2023, Vol. 24(1) 71–77

Building a Covid-19 secure intensive care unit:
A human-centred design approach

Jody Ede1,2, David Garry1, Graham Barker1, Owen Gustafson1, Elizabeth King1,
Hannah Routley1, Christopher Biggs3, Cherry Lumley1, Lyn Bennett1, Stephanie Payne1,
Andrew Ellis1, Clinton Green1, Nathan Smith1, Laura Vincent1, Matthew Holdaway1 and
Peter Watkinson1,3

Methods

Aims and objectives

The aim of this work was to create a clinical ICU design
centred around staff and patient requirements. To achieve
this, we evaluated proposed ICU designs utilising a novel
build simulation exercise to elicit user feedback.

Ethics

This work was undertaken as part of a local service im-
provement initiative Ulysses reference number 6805. This
work was fully supported by the Oxford University
Hospital NHS Foundation Trust and The University of
Oxford. This manuscript has adhered to the Standards for
Quality Improvement Reporting Excellence13 guidelines
(Supplementary File 1).

Human-centred design

Underpinning this work are the HCD principles as per the
International Standardisation Organisation 9241-210 doc-
ument.11 Whilst the principles of HCD are applied to
computer systems, it was felt that this would be a valuable
and systematic approach to clinical workspace design. A
similar approach has been applied in another healthcare
design project.10 To meet the four HCD principles for this
speciﬁc project (detailed in the introduction), we developed
an ICU build simulation exercise that would specify user
requirements (point 1 and 2) and produce design solutions
to meet these requirements (point 3). This data would
underpin the design process as the build project progressed
(point 4).

Design team

The design team consisted of a multidisciplinary team
group including ICU clinicians, nurses, and Allied Health
Professionals, IT representatives and clinical researchers.
Design team members and architects provided specialist
construction and regulatory insight into a project. Regular
design meetings occurred preceding the ICU build simu-
lation exercise with feedback being used to iterate designs.

ICU Build simulation day

The build simulation exercise utilised several methods to
elicit user requirements and workﬂows. Methods em-
ployed during this exercise were Build Mapping, Task
Analysis
and
Qualitative
data
from
staff
groups/
interactions. These approaches allowed an MDT group
of users to explore the designs in ways that are not

possible using 2D building plans. Plan mock-ups have
been cited as key strategies to highlight strengths and
weaknesses
of
clinical
designs.14
Four
facilitators
moderated the exercise according to a pre-speciﬁed
agenda. However the approach was not entirely rigid
and remained ﬂexible to the participants and their job
roles. Two facilitators had in-depth knowledge of the ICU
build and design process, one facilitator had experience
with human factors methodology and research data
collection methods and one facilitator was an ICU
physiotherapist.

Build mapping. Large sections of the proposed ICU build
were mapped to scale using ﬂoor tape to outline several
key areas (refer to Figure 1). These areas were mocked
up using real ICU equipment including beds, ventilators,
pumps, chairs, trolleys, and haemoﬁltration machines to
increase the ﬁdelity of the exercise. Given space con-
straints we were unable to map out entire ICU levels, so
we prioritised areas of concern/predictable high activity
such as tight corners or lifts (refer to Figure 2). Build
Mapping allowed the visual representation of space and
ICU orientation prompting staff to consider workﬂow
and day-to-day clinical activities. Mapped areas also
provided
the
opportunity
to
run
predeﬁned
task
exercises.

Task analysis. A clinical focus group was convened and
identiﬁed key clinical tasks to examine during the build
simulation exercise. Identiﬁed tasks were graded using a
priority stratiﬁcation system demonstrated in Table 1. Task
frequency relates to how often the task would be performed
in a standard clinical shift (1 = low frequency, 2 = moderate
frequency, 3 = high frequency). Criticality relates to how
important or critical that task is (1 = not very important/

Figure 1. Mapping of lift sizes.

73

critical, 2 = moderately important/critical, 3 = highly
important/critical). Overall task consideration score is a
multiplier of frequency x criticality and identiﬁes the tasks
of highest priority in real clinical settings. This stratiﬁcation
allowed simulation facilitators to focus on common and
high importance (critical) tasks, identiﬁed through a sys-
tematic process. Participants were asked to undertake some
(but not all) of the deﬁned tasks (individually or in role
appropriate groups) using the mapped areas. Participants
fed back speciﬁcally about i) ease of task completion and ii)
identify any barriers to these based on current designs.
Facilitators also observed performed tasks and entered
observations into ﬁeld notes. Not all pre-deﬁned tasks were
completed during the exercise.

Qualitative data. Qualitative data were captured through
facilitator observations and participant feedback during task
scenarios. Ad-hoc comments were captured throughout the
day. All data was entered into an excel spreadsheet.

Setting

This work was undertaken in a large teaching hospital Trust.
The ICU build simulation was held in a large open space
within hospital grounds creating an accessible exercise for
staff who had clinical commitments.

Participant selection

All potential users of the proposed ICU environment were
invited to participate in the build simulation exercise.
Participants were a convenience sample of users of the new
ICU unit which included staff, patients, and relatives.
Importantly, we wanted to capture a range of professions
and perspectives on the current designs to identify dif-
fering user requirements14 unique to certain staff groups
and patients. Critical care generally consists of two user
groups requiring representation, a core and transient user
group.

·
Core groups include patients, relatives, nurses,
doctors,
physiotherapists,
dietitians,
pharmacists
administration, housekeeping, IT specialists
·
Transient groups include radiographers, porters,
engineers, infection prevention teams, visiting spe-
cialist clinical teams

Paper concepts and deﬁnitions

Design changes vary in signiﬁcance, difﬁculty and costli-
ness and occur on many infrastructural levels. To ensure
that this was well represented within the data we created a
multilevel categorisation system for any design improve-
ments generated from the ICU build simulation exercise.
For the purposes of this work, we have deﬁned the design
levels presented within the results section:

·
Macro level design-refers to high cost or structural
building changes.
·
Meso level design- refers to room function changes,
insertion of windows or doors

Table 1. Demonstrating task prioritisation scores (frequency x criticality).

Task Descriptor
Frequency Score
Criticality Score
Prioritisation Score

Medication Management
3
3
9
Line Management
3
3
9
Documentation
3
3
9
Rehabilitation
3
3
9
Ward round
3
3
9
Handover
3
3
9
Patient positioning
2
3
6
CT scan
2
3
6
Breaks
2
3
6
Intubation/extubation
2
3
6
Blood sampling
2
2
4
Admission
2
2
4
Suctioning
3
3
Safety checks
3
3
Patient Assessment
2
2
Dressings

Figure 2. Map of simulated ICU areas.

74	

·
Micro level design- refer to interior design and room
layout changes, bedspace design and storage for
consumables

Analysis

Data were thematically analysed and sorted.15 The data
was not required for theory generation, but exploratory in
describing staff workspace requirements. Some of the
qualitative data has been quantiﬁed to give a more concise
overview of results. Quantifying qualitative data has been
utilised in previous studies as a way to understand and
present complex qualitative data.16 To ensure retention of
the richness of the qualitative data, narratives informed a
design report, providing the foundation of further design
meetings. A pragmatic approach was taken to analysis
given the required output of the exercise. All facilitators
were given access to the results of the day and asked to
feedback if any information had been misrepresented.
No concerns were raised regarding the credibility17 of
the data.

Results

Demographics

A total of 56 participants completed the ICU build simu-
lation exercise. Participant numbers and clinical roles are
presented in Table 2.

Design outputs

A total of 141 design suggestions were captured through the
qualitative data (observations of tasks and participant
feedback) and are illustrated in Table 3. There was some
overlap between individual design feedback. Suggestions
broadly related to three ICU working system domains:
Tasks, Patient or Relatives and Staff.

Design suggestions were driven by user’s behaviours
and functional requirements (drivers of design). These ICU
design drivers have been described in Table 4.
A total of 18 multilevel design improvements were made
and have been detailed in Table 5.

Discussion

The primary aim of this service improvement project was to
create an optimal ICU design based on user requirements
underpinned by the principles of HCD. Through this work,
we have demonstrated a systematic data collection ap-
proach that informed the design of a Covid-19 secure ICU
build.
It is not uncommon that clinical areas are designed
without fully accounting for clinical workﬂows10 or the
patient perspective.18 ICU is widely acknowledged to be a
stressful environment, not only because of patient acuity
and workload, but also because of design issues such as
lighting, high mounted-monitors, power points which cause
tangled wires and an excess of noise.19 We (the design
team) made 18 multilevel improvements to the original ICU
design by understanding staff workﬂows, patient/relative/
staff requirements and what drives these design require-
ments using the data from this exercise. Importantly, these
requirements (without this exercise) may only have become
apparent once the clinical area was in use, drastically
limiting possible modiﬁcations.
Task focused design suggestions (n = 69) were com-
monest within the qualitative data. A highly-functional
workplace has far reaching effects on individuals (staff
and patients) and the organisation.10 These effects may
include better task efﬁciency, cost saving, allow employees
to function at their best10 and reduce occupational injury.14

The design team considered the process of patient transfer
during the simulation event. Transfer of a critically unwell
patient is considered high-risk for adverse events.20 A
signiﬁcant design change was to increase the size of the lift
access to and from the ICU (see Figure 1). This was re-
sponsive to a changing patient group, with Covid-19 pa-
tients often requiring many more supportive machines and
bariatric beds also being in use. A larger lift was able to
easily accommodate this patient transfer (which traditional
lift sizes would not), thus making the process less logis-
tically challenging for staff during a high-risk situation.
We also considered staff daily workﬂows22 during task
completion and aimed to maximise nurse bedside presence.

Table 2. Participant numbers and clinical role.

Role type
Number of
participants

Nursing
13
Medical
12
Pharmacy
6
Estates
4
Infection Prevention Practitioners
3
Design Team
3
Administrative staff
2
Computer Information Systems (CIS)
2
Critical Care Follow Up Practitioner
2
Physiotherapist
2
Patient and relatives
2
Portering
Dietician
Radiographer
Housekeeping
Specialist sound researcher
Total
56

Table 3. Categorisation of design suggestions.

Design suggestion category
Suggestion
number

Task related design suggestions
69
Patient and relative related design suggestions
56
Staff related design suggestions
16
Total
141

75

Design solutions included equidistant point of care testing,
drug rooms, drug preparation areas and label printing
machines. Reducing time away from the patient is essential
for any future ICU design given the high workload and
lower nurse to patient ratios employed during the Covid-19

pandemic.3 Another overarching functional design driver
evident within this data was ensuring that the ICU design
was Covid-19 secure: meaning that it was ﬁt for purpose,
was able to accommodate both highly infectious patients
and “normal” ICU patients and minimised infection risks to

Table 5. Description of multilevel design improvement.

Design
improvements
levels

Number of
design changes
(n = 18)
Description

Macro design
5
• Lift size enlarged (to account for ICU equipment and bariatric bed)
• Wall corner replaced (enlarging relatives’ room)
• Wall structures to allow for future mounting of drug dispensing machine in drug rooms
• Staff changing area restructured to minimise space wastage (allowing for many staff in and
out simultaneously).
• Staff toilets added to lower levels
Meso design
5
• Window inserted between adjoining isolation rooms (increasing visibility of staff and
patients)
• Cleaner’s room door placed on opposite wall (generating better Covid-19 control/unit
entry and egress)
• Patient shower relocated (improving line of sight between bed spaces)
• Handover room moved to level entrance (avoiding heavy footfall past patient’s bed spaces
(reduce noise pollution)
• Drug room moved to a central clinical location (to even distance travelled during
medication preparation for all staff)
Micro design
8
• Bedspace equipment to patient’s side (not behind head)
• Established ﬁnal bed space design to ensure unit consistency
• No bedspace 13 (patient request)
• Dry and wet sides to bed space (i.e., not placing the ventilator on ﬂuid administration side)
• Equidistant point of care testing machines to maximise nurse bedside presence
• Bed space power points to ensure blood labels can be printed at every bed space (1 machine
between 2 beds)
• Ventilators to remain portable and not ﬁxed to pendants (improving mobility for
rehabilitation)
• Built-in phone charging points for relatives waiting room

Table 4. Describing behavioural and function drivers of design.

Behavioural drivers of design
Rationale

Learning and development (SIM
training)
Central to staff wellbeing, sends an important organisational message “We value you”

Optimising light (Patients and staff)
Light should be optimised and “borrowed” wherever possible. This is to aide delirium
management and staff wellbeing
Humanising the ICU (Garden, pets)
Aim to improve patient and relative long-term morbidity and PTSD through softer design
touches (phone charging points in the relative room)
Design consistency (Layout, bed space
design)
Increasing design consistency reduces staff cognitive load, increase staff comfort, familiarity and
improves task completion times

Functional drivers of design
Rationale

Visibility (Staff and patients, safety)
Visibility of staff and patients directly relates to safety. Any blocks to this reduce staff team
situational awareness and ability to directly monitor multiple patients when required.
Covid-19 secure
Staff perception of a functional ICU has changed and has become much more focused on the
ability to isolate, remain self-sufﬁcient and reduce occupational infection exposure and space
to socially distance. This was highlighted from the design suggestions.
Workﬂow improvements
Staff wanted to avoid creating workarounds and wanted these built into the environment
(storage solutions)
Task efﬁciency (Maximising staff
bedside presence)
Time away from patients to complete tasks increased staff concern and was a driver of
suggested design solutions.
Innovative designs and innovative
working
A clever environment design can create novel ways of working (e.g., integrating outside
rehabilitation sessions for patients)

76	

both staff and patients. It is estimated that up to 1 in 15
Covid-19 infections are nosocomial.23 Similarly, staff in-
ability to socially distance is cited as a leading cause of
staff-related nosocomial outbreaks.24 These results indicate
that environmental factors contribute to infections partly
due to inadequate clinical workplace design. We aimed to
mitigate this by increasing staff rest and handover areas
where large numbers of staff would be present at any one
time. We also improved the unit entry and egress points
during the donning and dofﬁng procedure by changing
locations of doors to create clean ‘ante-chambers’ if re-
quired. The rooms were designed to allow for ﬂexibility in
the clinical space and use depending on clinical demand
(infectious or non-infectious patients).
Patient and relative design suggestions (n = 56) related to
patient wellbeing and humanising the ICU. Historically, the
design of critical care units have largely been based on tasks
and lost sight of humanisation.18 Softer design touches from
this work fell at a micro design level. Although termed micro,
the importance should not be underestimated. This work
gave the design team an opportunity to focus the ICU design
around patients and staff giving careful thought to lighting
solutions, decoration, patient communication, family pro-
vision18 and noise.25 Speciﬁcally, we moved staff communal
areas (handover rooms/hubs) to nearer the unit entrance to
minimise footfall during shift changeover that would inev-
itably disturb patients. Similarly, the relative waiting room
size was also increased to ensure the ability to safely distance
for our visiting families. Bed space design also centred
around patient requirements and noise. This included re-
moving all equipment from behind the patient’s head as
patient feedback from the exercise showed that unfamiliar
noises (collecting aprons, drug preparations) that were out of
sight caused great anxiety (see supplementary File 2).
The fewest number of design suggestions related to staff
areas (n = 16) demonstrating low staff expectations. Covid-
19 has shone a light on the importance of staff care with the
expectation that NHS Trusts should provide a clinical
environment that facilitates this.26 Unfortunately, this issue
was not as widely highlighted in previous pandemics.6

Improvements to clinical environments is cited as a strat-
egy that can improve staff wellbeing.27 A negatively per-
ceived
clinical
environment
can
lead
to
increasing
incidence of stress, burnout and poor job satisfaction.8 All
of which directly affect patient safety and satisfaction of
hospital care.28 Despite staff having low expectations
themselves, the design team were very much focused on
this aspect, paying particular attention to staff areas which
would include sleep pods, hot food, cold water fountains
and outside space. We also examined the staff changing
facilities during this exercise and changed the design of
these to ensure that during staff changeover time (high
footfall), that many staff were able to enter and exit
simultaneously.

Limitations

There are some limitations of this work. Firstly, not all the
ICU building was tested as described in the methods. This
was limited by event facilities, but we endeavoured to test
problematic areas. We were unable to test all the tasks

previously identiﬁed but again prioritised those that were
clinically critical. The data is limited to the user require-
ments within our local area so these may not be entirely
generalisable. However, the design simulation method to
obtain requirements is generalisable and useable in other
clinical build projects.

Conclusion

We have used HCD methodology to feed into the design
process for a modern, bespoke, pandemic resilient ICU
build design by focusing on patient and staff requirements
and workﬂows. Our process has engaged all users of this
clinical space, creating a co-design and human-centred
approach. We have developed and presented a replicable
and novel approach to exploring healthcare build projects
using simulation and user feedback that may be utilised in
similar projects.