Human-centered design of a personal health 
record system for metabolic syndrome 
management based on the ISO 9241-210:2010 
standard

Charic D Farinango1 
Juan S Benavides1 
Jesús D Cerón1 
Diego M López1 
Rosa E Álvarez2

1Telematics Engineering Research 
Group, Faculty of Electronics and 
Telecommunications Engineering, 
Universidad del Cauca, Popayán, 
Colombia; 2Human Genetics Research 
Group, Faculty of Health Sciences, 
Universidad del Cauca, Popayán, 
Colombia

Methods
The PHR-S presented in this study was developed within the 
context of the SIMETIC project, an experimental study in 
Colombia on the impact of three ICT (web portal, as social 
network, and a PHR) on the management of MS.20 The eth-
ics committee at the Universidad del Cauca in Colombia 
approved the study (Act 6-1.25/7 of May 29, 2012). Written 
informed consent was obtained from all individual partici-
pants included in the study. The PHR-S was developed using 
the OpenUP/MMU-ISO software development ­process21 
updated according to the activities and recommendations of 
the ISO 9241-210 standard. The updated process is called 
OpenUP/MMU-ISO 9241-210.22 OpenUP/MMU-ISO 9241-
210 is a software development process based on OpenUP/
Basic, which integrates to its phases of development (incep-
tion, elaboration, construction, and transition), the four main 
UCD activities specified in the ISO 9241-210 standard: 
understand and specify the context of use, specify the user 
requirements, produce design solutions to meet user require-
ments, and evaluate the designs against requirements. In this 
way, it ensures that the project’s software development team 
uses the UCD for the design and development of the solution. 
The process includes a specialized practice for the UCD that 
contains the definition of tasks, including recommendations 
and requirements established in the ISO 9241-210 standard. 
The UCD methodology puts a special emphasis on the 
multidisciplinary design and implementation of IT solu-
tions. Medical recommendations regarding the structure and 
information in different stages of the process were obtained 
directly from specialist of the health care team: a nurse, a 
psychologist, a medical doctor, a nutritionist, and a doctor in 
physical activity sciences. Thus, the project had specialist for 
each section, who established nutrition, exercise, and stress 
management guides. In addition, the engineer’s team and the 

health team were in constant face-to-face communication, 
which allowed discussing the kind of information and the 
way it should be presented.
In the next subsections, the tasks related to the UCD 
approach are described. A more detailed description of the 
process can be found in Farinango and Benavides.23

Stage 1: inception phase
This phase aims to understand the extent of the problem and 
the feasibility of the proposed solution. For this, the software 
development activities included support for understand-
ing the problem, eliciting the requirements, and defining 
the initial system architecture. In this phase, one iteration 
was conducted, consisting of the following UCD activities: 
understand and specify the context of use, specify the user 
requirements, and produce design solutions to meet user 
requirements.

User information gathering: surveys
To perform the activities understand and specify the context 
of use and specify the user requirements, it was necessary 
to apply methods for gathering information directly from 
users. Thus, a survey was conducted to gather data using 
a previously defined questionnaire with open-ended and 
closed-ended questions. This was a descriptive survey 
administered by members of the project research team for 
4 months. The sample consisted of 1,187 individuals at risk 
of MS who were active workers from public and private 
companies in the city of Popayan, Colombia, between the 
ages of 18 and 65 years.
The purpose of the survey was to obtain personal infor-
mation about the individuals’ education and occupation; 
anthropometric, clinical, and preclinical data; lifestyle; and 
technology use. The information collected was used to define 
the context of use, the characterization of users, and their 
initial requirements.

Stage 2: elaboration phase
The purpose of this phase was to better understand the 
requirements and to create and establish a baseline for the 
system’s architecture. However, considering that the UCD 
approach aims to execute early validations with users, it was 
decided to design an initial prototype of the system. There-
fore, this phase had one iteration consisting of the following 
UCD’s activities: specify the user requirements, produce 
design solutions to meet user requirements, and evaluate the 
designs against requirements.

User information gathering: focus group
Based on the iterative nature of the UCD, more information 
directly collected from the users was needed. To do so, a 
focus group with users was performed. In this activity, users 
told their experiences and expectations, so it was possible 
to understand their attitudes, beliefs, desires, and reactions. 
The process prior to the implementation of the focus group 
consisted of the following two steps:

1.	 Development of a first mock-up of the PHR-S: the aim 
of this first step was to acquaint with existing PHR-S, by 
inspecting existing systems. One example is the Heart360 
system, developed by the American Heart Organization.24 
Following, the Balsamiq modeling tool was used to create 
wireframes, so a visually structure of the solution was 
obtained.
2.	 Implementation of the pilot focus group: it was performed 
with people (not users of the system) with the objective 
to validate the focus group protocol. There were eight 
people present and the following three moderators: a 
leading software development engineer, a health care 
professional, and a social communicator. At the end of 
the session, a discussion was held in which participants 
gave their opinions and feedback on the pilot.

To implement the focus group, seven MS patients were 
recruited. It was conducted in a large meeting room where 
all participants were sitting around the table so they could 
interact with each other. The protocol was the same as the 
pilot: each participant presented himself/herself, saying 
their name, occupation, and motivation to participate. Later, 
randomized subgroups were formed, promoting interaction 
and discussion. Then, questions were made about reading 
preferences between digital and printed format. Follow-
ing, the definition of PHR and explanation of the system 
mock-up were presented. Participants were asked about the 
type of information (weight, waist circumference, physical 
activity, nutrition, etc.) they consider useful to include in the 
PHR along with recommendations and opinions about the 
system design.

User information gathering: interviews
In order to collect more information about users, individual 
interviews were conducted as a complement to the focus 
group. A total of eight people participated in the interviews. 
It was performed in a private room in which privacy was 
guaranteed and distractions were avoided. The same ques-
tions from the focus group were raised, using the same order 

and focus. In addition, new questions to explore other users’ 
thoughts were included.

Interdisciplinary design: brainstorming
Once the team had collected enough information about the 
design of the application, a meeting with all team members 
was conducted in order to improve the initial design. The 
session was attended by

• a social media communicator,
• the project manager (a biologist, part of the health care 
team),
• a nurse (part of the health care team),
• a graphical designer,
• a leading software development engineer,
• two software developers.

The first step was to explain the goal of the session: to 
give opinions and ideas, considering the field of expertise 
of each member, so new designs could arise by taking into 
account the initially proposed designs and the information 
obtained so far. To do so, the health care team (biologist and 
nurse) has already determined to follow the IDF guidelines 
for the MS. As a result, the MS parameters section, where 
the risk factors are shown, was well defined. In this way, the 
interdisciplinary design had a starting point with already 
verified health care requirements.
After suggestions and requirements from users were gath-
ered, sheets of paper were distributed. The objective was that 
participants draw how they believe the information should 
be structured and how the user interfaces should be. After 
a few minutes, each participant showed and explained their 
design to the other members. From the different mock-ups, 
the final designs were selected.
Figure 1 shows the first design of the PHR-Ss’ home page.

Stage 3: construction phase
One of the main results in the construction phase was the 
system’s architectural design. Architectural decisions are 
derived from the system’s requirements obtained in the pre-
vious phases. In this phase, two iterations were performed, 
which include the following UCD activities: specify the 
user requirements, produce design solutions to meet user 
requirements, and evaluate the designs against requirements.

Interdisciplinary design
Within this phase, the prototypes were more elaborated 
and the members worked close together; especially the 

engineering team and the health care team were in constant 
communication, which allowed supporting the decisions, 
discussing the content of the system, and creating the medical 
requirements. There are three main subjects that need to be 
addressed to change a lifestyle: nutrition, physical exercise, 
and stress management. Therefore, the health care team added 
specialists for each area: a psychologist, a medical doctor, a 
nutritionist, and a doctor in physical activity science. These 
specialists elaborated the information guides for each section 
and the way it should be presented (videos, infographics, and 
text, among others)
From the user requirements and the understanding of the 
context of use, the tasks and subtasks that the system must 
perform to meet the user’s goals were identified. These tasks 
were classified into those performed by the system and those 
performed by the users. This classification is based on an 
understanding of the interaction that the system will have 
with the user. Later, it was necessary to identify the interac-
tion points, in order to define dialog techniques to structure 
the interaction. The next step was to design the dynamics of 
the interaction through activity diagrams, which allow the 
definition of sequences within the system and the information 
architecture. This allowed conducting the analysis, organizing 
and structuring of information, as well as selecting and pre-
senting of data in the system. The techniques used to perform 
the above activities were storyboards and tasks models via 
Concur Task Trees method. Finally, the user interfaces were 
designed, and the functionality was coded and integrated 
using traditional software engineering modeling techniques 

such as use cases, sequence, class, component, and imple-
mentation models.

Evaluation: usability test
During the elaboration and construction phases, evaluations 
with potential users of the system were conducted in order 
to validate the resulting designs. The first step was to plan 
the evaluation, where evaluation goals were established. 
Usability metrics (efficiency, effectiveness, and user satisfac-
tion) were defined based on the ISO/IEC 25022 Systems and 
Software Quality Requirements and Evaluation (SQUARE) 
– Measurement of quality-in-use standard.25 Then, the Think 
Aloud technique was established as the main technique for 
the usability testing, which is widely used and specified 
by the Department of Health and Human Services of the 
United States.26 It is used to understand the mind-set of the 
participants as they interact with a product, while making 
them express their thoughts aloud as they work. Along with 
this technique, a series of questions asked at the end of the 
test were made, in order to get more information about user 
experience. Finally, the tasks that users must perform during 
the test were defined.
The usability test was conducted with people at risk of 
having MS and was conducted in their workplace. The test 
protocol is summarized as follows: first, the research project 
was explained, along with details of the Think Aloud tech-
nique. During the evaluation, the face and the screen of the 
participant were recorded for later analysis. After the test, 
participants must answer the system usability scale (SUS) 

Figure 1 Home page mock-up drawn on a sheet of paper.

questionnaire,27 which contains 10 items, each one with a 
Likert scale of 1–5. This tool has become a standard of the 
industry with >1,300 references in papers or publications.27 
Finally, effectiveness, efficiency, and user satisfaction were 
analyzed from the videos and SUS data.

Stage 4: transition phase
The objective of this phase was the refinement of the solution 
and the creation of tools for user support. It was not needed 
to perform more tests with users in this phase because the 
goals and objectives established in the project design were 
met and stakeholders agreed with the implemented solution. 
After a series of refinements, the development of the system 
was completed. This was done by taking into account user 
information collected by reconnaissance activities (first itera-
tion) and validation activities (evaluations). Unlike previous 
phases, requirements of management activities were not car-
ried out at this stage because neither the requirements nor 
usability goals changed. The transition phase also included 
the deployment discipline. Deployment is out of the scope of 
this project; nevertheless, this stage included user manuals 
written for future use.

Results
In this section, main work products resulting from each of 
the following four main activities of the UCD are detailed: 
understand and specify the context of use, specify the user 
requirements, produce design solutions to meet user require-
ments, and evaluate the designs against requirements.

Understand and specify the context of 
use
The context of use was defined from the surveys; focus group 
and interviews were conducted with people at risk of MS 
from the city of Popayan, Colombia.
Frequency of use of Internet is presented in Figure 2: 
73% of people use Internet every day, with usage being more 
frequent in people younger than 30 years (91.5%).
The survey also inquired about user preferences of dif-
ferent ICT interventions and use of other technology. The 
questions and results are listed in Table 1.
Among the strategies proposed, the more preferred one 
by users was to record personal health data, which had an 
acceptance rate of 67.9%; this strategy is related to the use 
of a PHR-S. The least-accepted strategy was the exchange 
of health Information with others via Internet with an accep-
tance of 31%, option related to social media strategies.
It was also analyzed the acceptance of the aforementioned 
ICT strategies in people with MS versus their age.
For example, the PHR strategy was more accepted by 
people who use Internet, have MS, and are between 40 and 
49 years (84.3% of people). The complete results are ana-
lyzed in Figure 3.
The results of the surveys were complemented with 
interviews and the focus group, obtaining the context of use, 
which is summarized as follows:

• Users are individuals aged between 30 and 59 years, 
mixed ethnicity, occupationally active, married or living 

with a partner, at least secondary education, and income 
between one and three times the minimum wage.
• Users have obesity and increased waist circumference.
• They access the Internet at least twice a week using a 
computer.
• More than 50% declare themselves as being physically 
active but not frequently practicing sports.
• They tend to feel stressed.
• They read digital media as well as print media, and more 
than half read topics related to health.
• The time of the day when they have more free time to 
take part in an ICT health intervention is before 8 am or 
after 6 pm (outside working hours).

Specify user requirements
The results of surveys, interviews, and focus group sup-
ported the definition of user requirements during the first two 

­iterations of the system development. During the construction 
phase, user requirements were formalized.
The use case model presented in Figure 4 represents 
the activities that a user must perform with the system. The 
diagram represents the following PHR-S main functional-
ities: recording and viewing the five MS risk factors, shar-
ing these measures with health care professionals, and the 
educational module on nutrition, stress management, and a 
physical activity.

Produce design solutions to meet user 
requirements
First iteration
The first prototype emerged during the elaboration phase of 
the software development process. The aim of this prototype 
(low-fidelity prototype) was to provide an initial descrip-
tion of the system. The development included the design of 

navigable wireframes using Balsamiq and Marvel App tools. 
Examples of the prototype are shown in Figures 5 and 6.

Second iteration
The second prototype (high-fidelity prototype) was devel-
oped during the first iteration of the construction phase. 
Here, the system functionalities were implemented in the 
Indivo platform,28 and the user interfaces were professionally 
designed by a graphical designer. Indivo is a web platform 
that allows the collection, maintenance, and control of 
medical information directly by the patient; it is built with 
open standards and available under an open-source license. 
It is developed in Python under the web framework Django. 
Examples of the second prototype are shown in Figures 7 
and 8.

Third iteration
The third and final prototype emerged during the second 
iteration of the construction phase. At this point, the remain-
ing and newly elicited functionalities were implemented. In 
addition, design changes were made as a result of the previ-
ous usability tests. For example, participants encountered 
difficulties in locating information about MS control and 
navigating between the parameters of MS. This prototype 
was entirely designed by the graphic designer with the sup-
port of the development team. Examples of the final design 
of the system are presented in Figures 9 and 10.

Evaluate the designs against requirements
Evaluation of the first design prototype
The evaluation of the first prototype (wireframes) was oriented 
to assess the initial design, the location of the elements, and the 
navigation of the application. The usability test had four tasks 
which were previously explained to the users as a text guide. 
Since it was a low-fidelity prototype, user satisfaction was 
not evaluated. Table 2 contains the results of the evaluation.
Since all participants completed the tasks, effective-
ness was 100%. However, in terms of efficiency, only four 
participants achieved the proposed goals. The only task that 
was completed by all participants within the specified time 
was the second one, and the tasks that took longer were tasks 
1 and 3 (>10 s). Based on the results of the evaluation, the 
following changes were performed:

• Display explanations of normal values for each one 
of the MS parameters (eg, normal blood pressure is 
<120/80 mmHg);
• Use links instead of buttons;
• Insert help text in buttons to describe their functionality.

Also, some changes were proposed by team members:

• The project cannot afford a health professional available 
24 h a day and 7 days a week, so online communication 
with a medical doctor was discarded.
• Exercise and nutrition recommendations were not 
personalized.

• As the PHR-S is not interoperable with electronic medi-
cal records of patient’s health care providers, users will 
not be able to share their PHR with their family doctors. 
Nevertheless, the information could be shared with pri-
vate medical doctors belonging to the project, as long as 
the participants give authorization.

Evaluation of the second design prototype
The second prototype had much of the system already 
implemented in Indivo, which allowed the users to interact 

with a system that was closer to the final ­implementation. 
As it was consider a high-fidelity prototype, user satis-
faction was assessed. Apart from the Think Aloud tech-
nique, users’ opinions and other qualitative data were 
collected.

Effectiveness
Table 3 presents the results of the evaluation of system 
effectiveness.

Tasks 1, 3, and 5 were successfully completed by 13 
participants, achieving a 100% rate of success. Task 2 was 
completed by only 11 (84.6%) participants, and task 4 was 
completed by only 10 (76.9%) participants.

Efficiency
Table 4 presents the results of the evaluation of system 
­efficiency. As the goal of task 2 was just to explore the appli-
cation, the time spent in this task was not recorded; therefore, 
its efficiency could not be evaluated.

User satisfaction
Table 5 presents the results of the evaluation of user satisfac-
tion by applying the SUS.
The average SUS score was 83.85. This result indicates 
a high acceptance because it exceeded the threshold of 80.3 
proposed by Sauro, meaning that the result is above the mean 
of related usability studies. However, it is worth mentioning 
that three participants had scores: 62.5, 52.5, and 62.5. These 
values indicated low satisfaction and strongly influenced the 
overall average of the evaluation.
Changes in the design of prototype 2 after the quantitative 
and qualitative evaluations of the system were as follows:

• Change the type of navigation between MS parameters.
• Configure Indivo Chrome to show only the relevant func-
tionalities for the project such as keeping the application 
enabled by defect.
• Ungroup the control information for MS to make these 
sections more evident.
• Integrate information to explain each parameter.
• Normalize the data entry.

Also, some changes were performed following the project’s 
team requirements:

• It was necessary to integrate a physical activity plan to 
be delivered to users every month.
• Recommendations must include information about MS 
control.

Evaluation of the last design prototype
Effectiveness
In terms of effectiveness, six participants achieved each of 
the tasks successfully, resulting in 100% completion of each 
task. This shows a marked improvement in task 4 that turned 

out to be the most criticized task in the previous assessment. 
Also, in accordance with the new design, the sixth task was 
added for this evaluation, which probed to be successful too.

Efficiency
Table 6 presents the results of the evaluation of efficiency in 
the third prototype.
The time to complete all the tasks was below the goal.

User satisfaction
Table 7 presents the results of the evaluation of user 
satisfaction.
The SUS provided a user acceptance value of 84.2, 
increasing the acceptance of the previous iteration (83.85 
points). This result indicated high acceptance because it 
exceeded the threshold proposed by Sauro of 80.3. However, 
it is worth mentioning that there were two participants who 
obtained a score of 67.5 and 60, respectively. These values 
indicated low satisfaction and strongly influenced the overall 
results of the evaluation. Analyzing also the qualitative data, 
the following changes were made:

• Add explanations to the MS parameters’ graphs in order 
to make it more understandable.
• When a parameter option is clicked on, focus the screen 
in the space where the content of the option is going to 
be displayed.
• Add audio guides or videos explaining recommendations 
on physical activity.

Discussion
This paper describes the design and development process 
of a PHR-S for the management of MS, which was devel-
oped strictly following a software development process in 

­accordance with the ISO 9241-210 international specifica-
tion on human-centered design for interactive systems. The 
study showed how the requirements and recommendations 
of the ISO 9241-210 specification were integrated within a 
traditional development process such as the OpenUP/MMU-
ISO software process, which has been derived from the 
rational unified process. As required by UCD, this study was 
performed in a multidisciplinary environment, supported by 
user data collection techniques such as surveys, interviews, 
and a focus group. In addition, the process had a permanent 
focus on users, who played an active role contributing to the 
system design from the first iteration in the inception phase 
until the last iteration in the construction phase. Furthermore, 
the development process used an iterative method from 
where three prototypes of the system were constructed. Fol-
lowing recommendations of the ISO/IEC 25022 (SQUARE) 
specification, these prototypes were assessed by potential 
users of the system through usability testing. The usability 
characteristics analyzed were effectiveness, efficiency, and 
user satisfaction.
Based on a review of related work, it was concluded that 
there is no PHR-S developed exclusively for the management 
of MS and that existing ones are oriented to related health 
conditions such as diabetes or promotion of healthy habits 
and lifestyles. Moreover, none of the existing PHR-Ss have 
been developed taking into consideration the ISO 9241-210 
standard. Therefore, this study is considered as a reference 
for future projects in which the design and development of 
PHR-Ss, following standard-based, human-centered software 
development methodologies, is demanded. In addition, the 
establishment of a multidisciplinary team provided the appli-
cation with considerations not only from the disciplines of 

software engineering and health sciences but also from other 
disciplines such as graphical design and media communica-
tion. This proves the value of interdisciplinarity for improving 
the quality and effectiveness of eHealth. Moreover, it showed 
in practice a synergy and constructive dialog between health 
services’ research and software development, a current chal-
lenge in eHealth clearly described by Plagiary.29

The PHR-S reported in this paper was developed using 
the OpenUP/MMU-ISO 9241-210 software development 
process, which integrates to its phases of development (incep-
tion, elaboration, construction, and transition), the four main 
UCD activities specified in the ISO 9241-210 standard. The 
first UCD phase was to understand and specify the context 
of use. From the survey conducted, it was identified that the 
prevalence of MS was 39.4%. This was a rather high value 
in the study population in Cauca, Colombia, since it is esti-
mated that by 2020, 28% of men and 58.7% of women will 
have abdominal obesity.41 The PHR-S proposed intends to 
provide ICT alternatives for MS control, given that 75.2% of 
the people with MS use the Internet frequently. In particular, 
the PHR had an acceptance rate of 67.9% among the sampled 
individuals. In this phase, two more techniques for data col-
lection were used: interviews and focus groups. Although 
these activities took time and effort and relied on the user’s 
availability, they allowed collecting enough baseline data 
to understand the potential users of the system, as well as 
being a key input in the following UCD activity. However, it 
is necessary to take into account that, due to the complexity 
and diversity of human nature, fully understanding each per-
son and describing their interaction with computer systems 
become challenging.
The second and third UCD phases were specify the user 
requirements and produce design solutions. These traditional 
activities in any software development process were comple-
mented with human-centered approaches. The new tasks and 
activities provided by the ISO 9241-210 standards allowed 

taking into account the views and considerations of the user 
throughout the project. Therefore, it increased the chance of 
having high satisfaction and high acceptance. It also allowed 
members of the development team to keep a focus on the 
requirements and needs of the users. Moreover, it facilitated 
the continuous evaluation of the developed models and 
artifacts in the system’s context of use. Compared to other 
software engineering projects that use traditional methods 
without UCD, it could be concluded that the UCD activities 
increased the complexity of the development process, in 
terms of time and documentation. However, the product qual-
ity was higher, especially satisfaction and user acceptance as 
shown in usability evaluation.
Regarding the UCD phase, evaluate the designs against 
requirements, it was demonstrated how the active participation 
of the user in the system’s evaluation helped to reach a high-
quality software system. Effectiveness and efficiency were 
evaluated in the first prototype (elaboration phase). Effective-
ness was 100%, indicating a total accomplishment of the tasks; 
efficiency did not meet expectations in three of the four tasks set. 
In the second prototype (construction phase), user satisfaction 
was also measured; also, qualitative data on users’ interaction 
were collected by reviewing their actions and observations 
(provided by the Think Aloud technique). Effectiveness was 
92.3%, and efficiency was very low, as only one goal was 
fulfilled of the four evaluated. In addition, the SUS score was 
83.85, which is a very positive value. The lower results obtained 
in this prototype were attributed to several factors; first, it should 
be considered that this was the first functional prototype, so 
there were new secondary functionalities that could distract 
users from their goal. Second, this prototype was implemented 
in Indivo, which comes with its own interface and functional-
ities. In consequence, it added factors that complicated user’s 
performance in the test. Third, the navigation inside the PHR 
proved to be confusing for the users; for example, 23.1% of 
the users could not find the specified MS parameter during 
the test. Finally, some of the information architecture defined 
in the prototype was not completely understood by the users; 
for example, some users could not identify information on 
MS control. The 23.1% refers to three people from a group of 
13 people, who could not complete the task in prototype 2. In 
prototype 3, everyone could complete the task, which justifies 
the increase in the total SUS measure.
In the final usability test conducted in the third prototype 
(second iteration of the construction phase), effectiveness was 
100%, indicating that errors present in the previous prototype 
were corrected. Efficiency was 100%, given that all the objec-
tives were met. In particular, the evaluations made showed 
that user satisfaction increased, as the solution was refined, 

presumably because user recommendations were addressed, 
obtaining a final SUS score of 84.2. In addition, the metrics 
of effectiveness and efficiency reached the highest success 
rate in the final prototype of the solution.
Despite significant results in terms of user satisfaction, in 
iteration 2, participants 2, 7, and 8 obtained poor results. Exam-
ining their individual results for efficiency and effectiveness, 
it is possible to conclude that the worst performance belongs 
to participant 2, who did not complete one task (effectiveness) 
and had three of the four tasks outside the established time goal 
(efficiency). On the contrary, participant 8 had two of the four 
tasks outside the established time goal, and participant 7 had 
very good results in both efficiency and effectiveness. Thus, a 
possible justification for the low user satisfaction provided by 
participants 2 and 8 could be their inability to complete some 
tasks. Participant 7 had very good results in both efficiency 
and effectiveness but poor results in SUS. His/her poor result 
may have been due to the influence of the visual design, a 
lack of interest, or even the emotional state in which he/she 
was at the time. At iteration 3, participants 4 and 6 had low 
satisfaction scores; however, in this case, they also had high 
scores in efficiency and effectiveness, where only participant 
6 exceeded one of the time goals. Therefore, although the 
participants completed the tasks and accomplished them in 
time, they were not entirely pleasant with the conducted test.
An important observation resulting from the usability tests 
was that some participants did not understand the questions 
from the SUS questionnaire. Thus, a review of the SUS is 
necessary in order to make its questions easier to understand, 
at least in Spanish language. Also, there are different ways to 
run a usability test; in this study, they were conducted at the 
workplace, and the computer screen and the user’s face were 
recorded for further analysis. It is considered that the execu-
tion of these tests in an appropriate usability laboratory could 
facilitate the analysis, thereby obtaining more accurate results.
As a future work, it is proposed to evaluate the system’s 
performance over a period of at least 12 months; this might 
allow obtaining new considerations that can improve the 
system’s design. This evaluation will be part of a larger RCT, 
which is currently under development.41 It is also planned 
to add functionalities to the PHR-S, based on requirements 
elicited by RCT participants. Also, the RCT requires that the 
systems deploy an administration interface for the system’s 
administrator to handle the system more easily and have a 
mechanism to contact a medical doctor if necessary. For 
the users, it could be necessary to have a space for writing 
suggestions or the ability to export or print the measures 
recorded in the PHR. It is also considered important to 
evolve the PHR-S toward a personalized health system, eg, 

considering contextual information and using sensors, such 
as accelerometers. It could provide personalized physical 
activity recommendations. Finally, from the software engi-
neering point of view, a still-unexplored path is to integrate 
the ISO 9241-210 principles and recommendations to agile 
development process, such as the Scrum methodology.

Conclusion
This paper provides a detailed description of the analysis, 
design, implementation, and evaluation stages of a PHR-S for 
the management of MS. The system was developed follow-
ing a software development process in accordance with the 
ISO 9241-210 international specification on human-centered 
design for interactive systems. The literature review allowed 
to conclude that there are no PHR-Ss developed based on the 
ISO 9241-210 international standard, and none of existing 
PHR-Ss found are specifically oriented to MS. Using the 
OpenUP/MMU-ISO 9241-210 process into the development 
of the MS PHR-S allowed the software development team 
to maintain a focus on the requirements and user’s needs. 
The above increased user satisfaction and acceptance of the 
system. In particular, user satisfaction increased as the solu-
tion was refined, reaching a final SUS score of 84.2 points, 
which reflects high user acceptance. The final efficiency and 
effectiveness of the system was 100%.