Exploring User-Centered Security Design for Usable 
Authentication Ceremonies 

Matthias Fassl 
Lea Gröber 
Katharina Krombholz 

CISPA Helmholtz Center for 
CISPA Helmholtz Center for 
CISPA Helmholtz Center for 
Information Security 
Information Security 
Information Security 
Saarland University 
Saarland University 

1 INTRODUCTION 

We applied a four-stage User-Centered Design process: (1) fve 
collaborative design workshops with ten potential users to gather 
ideas and drawings that refect users’ perceptions of authentication 
ceremonies and trust establishment, (2) a security evaluation that 
narrowed the design space, (3) an iterative storyboard prototyp-
ing approach with 18 participants to improve usability and collect 
participants’ preliminary security perceptions, and (4) an online 
evaluation of the prototypes on Amazon MTurk with N = 131 
participants. 
The evaluation indicated that exposure to the combination lock 
prototype improved participants’ understanding of the security ben-
efits concerning diferent types of attackers (compared to Signal’s 
current ceremony). This understanding of security benefts likely 
afects the frequency with which users will conduct authentication 
ceremonies. Our design approach did not seem to improve other 
factors, such as usability and user experience. Since these factors 
are equally important for building authentication ceremonies that 
people will use, we suggest designers apply complementary de-
sign approaches to improve them. We report the methodological 
lessons that we learned from exploring user-centered and partici-
patory techniques for security design. We are confdent that our 
exploratory contribution sparks an interdisciplinary discourse on 
when and how to consider prospective users throughout the design 
process of security technology. 

3 DESIGN METHOD 

User-Centered Design involves users at every step of the design 
process and focuses on their goals and requirements. Usually, this 
process is iterative in nature and driven by evaluation. We chose 
our process with two main goals in mind: (1) exploring the design 
space from the users’ perspective – including a security evaluation 
of the specifc suggestions and extracting general themes about 
authentication from the qualitative data; (2) comparing the most 
promising of the candidates with an existing authentication cer­
emony – necessarily these candidates need to be feshed out and 
developed further for a meaningful comparison. Users are the main 
focus of our research, but they are neither security nor UX experts 
– we do not expect them to design usable and secure ceremonies 
on their own. Security experts are necessary to contextualize par­
ticipants’ conceptual ideas and match them to existing security 
mechanisms. UX experts are indispensable to designing usable in­
teractions with great security experience. Above considerations 
and our comprehensive literature survey resulted in a four-stage 
design process as presented in Figure 1: 

(1) Collaborative Design Workshops. We start by collecting users’ 
ideas about how authentication should work including their 
goals and requirements. We apply a participatory design 
approach by conducting collaborative design workshops. 
Participatory design considers the users’ cooperation with 
designers as a possibility to bridge the gap between the users’ 
tacit knowledge, i.e., knowledge that is hard to communicate, 
and the designers’ abstract and analytic knowledge [38]. 
We structured these workshops similar to the participatory 
design studies by Weber et al. [45] and Gorski et al. [20]: 

(1) participants reported about their experience with secure 
messengers, (2) we created a shared language about MitM 
attacks and authentication, and (3) participants designed and 
discussed conceptual authentication ceremonies. Section 4 
provides a detailed description of the collaborative design 
workshops. 
(2) Narrowing Down the Design Space. The design workshops 
resulted in a design space with many creative conceptual 
ideas. We conducted a security evaluation to narrow this 
design space to feasible ideas. We selected concepts that users 
mentioned commonly and perceived as secure. If possible, 
we matched those concepts with security mechanisms that 
actualized the concepts’ perceived security. We removed 
concepts that participants mentioned rarely and concepts 
without matching security mechanisms. Section 5 provides 
a detailed description. 
(3) Iterative Storyboard Prototyping. After selecting viable con-
cepts, we design prototypes based on them. We refne and 
evaluate these prototypes with users in an iterative pro-
cess. We apply prototyping techniques because they can also 
be used to analyze the work process of prospective users 
and simulate possible future work [8]. For each concept, 
we sketched all possible states of the user interface, which 
resulted in a storyboard. We presented these storyboard pro-
totypes to potential users and asked them to describe the 
concepts behind them and estimate the prototypes’ secu-
rity benefts. Then, we encouraged them to redesign the 
storyboards using pen and paper. After two iterations, we 
presented the storyboards and the feedback we received to 
a UX expert with several years of experience and improved 
them accordingly. Section 6 provides a detailed description 
of the iterative storyboard prototyping. 
(4) Evaluation. After concluding the iterative development of 
prototypes, we evaluate the prototypes’ secure experience 
and usability with prospective users. In a between-subjects 
online study, we evaluate the three resulting prototypes 
against a storyboard prototype of Signal’s authentication 
ceremony. We recruit participants on Amazon MTurk and 
randomly assign conditions. Afterward, they respond to a 
questionnaire about the prototypes’ usability, user experi-
ence, perceived security, and protection against diferent 
threats. Section 7 provides a detailed description of the eval-
uation. 

Security requirements. The purpose of authentication ceremonies 
is to mitigate MitM attacks. To do this securely, the conversation 
partners have to compare the key material they use. The conver­
sation is secure if all conversation partners agree on the correct 
key material. Comparing key material is possible in three ways: (1) 
out-of-band, (2) in-band, and (3) using zero-knowledge proofs. 

For the frst kind of comparison, the conversation partners have 
to meet, which requires planning for potential future security re­
quirements. The second and third types of comparison allow an in­
the-moment approach to security. In our study, we did not prescribe 
any method of application in order to not restrict the intuitions of 
our participants.

Ethical considerations. For all three parts of this work, we col­
lected basic demographic data but no personally identifable in­
formation. For the workshop, we collected the participants’ email 
addresses to organize the workshops and communicate the results. 
These were stored separately from the study data. All participants 
were informed about the purpose and procedure of the study. Before 
the workshop, we asked all participants to sign a consent form; for 
the iterative storyboard prototyping, we asked for verbal consent. 
The online study had a consent form on the frst page, including 
all necessary information on data collection and processing. We 
compensated all participants for their time. Our university’s ethical 
review board (ERB) approved the study. 

4 COLLABORATIVE DESIGN WORKSHOPS 

We conducted workshops to collect the prospective users’ ideas 
of authentication ceremonies, e.g., how they imagined the process 
and what motivation they need to complete it. Similar to Weber et 
al. [45] we divided each workshop into three phases: (1) discussion 
of experiences with secure messaging, (2) creating a shared lan­
guage for basic security concepts, and (3) prototyping conceptual 
ceremonies. In the frst phase we asked all participants about their 
common messenger usage. Additionally, we encouraged partici­
pants to report negative and positive experiences with these tools. 
The goal of this phase was to acquaint the participants with each 
other and to identify general challenges with secure messaging. 

During the second phase, we presented a slide show (included 
in the supplementary material) explaining end-to-end encryption, 
threat models, and MitM attacks to create a common base of knowl­
edge and to establish a common language among the participants. 
In the last phase, we asked the participants to provide prototypes 
of conceptual authentication ceremonies and to explain their ideas 
verbally and through drawings. In the beginning of this prototyping 
phase, we asked the participants to provide suggestions on how to 
ensure that they are communicating with the intended person if 

they could meet in person only once or not at all. Later on, we asked 
them how they establish trust in the ofine world, and if and how 
those strategies could be translated to electronic communication. 
After about an hour we debriefed the participants and discussed 
remaining open questions. 

Analysis. We collected diferent types of data: a set of drawings 
of conceptual prototypes, audio recordings, and our written notes. 
Two independent coders traversed the notes and corresponding 
drawings to systematically assign codes, a process known as open 
coding. We used the audio recordings to clarify misleading notes 
or drawings, which were difcult to understand. The resulting 
inter-coder agreement (Krippendorf’s α = 0.69 for the experience 
reports and α = 0.67 for the prototypes) allows us to draw tentative 
conclusions from the data. We grouped the resulting codes into 
categories to identify the most common concepts for authentication 
ceremonies among our participants. The full protocol and codebook 
is presented in the supplementary material. Since the workshops 
were conducted in a diferent language the researchers translated 
the codebook, quotes, and the shown drawings. 

Pilot study. We conducted a pilot study consisting of three ses­
sions with one participant each. Contrary to the rest of the study, 
the participants had basic knowledge about cryptography. Since 
those participants came up with rather unusual prototypes for au­
thentication ceremonies, we assumed that the procedure would also 
work for other participants. Based on the pilot study we concluded 
that the notion of trust needs to be well-defned when asking par­
ticipants how they would establish trust. Therefore, we decided to 
add two ofine trust scenarios to our study design: (1) meeting a 
previously unknown bank advisor, and (2) handing over a package 
that was accepted for an unknown neighbour. 

Recruitment and participants. We conducted fve sessions with 
two participants each. We invited interested users who used secure 
messaging applications, who described themselves as having a lay 
person’s understanding of cryptography, and who did not have con­
crete threat models in mind. We deliberately excluded participants 
with either a background in cryptography, or with concrete threat 
models. Both types of participants will already know about authen­
tication ceremonies and have preconceived notions on how they 
should work – which would narrow their design space. We created 
a dedicated website to inform about the study and advertised it 
via email, Facebook, and Twitter. Additionally, we used snowball 
recruitment to quickly fnd interested and qualifed participants. 
We compensated them for their time with food and non-alcoholic 
drinks during the sessions, and by ofering future security advice 
(which one participant accepted). 

All ten participants either graduated from a university or were 
currently attending one. Four participants received some kind of 
training related to computer science, but had no further knowl­
edge in security or cryptography. Seven participants were female 
and three were male. The average age was 28.2 (min=22, max=35, 
sd=4.76). The participants self-reported their knowledge on cryp­
tography and IP networks on a scale from one (“very little”) to 
six (“very much”). The participants rated their knowledge about 
cryptography (m=2, sd=1.3) as well as IP networks (m=2, sd=1.6) as

low. This refects that our target population should only have a lay 
person’s understanding of cryptography. 

4.1 Results 

In the following, we present the experience reports, the most com­
mon conceptual prototypes that came up during the workshops, and 
the priorities and expectations that participants explicitly named. 

Experience reports. At the beginning of each session, participants 
reported on their experience with secure instant messengers. Con­
venience was the participants prime reason to praise messengers, 
e.g. Telegram and WhatsApp have large user base and work on all 
platforms. Peer pressure is an important reason for choosing mes­
sengers: “If I have a close friend who insists on only using WhatsApp 
and I really want to communicate with him, then I am forced to use 
WhatsApp, even if I don’t want to – otherwise I have no way of com­
municating with that friend”. Features were equally important for 
users, e.g., participants liked Telegram for its sticker packages. All 
participants expressed annoyance about the diversity of apps and 
lacking inter-operability. Some participants criticized messengers 
that require a phone number. Signal but also to a lesser degree 
Telegram were criticized for their lacking quality of service. Many 
participants did not trust WhatsApp and Facebook Messenger be­
cause of Facebook’s bad privacy reputation. Interestingly, usability 
did not seem to be a major concern for our participants. Participants 
were mostly unaware of authentication ceremonies’ existence. The 
few aware participants perceived them as confusing rather than 
helpful: “I don’t really understand how it [WhatsApp encryption] 
works, because it says encryption is used, but when you access the 
contact data, you can encrypt it again with some kind of code, so I 
don’t get that. [...] and you have to be in the same place to do that, 
that’s very bothersome.” 

Trust establishment. The participants proposed numerous ways 
of authentication in electronic communication and provided 20 con­
ceptual prototypes. We categorized the concepts into six methods of 
establishing trust: (1) shared knowledge: comparing knowledge that 
is only known to the conversation partners, (2) picture-based: show­
ing pictures or videos of conversation partners, (3) social: asking 
friends or trusted contacts if they have authenticated the conver­
sation partner, (4) institutional: trusting institutions to correctly 
authenticate people, (5) habituation: building up trust in the iden­
tity of the conversation partner over long periods of time, and (6) 
measurement-based: using technological measurements to test if 
the conversation could currently be under attack. Fifteen of the 
suggested prototypes were from the frst three categories, which 
suggests that these come more intuitively to mind than others. The 
other three categories of trust establishment were not as popular 
and only had one or two suggestions each. 

Shared Knowledge: Nine out of ten participants proposed an 
identifcation method based on shared knowledge immediately after 
we confronted them with the possibility of communicating with an 
intruder. The three most common concepts were: (1) exchanging 
a password used for accessing conversation, (2) agreeing on code 
words and communicating using Spy Speak (a common TV trope), 
and (3) asking personal questions that only the other could answer. 
They reported high confdence in these methods, since they assume 

that only their conversation partner knows the agreed code words 
or can answer the personal questions. 

Picture-based: Six participants suggested a picture-based authen­
tication of conversation partners and three of them provided a 
conceptual prototype for this method. Participants suggesting this 
were quite confdent that they were talking to the right person 
afterwards, since they usually knew the face of their communi­
cation partners. However, most of them noticed that an attacker 
could spoof pictures. Therefore, the resulting trust would increase 
if senders could prove that the pictures are recent or if real-time 
communication, i.e. a video-chat, is used. 

Social: All participants reported everyday life situations in which 
they receive information about identities and trust from their social 
contacts, but most were uncertain how this process of establishing 
social trust could be translated to electronic communication. The 
three participants who provided a conceptual prototype for social 
authentication wanted the messaging client to automatically estab­
lish which of their contacts is trusted by one or more friends. The 
participants reported that the resulting trust from social authentica­
tion would be medium to low, suggesting that social authentication 
can only be part of a more extensive authentication concept and 
that trust transitivity highly depends on the friend who verifed 
the contact. 

Institutional: During the discussion about establishing trust in 
the ofine world, fve participants mentioned that they would ask 
for some form of institutional identifcation card. Two other partic­
ipants said that in business scenarios they would check the name 
tag of their conversation partner to establish the person’s name and 
their afliation. This form of trust is based on the issuing organiza­
tion: if a bank or a government vouches for someones identity, the 
trust in the organization is transferred to the person in question. 
However, none of the participants had a suggestion on how to trans­
late this form of trust establishment to electronic communication, 
which means that we did not receive a conceptual prototype for 
this form of trust. 

Habituation: Ofine relationships with neighbors, colleagues, 
and even bank employees indicate that some kind of trust can 
be built up over time. Almost all participants said that this is not 
a fool-proof way of establishing trust, but that they nonetheless 
depended on this method in some ways. Participants usually agreed 
that this method could be useful in electronic communication as 
well. They said that time builds valid identities because information 
collected over time can be matched with information from other 
sources. Measuring this trust involves either counting the number 
of messages between conversation partners or measuring the time 
since the last key change. 

Measurement-based: Even participants who are reluctant to con­
duct authentication ceremonies with every contact might still want 
to verify the communication security in more sensitive circum­
stances. Testing based trust establishment refects this belief and 
ofers diferent ways to test the communication channel for eaves­
droppers. Approaches to testing-based trust were mostly technol­
ogy based, one included meeting up and comparing the received 
messages in order to reveal if any manipulations took place, and 
another checked the quality of transmission.

Drawings. In the following, we present three conceptual proto­
types based on most frequent coding categories. We translated the 
participants’ pen and paper drawings to English. 

Figure 2 shows a prototype based on shared knowledge. Two com­
municating partners meet in person and exchange a passphrase, 
which one of them uses to upload a document afterwards. Only the 
person who knows the passphrase word can download the docu­
ment at a later point in time. As the code word is negotiated ofine, 
attackers do not know the passphrase, assuming security proper­
ties are resistant to guessing. Figure 3 shows the corresponding 
UI, a conversation that is inaccessible until the password has been 
entered without exceeding the limit of guesses. 

Picture-based authentication ceremonies assume that seeing the 
actual person invokes trust in the person’s identity. A major prob­
lem with this approach is spoofng. As a mitigation strategy one 
participant proposed to request images showing the communication 
partner performing a specifed task. Figure 4 on this page shows 
an example of such a task used as an encryption code. However, 
the participant who designed this method was not fully convinced 
about the resistance to image manipulations. 

All workshop participants preferred automatic to manual social 
authentication, but had difculties drawing an automatic process. 
Most of them focused on the visualization of trust levels in the UI. 
Figure 5 in the Appendix shows the use of color codes correspond­
ing to the trust status associated with a particular contact. Green 

was used for trusted friends, yellow for contacts that have been 
authenticated by trusted friends, and red was used for all other 
contacts. The designer emphasized that a trust network should be 
shallow, i.e. trust information should always come from a trusted 
friend. Multiple layers of trust inheritance are confusing for users 
and reduce the confdence in the result. The proposed trust level 
for “vouched for by a trusted friend” was suggested as medium to 
high, which seems promising for a method without required user 
interaction. 

5 NARROWING DOWN THE DESIGN SPACE 

The collaborative design workshop resulted in 20 conceptual de­
signs and qualitative data about diferent authentication schemes 
in the ofline and online world. One of the authors, a security and 
privacy professional with experience in the industry (2 years) and 
academia (2 years), narrowed down this design space based on the 
following criteria: (1) How common is the suggestion? and (2) Is it 
possible to actualize the perceived security of the concept design? 
The frst criterion assumes that suggestions are common because 
many people understand them intuitively, making them valuable as 
an authentication ceremony for the general population. The second 
criterion combines the users’ tacit knowledge about authentica­
tion with the researcher’s experience with security and privacy 
technology. We excluded conceptual designs which the security 
professional could not match to appropriate security mechanisms. 
In the following, we present the three chosen conceptual designs 
with corresponding threat models and security mechanisms.

Shared knowledge → Combination lock. The most common con­
cept design is based on shared knowledge. In those designs, partici­
pants suggested sharing a code word or a passphrase which is then 
used to control access to the conversation. There are two kinds 
of threats against this kind of authentication: (1) attackers guess 
a weak password, or (2) attackers intercept the password while 
users exchange it. As a countermeasure, this concept suggests pass­
words and not allow users to exchange the password in-band. The 
Socialist-Millionaire-Protocol (SMP) which is currently used by the 
Of-the-Record protocol [2] can be used to implement this concept. 
It is an online protocol that provides a zero-knowledge proof that 
both parties possess the same secret without actually disclosing any 
information about the secret. As Alexander et al. [2] mentioned, 
even secrets with a very low entropy are secure against ofine 
dictionary or brute-force attack. Boudot et al. [6] provides a full 
security analysis. Based on this scheme we propose a prototype 
utilising the concept of combination locks, where all conversation 
participants have to set their combination lock to the shared secret 
before they can join the conversation. We continue to develop this 
proposal using iterative storyboard prototyping in the next section. 

Picture-based → Selfes. Several participants mentioned that 
sending each other pictures of themselves establishes trust in the 
conversation partner’s identity. Since the pictures are transmitted 
in-band, a targeted attacker could manipulate the pictures in real-
time or use past pictures for authentication. However, the concept 
would provide security against simple large-scale attacks such as 
the crackdown on IronChat by the Dutch Police in 2018 [19]. This 
method encodes information about key fngerprints into gestures. 
Therefore, recipients of those pictures verify not only the identity 
of the person they are talking to, but also that a person uses the 
same key material as them. Adoption of this authentication method 
could be negatively impacted if users need to compare more than 
fve pictures. Assuming a gesture alphabet of size 32, it is possible to 
compare 15 to 30 bit of the key material using this approach. Based 
on this scheme we propose a prototype utilising the concept of 
selfes, where conversation participants have to provide a series of 
selfes to others to authenticate themselves. We continue to develop 
this proposal using iterative storyboard prototyping in the next 
section. 

Institutional → ID cards. Most participants were familiar with 
ID cards as a way to authenticate other people. The process of 
showing each other an ID card is well-established in the ofline 
world and we consider this mode of authentication well-aligned 
with common approaches to key authentication. Messengers that 
implement this need to provide a user interface that mimics an 
ID card that users can show each other. Since users have to meet 
in person to check their ID cards (simulated in the UI), attackers 
cannot infuence the authentication process as long as the devices 
are not compromised. The security is based on key verifcation, 
which works by comparing the encryption keys of the conversation 
partners over a secure channel. This is achieved by integrating a QR 
code of the key fngerprint into the simulated ID card (refer to (c) 
in Figure 6). In this case, they meet in person and the compare keys 
automatically as suggested by Tan et al. [39]. Based on this scheme 
we propose a prototype utilising the concept of ID cards, where 
conversation participants have to verify the others’ simulated ID 

card in the messaging app. We continue to develop this proposal 
using iterative storyboard prototyping in the next section. 

6 ITERATIVE STORYBOARD PROTOTYPING 

Narrowing down the design space resulted in three design concepts 
with corresponding threat models and security mechanisms. We 
developed detailed storyboard prototypes for each of them using 
Sketch, a vector graphics editor that supports user interface pro­
totyping. Each storyboard starts in an unauthenticated state and 
ends in an authenticated state. Each state of the user interface, i.e. 
changes after each tap, is included as its own still image in these 
storyboards. 

We used an iterative approach with alternating feld-work and 
revision of the prototypes. During the feld-work, we explained a 
scenario to the participant and conducted a walk-through of the 
storyboard prototype. For each element of the storyboard we asked 
the participants to describe what they see and what they would 
do next. We noted hesitation and obvious confusion as an implicit 
feedback in the feld notes and asked the participants explicitly 
about it afterwards. After the walk-through, we asked questions to 
explore the participants’ understanding of the prototype. We asked 
them (1) how they would describe the authentication process to a 
friend, (2) to describe how the process afects the security of the 
conversation, (3) to rate trust in the additional security on a 10­
point Likert scale. After refecting on the security of the process we 
encouraged all participants to redesign all storyboard prototypes, 
we emphasized that they could change the design, the phrasing, the 
order of the screens, or add additional screens. Participants marked 
their suggested changes directly on the printed storyboard proto­
types. We noted all answers in the corresponding feld notes. Since 
the prototyping sessions were conducted in a diferent language 
the researchers translated the feld notes and the prototype anno­
tations prior to the analysis. We used an online survey to collect 
demographics (age, gender, study program, type of occupation, and 
responses to the afnity for technology interaction (ATI) scale [16]). 

We extracted misconceptions, most frequently made suggestions, 
and improvements without negative side-efects from the resulting 
feedback. We used those suggestions and adapted the storyboard 
prototypes accordingly. After we improved all storyboard proto­
types we recruited new participants in the feld and started a new 
iteration of the prototyping approach. 

Recruitment and participants. Two members of our department’s 
administrative staf participated in a pilot-study. Their results are 
included in the fnal result as no changes were made, except for 
minor adjustments in the feld notes template. We recruited partici­
pants around our university’s main plaza. All participants provided 
verbal consent. We compensated them for their time with a candy 
bar. N = 18 people provided feedback in the storyboard prototyping 
process. The participants’ age was between 17 and 50 (m=26.545, 
sd=9.136), 33.3% of them were women and 66.6% of them were 
men. About a third (27.3%) of the participants were not studying or 
declined to answer the question about their feld. Only one partici­
pant studied a STEM program. One third of the participants were 
students, a third was employed, 26.7% were out of work, and one 
participant was self-employed. The average ATI score was 4.128

(sd=0.763), which indicates an afnity for technology interaction 
slightly above the average population score (3.5 [16]). 

6.1 Results 

Perceived security and trust. Since authentication ceremonies of­
ten need the cooperation of two users it is necessary that users are 
able to describe ceremonies in simple terms. The majority (13) of 
participants provided short and functional descriptions, the others 
either responded with step-by-step explanations (4) or an explana­
tion why they would not use such a ceremony (1). Eleven partici­
pants said that the ceremony had a positive efect on security, four 
did not know, two thought it would impact security negatively, and 
one would not use such a ceremony. To quantify the perceived secu­
rity we asked participants to rate the increased security on a scale 
from 1 to 10. The selfes based prototype received the highest aver­
age score of 7.08, the combination lock and the ID card prototype 
received a lower but similar score (6.08 and 6.2). When we asked 
about the participants’ reasons for their assessment, some described 
the strengths of an approach “being hard and time-consuming to 
fake the process” (P10) or remained cautious “one can never be 
entirely sure”. 

User-reported usability issues. The participants’ feedback con­
tained two categories of problems: (1) they wanted either more 
information, or (2) they wanted to improve the user interface fow. 
In the frst category, the warning message that notifes them was the 
most common topic. Participants wanted to change its placement, 
color, the information contained, or the kind of buttons included 
in it. Another major concern was the kind of visualisation of a 
successful authentication: participants suggested diferent colors, 
symbols, or obvious messages to do that. In the second category, the 
user interface fow, participants wanted to simplify and streamline 
the ceremonies. Their suggestions were concerned with reducing 
the amount of actions they had to do manually. Additionally, they 
wanted more information on their progress and wanted to change 
the visible buttons to make it easier for them to navigate through 
the ceremonies. Two participants also wanted to change input felds, 
because they felt more comfortable with pin entry pads than with 
number wheels. 

Social and cultural issues. For the authentication prototype based 
on personal pictures, we selected an alphabet of 32 gestures. We 
selected gestures that are easy to do with one hand, that are easy to 
recognize, and that do not have any negative political or insulting 
meanings. However, during the storyboard prototyping iterations 
we found that our curated list still contains gestures with negative 
meaning depending on cultural context. 

6.2 UX Expert Feedback 

Asking potential users to give design feedback is helpful because it 
gives them a concrete method to describe what they understand, 
what aspects irritated them, and how they would resolve those prob­
lems. In most cases, we cannot implement the participants’ design 
suggestions without further consideration. After a total of N = 18 
participants and two iterations of storyboard prototyping, we did 
not encounter any new types of problems or design suggestions 
from our participants. We involved a UX expert to help us improve 

the user interface design further. The UX expert that we recruited 
from our institution has several years of experience in UX design 
for diferent research facilities. In the frst meeting, we presented 
and explained the storyboard prototypes, provided information 
about the design process, and discussed the feedback we received 
from the participants. After the meeting, the UX expert annotated 
all storyboard prototypes in detail and gave suggestions for im­
provements. In the second meeting, we discussed the annotated 
storyboard prototypes and resolved misunderstandings. 

The UX expert gave feedback on the design of the authentica­
tion ceremonies themselves, as well as the motivational cues in the 
messenger’s interface. Regarding the authentication ceremonies, 
we implemented the following suggestions: a radical reduction of 
text on each screen, reduction of visual noise in the interface, con­
sistent placement of icons, and communicating only one aspect 
per screen with consistent use of progress visualization. They also 
suggested using imagery and animations to communicate that se­
curity “happens” in the background, similar to the approach by 
Distler et al.[13]. However, we did not implement this suggestion 
since we could not decide on ftting imagery and our paper-based 
prototyping approach does not work well with animations. 

The UX expert also provided feedback on the motivational cues 
in the messenger’s interface that lead up to the authentication cer­
emony. We implemented their suggestion to visualize the security 
status before and after security actions in a consistent manner. Ad­
ditionally, we discussed several issues with the security warning 
message. The UX expert suggested avoiding the advertisement­
banner efect by integrating the warning into the conversation 
itself. The messenger could force users to pay attention to the warn­
ing by requiring interaction, such as a slider or a fnger tap, to 
access information. While we did not implement these suggested 
changes to the warning message, we consider them an interesting 
future research direction. 

At the end of the second meeting, the UX expert suggested 
several sources of design inspiration, helpful books, and design 
tools that could help in the future. Figure 6 shows impressions of 
the three resulting prototypes. 

7 EVALUATION 

During the collaborative design workshops, we found that (1) par­
ticipants who understood the purpose and consequence of the 
ceremony were willing to invest an additional efort for some of 
their contacts, and (2) some participants felt reassured about the 
security if they were able to participate in the security process. 
Therefore, a good authentication ceremony provides users with an 
intuition about the security it provides in diferent situations, and 
also increases the users’ perceived security. 

Procedure. We conducted a between-subjects online survey (N = 
131) on Amazon MTurk and randomly assigned participants to one 
of four conditions. The four conditions include the three devel­
oped prototypes and Signal’s current authentication ceremony in 
the same presentation format and design language as the other 
prototypes. All click-through prototypes are provided in the sup­
plementary material. 

At the start of the survey, we presented the same messaging­
related scenario to all participants. This scenario introduces a threat

model: the potential risk of losing one’s job if the messages are in­
tercepted or sent to the wrong person – this was chosen since (a) it 
could have serious consequences, (b) it is a common enough situ­
ation s.t. participants are able to immerse themselves into it. The 
scenario also introduces the notion of an authentication ceremony 
and links the participants to a randomly assigned condition. Each 
of the four conditions shows a storyboard of an authentication cer­
emony. Participants may click anywhere to receive an indication of 
the clickable features in each still image. After the participants com­
plete the authentication ceremony, we link them to the evaluation 
survey. The survey covers the following four quantitative measures: 
(1) SUS (10 items): evaluation the prototypes’ usability using the 
Systems Usability Scale (SUS), (2) UEQ-S (8 items): evaluation of the 
prototypes’ user experience using the User Experience Question­
naire (UEQ-S), (3) Perceived Security (1 item): participants’ rating of 
their conversation’s general security after completing the ceremony 
[7-point Likert scale], and (4) Threat Models (5 items): participants’ 
rating of security that their ceremony provides against fve attack­
ers with diferent capabilities [7-point Likert scale] (detailed items 
in the supplementary material). Even though users’ perceptions on 
security or the threat models are not necessarily accurate, they will 
afect how often and for which purpose they will use authentica­
tion ceremonies. We also collected qualitative information on (1) 
the participants’ reasons for their perceived security, and (2) the 
participants’ contacts they would consider authenticating in the 
future. Additionally, we asked for information on messengers used, 
whether they have seen an authentication ceremony before, and 
if they would conduct an authentication ceremony in the future. 
To show the validity of our sample, we also measured the afnity 
for technology interaction (ATI) scale. The full questionnaire is 
included in the supplementary material. 

Analysis. We hypothesized that participants who experience one 
of the three developed prototypes will have an increased perception 

of security and an improved understanding of the type of threat 
models they protect against – when compared to Signal’s current 
authentication ceremony. 

We use a MANOVA to measure the global efects of the choice 
of prototypes on the four outcome measures (SUS, UEQ-S, Perceived 
security, and Threat Models). We apply separate univariate analyses 
to measure the efect of the prototypes on each of the outcome 
measures. In case of a signifcant statistical efect on the outcome 
measures, we use pairwise planned contrasts between the developed 
prototypes and the control group to understand which prototypes 
is responsible for this efect. The required sample size for a medium 
efect size of f 2(V ) = 0.625 and a power = 0.95 is 144 participants, 
which was our lower bound recruitment goal. We used open coding 
to analyse the free text responses to the qualitative questions. One 
researcher coded all answers, thereby creating the initial codebook 
consisting of 15 codes. A diferent researcher used this codebook 
to code all answers independently. This resulted in an inter-rater 
agreement of Cohen’s κ = 0.69, which is a satisfactory agreement. 

Recruitment and participants. We conducted a pilot test with 
two participants to refne our survey and to determine participant 
compensation based on completion time (10 resp. 15 minutes). We 
implemented their minor suggestions for improvements in the fnal 
version of the study. 

For the fnal study, we recruited participants on Amazon MTurk. 
We required a 99% approval rate for past assignments. We paid each 
participant USD 2.50 which results in a USD 10 per hour wage. We 
received a total of 217 completed questionnaires. 82 participants 
were already familiar with one of the study’s conditions, because 
they had seen Signal’s authentication ceremony before. Four partic­
ipants failed the two Likert scale attention check questions (taken 
from Huang et al. [24]). After removing them, our fnal dataset con­
sists of N = 131. The participants’ average age was 30.58 (sd = 8.10). 
About two-thirds (63%) of them were men, about one-third (36%)

were women, and one person (1%) was non-binary. The majority 
(66%) of participants had a college degree, 12% had a vocational 
degree, 19% completed high-school, and 3% did not complete high­
school or preferred not to say. The average ATI score (3.58) is near 
the expected average of 3.5 [16]. Participants reported using on 
average 2.48 (sd = 1.24) messengers (most commonly WhatsApp, 
iMessage, and Telegram). 12.97% of them would authenticate most 
or all of their contacts. The rest would authenticate on average 5.16 
(sd = 2.94) of their contacts. The supplementary material includes 
a table with all collected demographic information. 

7.1 Results 

Participants experience one of the prototypes (Combination Lock, 
Selfes, ID Cards) or the reference prototype modeled after Signal’s 
ceremony. Each of the four groups had 28 to 38 participants. The 
average afnity for technology interaction (ATI) in each group was 
similar and ranged from 3.53 to 3.67, whereby 3.5 is the expected 
average [16]. 

Quantitative responses. Participants evaluated the prototype’s 
usability (SUS) and user experience (UEQ-S). The prototypes’ SUS 
scores ranged from 50.07 to 55.93. SUS scores above 71 are con­
sidered acceptable and scores below 51.7 are considered unaccept­
able [5, 33]. The prototypes’ UEQ-S scores ranged from 1.12 to 1.42. 
Values range from -3 (horribly bad) to +3 (extremely good), whereby 
results above +0.8 indicate a positive evaluation. 

To understand the participants’ perceptions of the prototypes’ 
security benefts we asked them to rate their perceived security 
on a 7-point Likert scale, and rate (again on a 7-point Likert scale) 
the respective ceremony’s efectiveness against fve specifc threat 
models. The prototypes’ perceived security ranged from 4.92 to 5.60. 
The participants’ rating of security against the fve threat models 
ranged from 4.24 to 4.81, whereby a rating of 7 indicates conf­
dent and correct evaluation of security in all cases. The calculated 
Cronbach’s alpha for these fve threat models items is ρT = 0.83 
which indicates good (0.8 < ρT < 0.9) internal consistency. Table 1 
provides an overview of the resulting measurements. 

Statistical tests. Using Roy’s largest root, there was a signifcant 
global efect of the experienced authentication ceremony on the 
outcome measures, θ = 0.09, F (4, 126) = 2.702, p = .03, ηp2 = 
.07891. 

To fnd out which of the four outcome measures (SUS, UEQ­
S, Perceived Security, and Threat Models) is afected by the difer­
ent authentication ceremonies we ran separate one-way ANOVAs 
on them. After applying Holm-Bonferroni correction, these sep­
arate univariate analyses revealed a marginally signifcant efect 
on the outcome measure Threat Models, F (3, 127) = 3.48, p = .07, 
ηp2 = .07591. Table 2 shows the results of separate ANOVAs for all 
outcome measures. 

We used planned contrasts (with a separate linear regression 
model) between the diferent ceremonies to fnd out which of the 
ceremonies afected the outcome measure Threat Models. These 
planned contrasts with Signal’s authentication ceremony revealed 
that (a) the combination lock ceremony signifcantly improved 

the outcome measure Threat Models, t(127) = 1.982, p = .049 
(one-tailed), and (2) that the selfes-based ceremony signifcantly 
worsened the outcome measure Threat Models, t(127) = −2.194, 
p = .03. Table 3 shows the result of all planned contrasts on the 
outcome measure Threat Models. 

Qualitative responses. We asked all participants to provide a rea­
son for their perceived security rating. The responses to the combi­
nation lock-based prototype included rather detailed explanations, 
many of them stating that the security of the conversation is based 
on the knowledge of the access code: “Only the person with the code 
can access the conversation.” (P75). One participant thought 4-digits 
might be too short for security and another one thought about the 
difculties to distribute the shared knowledge in a secure manner. 
Participants who saw the selfes-based prototype felt reassured by 
the pictures of the communication partners, but commonly had 
a problem to connect this with confdentiality: “I can understand 
the confrmation of the person on the other end. I can see how the 
ceremony confrms the party you are communicating with. I have 
trouble understanding how the data is further secured in the space 
in between.” (P85) The ID card based prototype resulted in mis­
conceptions about the security implications of the authentication 
ceremony. Participants assumed that it could be stolen or copied, 
contrary to the technical reality. 

Necessary additional interactions conveyed a feeling of improved 
security. Several participants connected the action of scanning QR 
codes with added security: “Due to the double QR code verifcation 
(the two participating phones mutually scanning each other)” (P25). 
However, since one participant mentioned that scanning a QR code 
does nothing for security, this reasoning is potentially shaped by 
prior experience or knowledge. Many participants also explained 
why they did not fully trust the authentication ceremony: “However, 
I do know that there will be that small section of individuals that would 
still be able to hack this system if they really wanted to.” (P81) Some of 
those participants described threat models (such as a conversation 
partner forwarding information) and others just overestimated the 
capabilities of attackers. 

8 LIMITATIONS 

We recruited participants for our collaborative design workshops and 
iterative storyboard prototyping sessions in stable, economically 
rich countries of the global north. This population faces few threats 
in their daily life – which infuences the resulting prototypes. These 
participants were also not security or design experts, and we did not 
expect them to come up with technical secure concepts. Instead, we 
explicitly included security and design experts in our design method. 
However, users are experts when it comes to their perceptions, 
values, intentions, and mental models – and User-Centered Design 
can help to incorporate this expertise into designs that work for 
users, not against them. 

Many authentication ceremonies require in-person meetings 
even though users’ need for additional security arises in the mo­
ment. Ensuring secure conversations requires planning these in­
person meetings ahead of time, which might decrease the usefulness 
of the authentication ceremony to regular users. We did not pre­
scribe one type of ceremony, since we did not want to restrict the 
participants’ intuitions. Qualitative results (in Section 4 and 7) sug­
gest that in-person meetings build trust in the security mechanism. 

Collaborative design workshop participants need a grasp of the 
security issues in order to suggest solutions. We used a slide show 
(included in the supplementary material) to explain these issues in 
high-level terms to them. The resulting prototypes did not include 
these explanations, since (a) we cannot expect users to read them 
(outside of a lab environment), and (b) the user experience should 
communicate the prototypes’ security implications. 

Our evaluation used a scripted online experience instead of a 
lab study. Previous work [3, 7] found that remote asynchronous 
usability testing discovers fewer usability issues than lab testing, 
which is ofset by easier participant recruitment. However, our main 
concern is not usability testing but rather the users’ comprehension 
of the ceremonies’ security implications. Encouragingly, Wu et 
al. [46] used a similar approach to evaluate their authentication 
ceremony designs. We assume that the efects found in a scripted 
online experience should be even more pronounced in a real-world 
scenario. 

9 DISCUSSION 

9.1 Methodological Lessons We Learned about 
User-Centered Security Design 

We explored how user-centered and participatory design techniques 
can be applied to a well-studied security problem. From this explo­
ration, we learned how some aspects worked out better than we 
expected and which aspects we would have approached diferently 
in hindsight. 

Framing of the design problem afects the entire design process. 
The framing of the initial design problem impacts the entire design 
process and its outcomes. It specifes which strategies and which 
kinds of solutions are suitable for the problem at hand – and who 
should contribute in which manner they are allowed to contribute. 
Hence, this framing should be chosen carefully and explicitly. 

We based our design problem entirely on previous research on 
authentication ceremonies in secure instant messaging. This was 
possible since this niche-problem has already been studied exten­
sively and the continuing issues are well-documented. This is a 
valid and common approach in research, however, it also means 
that assumptions from previous research also infuenced our work. 
A diferent approach of framing a design problem in secure in­
stant messaging could have involved asking participants with an 
increased reliance on security (e.g. activists, members of oppressed 
minorities, health-care workers, sex-workers, ...) about their day­
to-day uncertainties and fears about secure communication. 

Explicit choice of participants is necessary. Working with a uni­
versal defnition of an unmarked user has been a problem in the 
frst wave of HCI [9]. Similarly, it is a commonly observed issue in 
User-Centered Design that designers tend to imagine users that are 
similar to themselves [10, 30]. This erases the challenges of groups 
that are unlike the involved designers, and reinforce the societal 
power hierarchy. 

To avoid unmarked users in design studies for security, we sug­
gest keeping the following groups in mind: afected users, idealistic 
users, and non-users. Ermoshina et al. [15] diferentiated between 
users with specifc and concrete threat models, who were conse­
quently invested in learning and using security tools, and users 
with very abstract threat models who had an interest in security 
tools but used them more for emotional and idealistic reasons than 
fearing concrete negative efects. Since the security and useful­
ness of some security tools rely on the number of total users, it is 
equally important to focus on the attitudes and requirements of 
non-users [35]. All three groups need to be involved to build widely­
deployed security mechanisms that provide meaningful security 
against various kinds of users’ threat models. 

In our design process, we did not focus on users with specifc 
threat models in mind, instead, our recruitment eforts yielded 
mostly idealistic users with rather abstract threat models. In hind­
sight, this allowed us to focus more on user comprehension and 
motivational aspects – assuming that afected users are usually 
motivated and more concerned with issues of usability. Our choice 
of participants also enabled us to fnd social and cultural aspects 
to the design of authentication ceremonies: (1) that requesting an 
authentication might seem like a sign of distrust in the conversation 
partner, (2) that they might feel pressured to provide a reason for 
their authentication request, or (3) that they might be expected to 
explain how the ceremony works when they actually do not know. 
One participant of the iterative storyboard prototyping sessions did 
not like the concept of the selfes-based prototype. They thought 
that sending selfes of themselves comes across as narcissistic or 
that some of the gestures are inappropriate depending on the cul­
tural context. Even though our selection of participants worked 
out well in our case, we would approach the question of suitable 
participants with more care in future design studies.

Clear expectations from participants’ involvement in the security 
design process. In the beginning, we did not have a clear expectation 
of our participants’ conceptual designs – misleading us about the 
work that would still remain in subsequent design stages. This early 
learning experience led us to include an explicit security evaluation 
and feedback from a UX expert into the design process. 

Designers need to have clear expectations of which expertise 
participants can bring to the design process. They account from 
their lived experience to inform the design process about prob­
lems with existing approaches, current workarounds, and the users’ 
threat models. Participants can also provide intuitions about secu­
rity procedures they would expect to see or that they would fnd 
especially convincing. Our collaborative design workshops provide 
evidence for that, seeing that the resulting prototypes are novel 
and engaging. Additionally, participants can provide insights on 
secure experiences after they experience them. This works either 
by using traditional interview techniques or redesigning the low­
fdelity prototypes themselves. The latter approach is especially 
useful when participants have difculties expressing their desired 
changes verbally. 

However, we need to stress again that participants cannot pro­
vide expertise on security, usability, or user experience design. The 
results from our collaborative design workshops included several 
designs that were not secure and very hard to implement securely 
at all. Consequently, expertise in these areas has to come from other 
involved parties. 

Focus on qualitative evaluation in the prototyping phase. As Green­
berg et al. [21] noted that HCI papers tend to quantitatively evaluate 
early designs even when a qualitative approach would be more ap­
propriate. Throughout our design process, we observed that the 
qualitative, rather than the quantitative, evaluation of our proto­
types provided more thorough and actionable information about 
their underlying issues and benefts. A particularly relevant exam­
ple is the participants’ mental association of the user experience 
with the achieved levels of security. While we could tell from quanti­
tative measures that participants believed in a prototype’s security, 
we required qualitative data to understand the reasons for these 
beliefs. These reasons were sometimes unintended, unexpected, 
and consequently, insightful. In the future, we would focus more on 
qualitative evaluations of our early designs instead of comparing 
prototypes quantitatively early on. 

9.2 Outcomes from our Endeavour to Design 
Appropriate Authentication Ceremonies 

Unexpected fndings regarding our resulting prototypes. In hind­
sight, two unexpected fndings add necessary context to the result­
ing prototypes and their evaluation results: (1) Qualitative results 
suggest that participants strongly associate the act of scanning 
QR codes with security – which means that QR codes potentially 
evoke a perception of security even without understanding the 
security mechanism itself. This association would have infuenced 
the evaluation of the ID card prototype and Signal’s current cer­
emony. (2) Reviewing the documentation from the collaborative 
design workshops, we note that participants either understood 
MitM attacks as an impersonation attack or an interception attack 
– both interpretations are incomplete but correct. Consequently, we 

received some suggestions that protect against impersonationand 
others that protect against interception. Qualitative results indicate 
that participants exposed to the selfes or the ID card prototypes 
were confdent about their contact’s identity but unsure how the 
procedure protects against interception – even though it techni­
cally would. In contrast, participants that used the combination lock 
prototype understood how it provides security even though some 
thought 4-digit combinations were insufcient. 

The iterative storyboard prototyping uncovered that adapting 
the messengers’ UI fow (details are in the supplementary material) 
can provide security guarantees. The combination lock prototype 
locks users out of a conversation until they have entered the correct 
access code. This design choice was consistent with the workshop 
participants’ conceptual ideas. Since users in these scenarios are 
required to authenticate, the transmission of unauthenticated mes­
sages indicates an ongoing MitM attack. Such a guarantee based 
on messengers’ UI fow is a clear improvement over the state-of­
the-art. 

Increasing adoption rates. The comparative evaluation of our 
prototypes did not fnd improved usability or user experience. How­
ever, both are prerequisites for increased adoption rates. We found 
three diferent explanations for this, each leading to another rem­
edy. Our prototypes could have improved the usability and user 
experience in minor ways not detectable with our study’s num­
ber of participants. Such potential minor improvements could be 
found with more participants. It is also possible that our online 
user experience does not compare well to the physical counter­
part. Repeating the evaluation with high-fdelity Android-based 
prototypes could provide more meaningful results for these two 
measures since the experience would resemble real-world circum­
stances. We also consider the possibility that our comparatively 
short user-centered design process might not be suited for gaining 
usability improvements. Other complementary design approaches, 
such as activity-centered design, could be applicable and improve 
usability and user experience. 

A broad social acceptance of authentication ceremonies is nec­
essary to increase adoption rates. Social acceptance might be an 
issue for our prototype based on sending selfes that show specifc 
gestures. Sending pictures containing silly gestures or even selfes 
to contacts might be inappropriate depending on the cultural and 
social contexts. Hence, business-related authentication will require 
diferent kinds of pictures than authentication amongst relatives 
and friends. 

Aspects such as discoverability, motivation, and nudges were 
not our primary research goals. Nevertheless, they are crucial as­
pects of increasing adoption rates. Users could either plan their 
security ahead, regardless of their immediate requirements or they 
(unexpectedly) require increased security in the moment of use. 
Users that employ the frst approach have a security motivation 
but might need reminders at convenient times (motivation and 
context-sensitive nudges). The second approach requires an un­
derstanding of the available security mechanisms and that users 
fnd and use these mechanisms in an appropriate time-frame (un­
derstanding, discoverability, and usability). Most authentication 
ceremonies rely on a planned security approach because they often 
rely on in-person meetings. However, ceremonies need to support

both approaches to be useful in more situations and for more types 
of users. 

Our results in the context of related work. When Vaziripour et 
al. [44] let their study participants authenticate their communica­
tion partners without telling them about authentication ceremonies, 
they used several techniques that also came up during our collab­
orative design workshops. Namely, send pictures, recognize video, 
recognize voice, and shared knowledge. This overlap of techniques 
suggests that these social approaches to authentication might gen­
eralize to a larger population – a fnding that could inform future 
authentication ceremonies. 

Necessary additional interactions in the form of authentication 
ceremonies boosted some of the participants’ perceived security. 
Fully automatic authentication (e.g., with CONIKS [29]) would 
make these ceremonies superfuous, thereby reducing the perceived 
security for this population. However, most participants stated that 
they would only authenticate friends, partners, and family – making 
automatic approaches useful for other contacts. 

10 CONCLUSION 

Authentication ceremonies in secure instant messaging are a well­
researched security problem [22, 37, 39, 41–44, 46]. A few diferent 
approaches (applying either systems design or activity-centered 
design) have been explored to improve their usability and adoption 
rate. Our user-centered design approach is based on the assump­
tion that fundamental improvements of these ceremonies require 
rethinking the entire design from the user’s perspective. We used 
a four-stage design process including collaborative design work­
shops, selecting viable candidates, iterative storyboard prototyping, 
and a mixed-methods online evaluation. Even though the quantita­
tive comparison of our prototypes did not reveal usability or user 
experience improvements, we found that one of our prototypes 
increases the users’ comprehension of the ceremonies’ security 
benefts. 

We also learned several important lessons from applying user­
centered design to security problems: (1) Participants have impor­
tant participatory roles in the security design processes. Mainly 
framing the design problem regarding threat models and social 
aspects, informing designers and security experts about their intu­
itions on convincing secure experiences, and improving prototypes 
with their iterative feedback; (2) The choice of participants needs to 
be explicit and consistent. The constructed notion of the “universal 
user” could be combated by,e.g., diferentiating users according to 
the details of their threat models (concrete – abstract), or by their 
current (non-)use of security features; and (3) Focusing on qualita­
tive evaluations is necessary to understand if participants correctly 
associate the user experience with the achieved security levels.