Development, Implementation, and User
Evaluation of COVID-19 Dashboard in a
Third-Level Hospital in Iran

Somayeh Fazaeli1
Taleb Khodaveisi2
Ali Khorsand Vakilzadeh3
Mehdi Youseﬁ4
Atousa Ariafar5

Mohsen Shokoohizadeh1
Saeed Mohammad-Pour6

1Medical Records and Health Information Technology Department,
School of Paramedical Sciences, Mashhad University of Medical
Sciences, Mashhad, Iran
2Department of Health Information Technology, School of Allied
Medical Sciences, Hamadan University of Medical Sciences,
Hamadan, Iran
3Department of Complementary and Chinese Medicine, School of
Persian and Complementary Medicine, Mashhad University of
Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Iran
4Social Determinants of Health Research Center, Mashhad University
of Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Iran
5Imam Reza Educational, Research and Medical Institution, Mashhad
University of Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Iran
6Department of Health Economics, School of Management and
Medical Information, Iran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran,
Iran

Appl Clin Inform 2021;12:1091–1100.

Address for correspondence Mehdi Youseﬁ, Social Determinants of
Health Research Center, Mashhad University of Medical Sciences,
Mashhad, Iran (e-mail: YouseﬁMH@mums.ac.ir).

Mohsen Shokoohizadeh, Medical Records and Health Information
Technology Department, School of Paramedical Sciences, Mashhad
University of Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Iran
(e-mail: ShokoohizadeM1@mums.ac.ir).

Keywords
►COVID-19
►dashboard
►hospitals
►information systems
►Iran

Conclusion
The selection of proper criteria for the implementation of an effective
dashboard is critical for the health care organization since they are designed with a
high-tech and content-based environment. The dashboard in the present study was a
successful combination of clinical and managerial indicators. Future studies should
focus on the design and development of dashboards, as well as benchmarking by using
data from several hospitals.

Applied Clinical Informatics
Vol. 12

1092

Methods

This descriptive developmental applied study was conducted
to develop and assess a COVID-19 dashboard in a big hospital
in Mashhad, Iran, using a focus group technique and a panel
of experts. This dashboard was designed in Imam Reza
Hospital, which is a tertiary care teaching hospital in Mash-
had, Iran. This hospital has approximately 1,000 beds and
provides care to around 6,000 inpatients and 19,000 emer-
gency patients monthly.
User-centered design (UCD) was adopted for the develop-
ment of the dashboard. The UCD is an iterative design process
in which designers and other stakeholders focus on the users
and their needs in each phase of the design process.26 The
UCD process ensures a stable integration of later users
throughout all phases of the project. With more user focus,
the UCD method is one of the most suitable methods for the
recognition of the user’s problems.26,27

The general phases of the UCD process include:

1. Speciﬁcation of the context of use: Identiﬁcation of the
people who are supposed to use the product, the purpose
of use, and the conditions of use.
2. Speciﬁcation of requirements: Identiﬁcation of any busi-
ness requirements or user goals that must be met for the
success of the product.
3. Creation of design solutions: This part of the process may
be done in stages, building from a rough concept to a
complete design.
4. Evaluation of designs: Evaluation—ideally through usabil-
ity testing with actual users—is an integral part of soft-
ware development.26

In other words, UCD steps for the development of a
dashboard include identiﬁcation of goals, users, data, design
and layout, user feedback, dashboard design, and overall best
practices.
This study was performed in four steps according to UCD
stages.
The main goals of designing this dashboard for real-time
analysisand managementofCOVID-19diseaseandthegeneral
features of this dashboard were examined through brain-
storming during the ﬁrst focus group discussion. This focus
group discussion was held with the presence of 10 potential
users of the system, including hospital managers, nursing
managers, heads of relevant departments (infectious disease
specialists), and heads of COVID-19 committees (emergency
medicine specialists). The main criteria for the selection of
participants included their experience and knowledge of
hospital management and their willingness to participate in
the study.
In the second phase, the focus group discussion was held in
thehospital,withthosewhowerepresentinthepreviousfocus
group,andthemeetingswere chaired by thehospitalmanager.
Initially,userswereaskedsuchquestionsas“Whatinformation
do they need to better manage COVID-19 in their ﬁeld?,” “Why
do they need this information?,” “When do they need this
information?,” “How should they access this information?,”
and “Where should they get the needed information?.”

Moreover, the focus group discussed any user goals that
must be met for the success of the product. Therefore, the
necessary approach for getting access to each piece of
information, as well as the information sources for inclusion
in the COVID-19 information management dashboard was
identiﬁed subsequently.
At the end of this phase, the comments were written and
summarized, and voting was done using the nominal group
technique in the form of a list of information that needs to be
placed in the COVID-19 information management dash-
board. The nominal group method was used to analyze the
focus group data and get a conclusion at the end of the
sessions. Access to each required indicator and information
resource was provided and approved by the majority (75%) of
the participants.
Subsequently, the study team including ﬁve specialists
(i.e., two physicians, one nurse, one health information
management, and one manager) classiﬁed indicators in three
classiﬁcations of inputs, process, and output after the second
focus group meeting, according to related previous studies.
In the creation of the design solutions phase, the special-
ized software design team developed the dashboard proto-
type using the Power BI Desktop software based on the
identiﬁed data elements and requirements from the previ-
ous step.
The use of colors in a dashboard can be a plus; however, it
is necessary to choose them according to known rules, as
indicated in the study conducted by Pestana et al.28 In this
regard, different colors were applied to indicate the impor-
tance of information. In this regard, dark-colored fonts were
used to highlight information that required more user’s
attention,28 and the barely discernable pale background
color was used to provide a more soothing and less starkly
contrasting surface on which the data can reside.29

Afterward, the designed prototype was integrated with
the hospital information system (HIS) and its capabilities and
visual features were displayed to the users. In the ﬁnal phase
(i.e., evaluation of the designs), 1 week after the prototype
was available to users, the third focus group was held with
the same participants who had attended the second focus
group. These 10 main users were asked to comment on
suggestions provided for upgrading the designed dashboard.
Furthermore, their satisfaction was measured based on the
end-user satisfaction model with such items as content
review, accuracy, ease of use, and timeliness using a ques-
tionnaire that was scored based on a ﬁve-item Likert scale,
similar to that used in the Rouhani and Zamenian study,21 in
which very good ¼ 4, good ¼ 3, moderate ¼ 2, bad ¼ 1, and
very bad ¼ 0. The validity and reliability of the questionnaire
were conﬁrmed. The dashboard software was then provided
to participants to evaluate after working with the dashboard
through the completion of a designed paper questionnaire.
The mean  standard deviation (SD) of the questions were
calculated as well.
Eventually, the ﬁnal version of the dashboard system was
developed after the comments and suggestions received
from users and the required changes were applied to the
designed prototype.

Applied Clinical Informatics
Vol. 12

1093

Results

Opinions from potential users of the COVID-19 information
management dashboard were gathered in the initial phase of
the study. According to the comments, objectives ofdashboard
development included the possibility of informed and evi-
dence-baseddecision making for the managers, easier analysis
of information through information processing, and identiﬁ-
cation of the main performance indicators and factors that can
be evaluated. Regarding general features dashboards, partic-
ipants agreed that dashboards are likely to solve the problems
of presentation format and information load when certain
visualization principles and features are present (e.g., high
data-ink ratio and drill-down features). Dashboards should
have some level of ﬂexibility so that users can switch between
alternative presentation formats. Pop-ups and warnings can
help users select an appropriate presentation format.
At the end of the session, the main users of the dashboard
were given their votes. The criteria for selecting these
individuals included membership in the hospital board of
directors or one of the COVID-19 committees, such as the
Nosocomial Infection Committee, and at least 2 years of
working experience in the hospital.
The mean  SD age and mean  SD work experience of the
selected main users were 44  4.11 and 12  6.04 years,
respectively. The participants in the study included four
females and six males and their demographic information
is presented in ►Table 1.
In the second phase, the main information requirements of
caring for COVID-19 patients were identiﬁed with the partici-
pation of the main users. Based on the available data, 25
indicators have been selected to be displayed in the COVID-
19 dashboard. For a better understanding of information,
participants decided to classify the selected indicators into
three categories (performance, clinical, and demographic cat-
egories) (►Table 2). Data on these indicators were extracted
from the HIS, automatically. Moreover, at the request of
participants in the focus group, users could visualize the
data summary of each patient and compare the data obtained
from different departments. It was suggested that the number
of admissions, discharges, and deaths over a period of time
could be observed as well. Moreover, it was decided to use a
table to show the average request for the diagnostic tests.
Dashboard users could view demographically classiﬁed
data, such as gender-based data. In total, eight items were
suggested by the second focus group as dashboard require-
ments: (1) the ability to access the system through Web
browsers without the need to install a speciﬁc platform or
operating dashboard, (2) the ability to connect to the health
information system for data gathering and analyzing, (3) the
capability to deﬁne access levels for the users, (4) the
possession of user-friendly dashboard, (5) the ability to
change, develop, conﬁgure, and service the dashboard, (6)
the use of color capabilities in the dashboard, (7) the ability
to report online and drill down, and (8) the possibility to
visualize data over a period of time.
Subsequent to the development of the initial dashboard
prototype using the Power Bi server, each user was given a

URL to use the dashboard, and access levels were also
deﬁned.
According to the access level set in the initial focus group
of the prototype dashboard, it was possible to provide daily,
weekly, and monthly reports according to the selected
indicators. It was also possible to create exception reports
based on the users’ requests. This prototype dashboard
utilized data from March 2020 to August 2020 based on
HIS. The HIS is an administrative and clinical database
containing data from all departments in the hospital, which
provided care to COVID-19 patients. The prototype dash-
board presents summary data of COVID-19 patients at the
hospital level for the main users.
In the third step of the focus group, suggestions were made
by the members of the focus group to upgrade the dashboard
according to the feedback provided by the users. After consul-
tation with the technical team for the modiﬁcation of the
relevant dashboard, it was agreed that the number of deaths,
admissions, and discharges should be displayed in three
separate graphs, and the distribution of patients by days of
hospitalization and the average length of stay be displayed in a
graph as well. Afterward, a questionnaire was provided to
participants
and
their
satisfaction
with
the
designed

Table 1 Demographic characteristics of participants

aMean  standard deviation (SD) age is 44  4.11.
bMean  standard deviation (SD) work experience is 12  6.04.

Applied Clinical Informatics
Vol. 12

1094

dashboard was measured. The internal and external validity,
reliability, and statistical validity of this questionnaire have
been approved by Aggelidis and Chatzoglou.30 The average
user satisfaction of the model is presented in ►Table 3.
The images of the report page of the designed information
dashboard are presented in ►Figs. 1–3.

Discussion

As previously mentioned, the main objective of the present
study was to develop and implement a dashboard system to
manage the crisis caused by COVID-19 in a third-level hospital.
In this regard, the main indicators and requirements of such a

Table 2 Indicators for display in a dashboard

Abbreviations: CT, computed tomography; HIS, hospital information system; ICU, intensive care unit.

Table 3 User satisfaction of the dashboard

Abbreviation: EUCS, end-user computing satisfaction.

Applied Clinical Informatics
Vol. 12

1095

system were identiﬁed. Therefore, identiﬁcation of the main
indicators and requirements of the developed dashboard
through the participation of potential users in all stages of
development and implementationwas the differencebetween
this study and similar studies.25,31

Some of the previous studies on dashboard design for
pandemic diseases, such as COVID-19,1,4 severe acute respi-
ratory syndrome, and H1N1 inﬂuenza,32–34 had their focus

on the clinical aspect and analysis of data outcomes. The
ignorance of users’ views and their participation in designing
such information systems has led to their lack of interest in
such systems.35,36 Therefore, the present study focused on
the identiﬁcation of the information needs and requirements
of such a system from the users’ point of view. Based on the
study results, several methods were used to identify and
extract indicators and requirements of the dashboard system

Fig. 1 The ﬁnal dashboard visualizes data for patients screened for COVID-19 disease. The prototype dashboard presents a deidentiﬁed patient
record populated with clinical data (imaging diagnostic tests).

Fig. 2
The number of daily admissions, daily discharges, and daily deaths in a sample time period.

Applied Clinical Informatics
Vol. 12

1096

which included investigation of similar information systems,
user interviews, and questionnaires.37–39

In this study, a UCD was adopted for the development,
implementation, and evaluation of the COVID-19 dashboard.
The results of a study performed by Setyawan et al indicated
that this method had a positive relationship with supporting
user’s participation in the process of application develop-
ment.27 In studies in which a similar method has been used,
researchers designed a safety dashboard for patients as well.
Their ﬁndings showed that this method increased patients’
participation.40,41 Another study based on this method
showed that according to the users’ feedback, visualizations
improved situational awareness and have probably provided
valuable information to facilitate informed operational deci-
sion making.42

In this regard, indicators and requirements of the dash-
board system were identiﬁed through the examination of
similar dashboard systems and interview with users through
focus group meetings.
Users tend to utilize a variety of tools, such as mobile
devices, especially smartphones, as well as other electronic
devices, including personal computers (PCs), laptops, and
tablets to access information in Web-based applications,
such as dashboards.37,43 The designed dashboard in the
present study is Web-based and can be accessed by all users
through common browsers on electronic devices, such as
PCs, laptops, and tablets, without the need for installation on
a speciﬁc operating system.
Reasonable decision making is a key element in health
care organizations at managerial levels. A dashboard is a tool
that can integrate data from several different sources, sum-
marize the key performance indicators (KPIs), and provide
them to users in a colorful graphic in real-time to facilitate
informed decision making.38 Studies on the design of COVID-
19 management dashboards showed that these dashboards
connect to and integrate with other health information
systems, such as electronic health records and health infor-
mation systems, to receive data from these systems.14,39,44,45

Similarly, the dashboard designed in the present study was
integrated with the HIS. Therefore, the data could be used in
real-time to display and manage COVID-19 disease.
Determination of accurate KPIs is one of the primary
requirements in the development of a dashboard. These
indicators should be developed in accordance with the needs
andgoalsof thegivenorganizationtoprovidevalidandreliable
measurements.46–48 Demand for intensive care unit (ICU)
services will increase under conditions similar to the COVID-
19 pandemic. Therefore, patient triage is critical in situations
like this since there is always a risk that patients may not be
properly admitted to the ICU which may cause more harm and
injury to the patients.35 Regarding the fact that the triage,
emergency, and ICU departmentsare involvedintheprocess of
providing health care services to COVID-19 patients, it is
important tomonitor theworkﬂowof theseunits.Accordingly,
the indicators required for COVID-19 management in the
present study were identiﬁed through the assessment of the
information needs of dashboard users. These indicators were
classiﬁed into three main groups based on clinical and mana-
gerial needs of users, including performance, clinical, and
demographic criteria. Subsequently, the output data and
reports of the dashboard were displayed to managers and
clinical specialists in form of color charts and tables. Based on
the results of previous studies, the use of colors in dashboard
design led to a better understanding of the situation and
improved data visualization which in turn reduced the re-
sponse time and error rate.36

Similarly, in the study conducted by Grange et al, the
related key indicators were identiﬁed and applied to the
designed COVID-19 management dashboard.14 Furthermore,
interactive Web-based dashboards have been designed dur-
ing the COVID-19 pandemic surge in different countries to
help managers and clinicians better manage the limitations
in human resources, medicine, and medical equipment and
take more effective actions.1,31,49,50

In addition, user satisfaction is one of the important
factors affecting the acceptance and application of different

Fig. 3
Distribution of length of stay and mean  standard deviation (SD) of patient age in deidentiﬁed department.

Applied Clinical Informatics
Vol. 12

1097

software.51 However, the review of studies related to the
design of COVID-19 dashboards showed that user’s satisfac-
tion with the designed dashboard has been examined in a
small number of them.52 In the same line, user’s satisfaction
with the designed dashboard was examined in the present
study in terms of the simplicity of use and the extent to
which the information and operational needs of dashboard
users were met.
As a result, the examination of users’ satisfaction and
application of their comments and feedback in dashboard
design led to improved dashboard performance and in-
creased users’ acceptance of the designed dashboard.
It seems that the structure and minimum data included in
this dashboard can be used for similar hospitals due to the
similar nature of the disease.
Regarding the limitations of the present study, one can
refer to the fact that due to the critical situation of the COVID-
19 pandemic, focus group interviews with potential users
were withheld. Moreover, since the present study was con-
ducted in only one center, the number of participants
involved in the development and implementation of the
dashboard was small.

Conclusion

Information dashboards are important for the provision of
access to necessary information in the shortest possible time.
Information dashboards keep managers informed about the
process of patient care, admission, discharge, and incidents,
such as the number of deaths and the use of hospital services.
The application of this tool leads to more evidence-based
decision making in the crisis and reduces the likelihood of
error and failure in crisis management.
Furthermore, the simplicity of design and the possibility
of connection to the HIS database allows administrators and
users to access the reports they need with higher conﬁdence
and speed and avoid the repeated collection of the required
information.
Eventually, the dashboard developers need to receive
periodic feedback from the users, update their information
needs, and evaluate the quality of data and dashboard
information to preserve the users’ desire to use this system
continuously and make the most of such information man-
agement dashboards.

Clinical Relevance Statement

This study can be used as a guide for the implementation and
development of a dashboard for managing various crises,
such as COVID-19 disease in hospitals.