A systematic user-centred framework for engineering product
design in small- and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs)

Francesco Gherardini1
& Cristina Renzi2 & Francesco Leali1

3 Methodological framework

A user-centred methodological framework, for the continuous
and iterative interrelation between the user needs and prefer-
ences and the engineering designer perspective during the
whole design process, is proposed.
The framework aims to help the designer in the definition
of the actions related to each design object as well as in the
solution of the design problems related to these actions, by

suggesting appropriate methods. A given set of methods is
provided for each action, in order to allow the designer to
choose the most suitable one, on the basis of his know-how
and on the specific resources available in the SME. However,
the designer is not limited to this set of methods, according to
his expertise. In this way, the designer can tailor his own
design process.
As a novel aspect, this framework involves the user in each
phase of the design process. In particular, the user becomes an
actor in the definition of the product requirements, as well as
in the evaluation of the concept and design alternatives and of
the final prototype.
According to the literature [5, 55], the design phases ad-
dressed in this framework are

1.
Conceptual design phase
2.
Preliminary design phase
3.
Product and process early assessment phase

as reported in Fig. 1. The conceptual and the preliminary
design phases present some subphases, according to one or
more objects that have to be achieved in the design process:
hence, the first column of Fig. 1 highlights a flow of these
objects. In the second column, the actions required to achieve
each object are reported, and, in the third, the actors that are
involved (i.e. user and designer).
The proposed framework involves the following list of ac-
tions: elicitation, translation, concept generation, selection,
modelling, visualization, engineering, simulation and optimi-
zation. These actions can be carried out by means of state-of-
the-art methods and techniques, which belong to areas of en-
gineering design or decisional fields. These can be implement-
ed by commercial or free tools, often based on Web applica-
tions (Web tools), or in-house made tools directly developed
by the designers, according to the designer’s intention and
know-how.
In the following, a non-exhaustive collection of the state-
of-the-art methods and techniques used for carrying out the
actions is reported, as a suggestion for the designer in the use
of the framework.

Elicitation As depicted in Fig. 1, the action of elicitation is
applied to achieve the objects’ user needs as well to gather
preferences on the design alternatives and the virtual proto-
type. In the proposed framework, the Web tools for elicitation,
which we identified and selected, belong to conversational
(e.g. questionnaires and surveys, brainstorming, Web forum)
and synthetic (e.g. virtual prototyping, Web scenarios, contex-
tual inquiry) categories. Several Web tools can be found in the
Internet that can be applied without previous specific pro-
gramming languages. As an example, a preliminary selection
of suitable elicitation Web tools and techniques focusing on
the SMEs’ operating context is reported in Fig. 2.

Most of the listed tools allow the designer to directly man-
age the user needs and preferences, by collecting all the

responses in spreadsheets and providing helpful summaries
of the collected data with charts and graphs.

Translation Several methods are focused on the translation of
user needs and preferences into product or technical require-
ments, as listed in Table 1. These methods require the presence
of the user and are usually applied in the early design phases,
seldom being integrated in latter steps of the design process
[35, 55, 56].

Selection The action of selection is applied both to select
concept alternatives in the conceptual design phase and to
design alternatives in the early assessment phase. Methods
related to the action of selection, which involve the user, are
listed in Table 1. Moreover, the fuzzy group decision-making
approaches (e.g. the fuzzy analytic hierarchy process (F-
AHP)) are used to handle uncertainties deriving from the ver-
bal judgments expressed by the decision makers, as in
[57–59].

Concept generation The concept generation action is car-
ried out to generate conceptual design alternatives. To this
aim, several methods can be applied as, for example,
functional analysis [60] and concept combination [61].
The former supports the identification of functional attri-
butes according to the developed requirements. In the lat-
ter, a set of alternatives is generated by means of a com-
bination tool (e.g. the concept combination table, morpho-
logical matrix, classification tree, etc.). In particular, the
morphological method [62, 63] integrates all the previous-
ly described steps, by listing the decomposed functions,
finding conceptual solutions to each function and combin-
ing them into overall concepts.

Modelling The action of modelling is used in the generation
of both conceptual design alternatives and the virtual proto-
type. It is usually carried out by means of parametric 3D CAD
modellers.

Visualization The action of visualization is carried out by the
user to catch the effective shape of the design alternatives and
the virtual prototype, by means of 3D viewer tools, as the
royalty-free cross-platform WebGL. This action supports the
elicitation action.

Engineering The action of engineering is aimed at evalu-
ating the effective performance of the product, in the early
assessment phase. This action is carried out by means of
engineering design-based techniques as design for X [64]
(in which X stands for manufacturing, assembly, environ-
ment, costing, etc.).

Simulation The action of simulation involves digital tests on
the virtual product, with the aim of assessing its performance
in the early assessment phase. Simulation tests are usually
carried out by means of computer-aided engineering tech-
niques as finite element analysis (FEA).

Optimization The action of optimization is aimed to enhance
the product performance, on the basis of the results of simu-
lation tests. To this aim, single/multi-objective optimization
algorithms are used. Families of deterministic methods ap-
plied to solve constrained and unconstrained design problems

are the linear and non-linear programming methods.
Conversely, stochastic methods usually adopted are simulated
annealing, genetic algorithms, particle swarm optimization,
ant colony optimization and neural network-based optimiza-
tion (e.g. [65]). In addition, the design of experiments (DOE)
is a sampling technique used to build metamodels that gener-
ally represent the input models in the optimization process.
On the basis of the design process, the proposed user-
centred design framework involves the phases described in
the following.

3.1 Phase 1: conceptual design phase

In phase 1, three subphases can be distinguished (Fig. 1),
namely the definition of the user requirements, the generation
of conceptual alternatives and the selection decisional phase.
These subphases are hereafter analysed.

3.1.1 Subphase 1A: user need identification and requirement
definition and assessment

This subphase is aimed at gathering the voice of the user
and, subsequentially, at translating user needs into techni-
cal requirements. In particular, an action of elicitation in-
volves the actor user, in order to gather the voice of the
customer and generate the object user needs. Hence, the
actor designer performs an action of translation of the
user needs in order to generate the object’s technical
requirements.

3.1.2 Subphase 1B: concept generation

The objective of this subphase is the definition of conceptual
design alternatives (or concept alternatives). To this aim, the
actor designer performs an action of concept generation.

3.1.3 Subphase 1C: decisional phase

In this subphase, first, the actor user is required to judge on the
concept alternatives, by an action of elicitation. Hence, an
action of selection is performed by both of the actors, user
and designer, to find out a set of the most suitable design
alternatives by means of a decision-making method. The out-
put of subphase 1C is the selected concept object, which has to
be compared to the reference product.

3.2 Phase 2: preliminary design phase

Phase 2 starts from the product requirements, which define the
main features of the selected concept (i.e. the output of phase
1), and ends with the preliminary layout of the product. Three
subphases can be distinguished, as shown in Fig. 1.

3.2.1 Subphase 2A: definition of the advanced concept design

The input data of this subphase consist of a list of product
requirements, which is composed from the technical require-
ments (derived from the subphase 1A) and a set of additional
requirements, derived from regulatory, physics, corporate, etc.
The actor designer performs an action of translation on the
product requirements in order to define a set of design
variables. Hence, the design variables are converted by the
actor designer into a set of design alternatives by means of
an action of modelling, using a 3D CAD modeller.

3.2.2 Subphase 2B: decisional phase (second level)

Starting from the 3D models of the design alternatives, an
action of visualization and, then, an action of elicitation in-
volve the actor user who is required to compare the alterna-
tives. The selection is performed by the actors user and de-
signer, who are decision makers in the selection phase. The
design alternatives are ranked against a set of criteria involv-
ing the requirements in output from subphase 2A, and the
identification of the most suitable design is achieved.

3.2.3 Subphase 2C: definition of the concept preliminary
layout

The actor designer is required to provide the engineering of
the solution identified in the previous subphase, by integrating
manufacturing, economic and environmental (etc.) aspects by
means of specific techniques. The output of this phase is the
object preliminary layout.

3.3 Phase 3: product and process early assessment

The early assessment phase involves the actions of simulation
and optimization performed by the designer, in order to pro-
vide a first product and process performance evaluation as
well as solve criticalities already in the early stage of the prod-
uct development. The output of this phase is a virtual
prototype, which is subjected to a last action of elicitation by
the actor user in order to establish if it complies with prior user
needs.

3.4 Additional features

The proposed framework allows the designer to employ tai-
lored methods for overcoming specific design issues. Among
the existing methods used for translating the user requirements
into technical requirements, quality function deployment
(QFD) [34] is widely used [66, 67] and it is often used in
SMEs [14, 68], even if some limitations have been addressed
in the literature [69, 70], especially related to the use of unnat-
ural evaluation scoring metrics [71, 72].

In order to overcome these specific issues, we develop a
revised QFD, namely the need-based function deployment
(NBFD). In the common approach, each user has to assign a
qualitative or quantitative score to each need, determining user
importance (degree of importance or priority). To face the crit-
icality of user importance rating, a quantitative approach is pro-
posed in Eq. 1. After defining the full list of m-dentified needs,
each jth user assigns importance to p needs, without expressing
score or rank. The number of users that considers the ith need as
important is quantified, and, finally, the rate assigned to the ith
need consists of a normalized priority index (NIi):

NIi ¼

X n

j¼1ri;j

n
 s
ð1Þ

Where:

rij ¼
0 if the ith need is not important by the jth user
1 if the ith need is important by the jth user



n ¼ number of users

j ¼ 1; …; n

s ¼ rating full scale e:g:5; 10; 100; …
ð
Þ

m ¼ number of needs

p≥
X
m

i¼1
rij ¼ number of needs defined important by

each jth user; where p < m

Each jth user can assign a fixed number p of important
needs among the list of m needs. The value of p is
predetermined by designers and, by our experience,
can be opportunely ranged between one third to one half m,
in order to allow users to focus properly on their priority
needs. In this way, with the aim of better integrating the elic-
itation approach, the normalized index (NI) replaces the scores
of each need within the House of Quality (i.e. the first level of
a QFD according to [34]).
Moreover, this NI is capable also to distinguish preferences
on the basis of socio-demographical or geographical charac-
teristics of the sample of users. The users can be classified on a
selected criteria (e.g. geographical origin); so, many sub-NI
can be developed. Subsequentially, a different importance (i.e.
a sub-NI) can be assigned to each need, distinguishing be-
tween the users’ assessment (e.g. European users and
American users).

4 Case study

As a case study for the methodological framework, we select-
ed the design of a housing and the related system interfaces of

a biomedical electronic device in collaboration with an elec-
tronic Italian SME.
The SME is selected according to the following criteria: the
SME acts in innovative fields of application and markets,
invests in research and development activities as a source of
continuous improvement and is focused on the development
of new products based on emerging technologies. All of these
criteria require the involvement of users throughout the design
process, so this SME can represent a good test for the frame-
work application. Moreover, the designers’ knowledge back-
ground already includes some state-of-the-art methods and
techniques, but they are inconsistently used within the design
process.
The design of the housing and the related system interfaces
of the biomedical electronic device are based on a printed
circuit board (PCB) with RFID transponder or tag. The device
is aimed to the radiolocation and tracking of patients and per-
sonnel in hospitals, in particular, in maternity and obstetrics
wards. The expected goal is to determine the design attributes
for the housing and the related system interfaces, based on a
PCB advanced layout: only minor modifications are permis-
sible. Due to the peculiar operating conditions, the problem is
characterized by stringent requirements regarding safety, reg-
ulatory and sanitation. Moreover, ergonomics and aesthetics
play a major role in the design process of the housing. Hence,
the hospital personnel of different health institutes have been
involved in the design process as expert users.
Due to the context of usage, this case study is characterized
by requirements that strongly depend on the users, so their
involvement in the whole design process is a key point.
Moreover, due to the different geographical locations of the
users, a communication support is required to enhance the
communication between themselves and between them and
the designers. Similarly, the designers requires a support for
their communication: the design team is composed by an elec-
tronic engineer and a marketing expert, coming from the
SME, and a mechanical engineer, coming from a research
institution. To this aim, the framework includes Web tools that
support the collaboration of all the actors involved, as in the
elicitation and selection steps: the actors can discuss, meet and
share content in real time and visualize images or sketches.
In this section, the framework is detailed by defining—for
each action—the method or technique adopted by the SME’s
design team and the related tool. This information is collected
in two additional columns called “method/technique” and
“tools” beside the columns already presented in Fig. 1, as
shown in the figure describing each phase (Figs. 3, 9 and
11). Finally, the results deriving from the frameworks appli-
cation to the case study are presented.
In phase 1, the conceptual design phase is carried on ac-
cording to Fig. 3.
In subphase 1A, due to the operating context, many latent
needs are expected, so a three-step elicitation sequence is

proposed, based on brainstorming, Web forum/scenario and sur-
vey. To this aim, a set of free elicitation Web tools are selected:
the first aims to collect the most of needs, the second to promote
discussion with a scenario-based approach for the users’

understanding and questioning and the last to collect explicit and
latent needs. The elicitation output is a list of 15 needs.
For the translation action, the NBFD is selected on the base
of the SME’s team prior knowledge. The designers have ex-
pertise in the application of the QFD method but, due to the
difficulties in the prioritization of the user needs, they rarely
use it. In the NBFD applied on the case study, users are re-
quired to select the five principal needs, among the 15 formal-
ized ones, according to the proposed NBFD. The result of the
elicitation is summarized in the NI of the NBFD matrix
(Fig. 4). As a result, a set of technical requirements is devel-
oped by the design team.
In subphase 1B, the designers are required to generate
some concepts: a functional analysis supports them in the
identification of four principle functional attributes according
to the developed requirements, as presented in Table 2.

The use of a concept combination table leads to a total
number of 30 possible design alternatives, due to some incon-
sistent solutions. Moreover, among the possible solutions,
some have been discarded, due to constraints imposed by
practitioners (according to the company development guide-
lines). Two attributes are then considered as specifications to
the problem: the first is the mechanical interface, chosen in
place of radiofrequency due to avoid possible interface with
other devices. The second is the static attachment of the hous-
ing to the bracelet, which has been selected in place of the
clamped one for avoiding moving elements that could break.
The output of this subphase are six feasible concept alterna-
tives, as depicted in Fig. 5.
In subphase 1C, the users are required to express prefer-
ences on the six concept alternatives by a two-step elicitation
sequence. First, the users are involved in a Web forum to

promote discussion with a scenario-based approach, and final-
ly, their preferences are collected by means of a Web
questionnaire.
The following selection step has been carried out by
means of an in-house made group fuzzy analytic hierarchy
process (F-AHP), implemented in MATLAB® by the au-
thors and described in [57], which is able to include the
preferences of both the users and the designers in the
decisional step.
First, several needs which have been judged as most
important by the users have been defined. These are, in
particular, small size, steam/chemical sterilization, reus-
ability, easy cleaning, not harmful and not removable.
Moreover, the team of decision makers, composed by an
electronic engineer, a marketing expert and a mechanical
engineer, provided fundamental criteria to describe the
technical attributes for the product, namely mouldability,

disassembly, end of life and recyclability. The user needs
and the designer needs have been listed in Fig. 6. Some of
them have been summed up in more general criteria for
better readability. Moreover, relationships between the us-
er needs and the designer needs have been represented, if
existing. Hence, the list of user and designer needs have
been collected in the decisional criteria, namely dimen-
sions, manufacturability, maintainability, disposal and ser-
vice and operational life.
The decision-making procedure based on the F-AHP
method follows the steps described in [57]. Fuzzy linguis-
tic variables are introduced to describe the preferences of
the decision makers. In particular, “preference” judgments
are taken from the Term Set {very low, low, medium,
high, very high} (Fig. 7a). Judgments related to “suitabil-
ity” are taken from the set {very poor, poor, fair, good,
very good} (Fig. 7b).

First step: Decision makers express their judgment on the
importance of the criteria. In the first step, the three decision
makers (q = 3) are required to give their preferences to the
criteria from the set preference. These linguistic assessments
are handled as fuzzy numbers. The weights are allocated for
each criterion j, (j = 1 , … , i), by the rth decision maker
(r = 1…q). In this way, a matrix of (i × q) elements is produced:

wj;r


¼

w11
w12
:::
:::
w1q
:::
:::
:::
:::
:::
:::
:::
:::
wi1
:::
:::
:::
wiq

0

B
B
B
B
@

1

C
C
C
C
A
ð2Þ

According to Eq. 2, the weights are allocated for each cri-
terion j, (j=1, … ,i; with i = 6), by the rth decision maker
(r = 1…q; q = 3), in the matrix of (6 × 3) elements.
Linguistic values are provided by the decision makers
(Table 3), for evaluating the suitability of each alternative in
relation to the criteria, while the corresponding numerical
values are shown in (Table 4), in a i × q × 4 matrix (as each
element is a four-element vector).
Second step: Definition of a matrix of mean aggregated
preference weights. Thus, the priority among criteria is set,
and the calculated values of the mean aggregated preference
weights are provided in a matrix. In addition, the suitability of
each alternative is evaluated with respect to the criteria, by
means of linguistic variables, treated as trapezoidal fuzzy
numbers. Each weight wj , ris a four-element vector,

representing the trapezoidal numberwj , r = (ajr, bjr, cjr, djr).
Hence, the mean operator is used to find the mean aggregated
preference weight Wj in

W j ¼

X
q

r¼1
wjr

q
¼

X
q

r¼1
ajr

q
;

X
q

r¼1
bjr

q
;

X
q

r¼1
cjr

q
;

X
q

r¼1
djr

q

0

B
B
B
B
@

1

C
C
C
C
A
:
ð3Þ

According to Eq. 3, the Wj matrix is a i × 4 sized, as

W j ¼

0:500
0:650
0:717
0:833
0:417
0:517
0:583
0:717
0:667
0:817
0:900
0:967
0:350
0:500
0:567
0:667
0:350
0:500
0:567
0:667
0:200
0:350
0:400
0:567

2

6666664

3

7777775

Third step: Decision makers express the suitability of the
alternatives to the criteria. Hence, the judgements of each al-
ternative are expressed according to their suitability to the
criteria by each decision maker, using the linguistic variables
from the term set of suitability (Table 5).
Linguistic values are provided by the decision makers,
for evaluating the suitability of each alternative in relation
to the criteria, and the q decision makers are asked to
judge each alternative according to their suitability, rela-
tive to the criteria, using the linguistic variables from the
term set of suitability.
Fourth step: matrix of the suitability indices for all the
alternatives. If Sjmr = (ajmr, bjmr, cjmr, djmr) is defined as the
suitability assigned to the mth alternative (m=1,2, … ,p),
evaluated against the jth criterion (j=1,2, . . . ,i), by the rth
decision maker (r=1,2, . . . ,q), the suitability is given by i
matrices of size (p × q).
The suitability indices (Sjm) are then evaluated for each
criterion, as

Sjm ¼

X
q

r¼1
Sjmr

q
:
ð4Þ

According to Eq. 4, Table 6 shows the suitability indices
evaluated for all the alternatives and criteria.
Hence, the suitability indices are evaluated for all the alter-
natives and criteria and can be collected in a single matrix.
Fifth step: In order to proceed with the final ranking, a
fuzzy score Γ is calculated, for each alternative, as:

Γm ¼

X
i

j¼1
Sjm⊗W j



i

¼ S1m⊗W1
ð
Þ⊕:::⊕Sjm⊗W j


⊕:::⊕Sim⊗Wi
ð
Þ
i
ð5Þ

for m=1, . . . ,p.
In order to get the final ranking, a fuzzy score Γ is calcu-
lated according to Eq. 5 and is presented, for all the alterna-
tives, in the matrix shown in Table 7.

Each fuzzy score is a trapezoidal fuzzy number, and, con-
sequently, it can be graphically represented as in Fig. 8.
Sixth step: defuzzification. A consequent fuzzy score evalua-
tion and a defuzzification procedure generate a ranking vector of
the alternatives. Each fuzzy score is a trapezoidal fuzzy number.
In order to rank the alternatives, the fuzzy score of each
alternative has to be changed into an equivalent crisp value, by
a “defuzzification”, called weighted average method (as
shown in Eq. 6 for each alternative) [58–51]. Each of the base
variable x is weighted by its respective maximum membership
value μm(x) for any m fuzzy number (or variable).

Γmmean ¼

X
μm x
ð Þ  x
ð
Þ
X
μm x
ð Þ
ð6Þ

This vector gives rise to a ranking procedure, for searching
the maximum value among the scores, corresponding to the
best alternative. The result of the decisional phase is an ordered
set of alternatives, which includes the reference alternative.
Seventh step: Ranking of the alternatives. In order to rank
the alternatives, the fuzzy score of each alternative has to be
changed into an equivalent crisp value, by a defuzzification,
according to Eq. 6 for each alternative. The defuzzified values
are collected in the vector of Eq. 7, in which each row is the
mean value of the fuzzy score of each alternative.

Γmean ¼

0:656
0:336
0:467
0:311
0:462
0:208

0

B
B
B
B
B
B
@

1

C
C
C
C
C
C
A

ð7Þ

The highest values of the elements of Γmean represent
the best alternatives. In this case, the first alternative is to
be considered the best one, followed by the third and the
fifth ones.
Finally, the concept selected by means of the F-AHP has
been analysed and qualitatively compared to the reference
product by a discussion among the designers. This is per-
formed in order to list further product requirements to be taken
into account in the following steps.
The preliminary design phase (phase 2) is detailed in
Fig. 9.
In subphase 2A, the set of technical requirements derived
from phase 1 is used as input data in the second-level QFD, for
defining the concept design variables. Beside the previously
defined 15 requirements, (i.e. the marketing requirements) re-
ported in the first rows of the matrix shown in Fig. 10, a new set
of requirements (i.e. the engineering requirements) is included
as additional rows. This matrix helps the designers in defining
the design variables, for the selected conceptual alternative ac-
cording to the requirements in rows, as shown in Fig. 10.

Some design variables, e.g. the free form shape of the
housing and the ergonomic curvature of the bottom housing,
need to be defined as morphological geometry and aesthetics.
Therefore, a parameterized CAD model of the concept is gen-
erated, in order to provide a visualization of the each of the
four design alternatives developed by the designers.
In subphase 2B, the elicitation techniques are based on the
visualization of the four design alternatives. Therefore, the 3D
virtual concepts are visualized by the users by means of a
CAD viewer Web tool, which work as content sharing for
sketch and concept visualization. Hence, the user can compare
each concept with a commercial reference product. By this
virtual prototype elicitation, the user preferences are gathered
by a Web questionnaire. Equally, the design preferences are
collected. In Table 8, the concept alternatives are then ranked
according to a more detailed level of requirements, which is
derived directly from the results of subphase 2A.

In subphase 2C, the concept preliminary layout is defined
by means of integrated engineering techniques, grouped as
design for X. In particular, the design for manufacturing and
assembly helps the designers in the specification of the geom-
etry of the housing and its elements, which will be realized by
injection moulding.
In phase 3, the product and process assessment is carried on
by simulation and optimization actions by the designers, and
then the virtual prototype will be finally assessed by the user,
according to Fig. 11.
The simulation of the housing is based on finite elements
methods. The lower shell of the housing needs to integrate a
pin for commanding the mechanical programmable interface
on the PCB. The pin is defined through dimensional and geo-
metrical parameters (geometry of the cone, fillets, shell thick-
ness, pin positions, etc.) to be optimized (Fig. 12). The vertical
displacement of the pin, due to an external force applied on the
lower shell, has to be maximized without compromising the
mechanical behaviours. The application of a force in corre-
spondence of the pin in the shell is simulated with Simulation
(Dassault Systèmes).
The second objective is to define a set of process pa-
rameters which leads to the best part mouldability
(Fig. 13) with the lowest warpage (in particular, global
warpage, lower surface warpage and upper hole warpage)
and the minimum energy consumption (by reducing
mould and melt temperatures and injection and packing
pressures). These optimizations, in a life cycle approach,
involve multiple factors and multiple responses; therefore,

the goal is to determine a combination of levels for every
factor through a multi-objective optimization.
In the screening phase, the significant factors (i.e. the
factors determining important variations in the system
responses) are screened based on a first experimental
plan, involving all the factors with a reduced number

of runs. For each factor, the selection of the values
for each level is determined inside its variability range
(Tables 9 and 10). Finally, a second DOE plan is then
implemented considering only the significant factors
found by the screening DOE: for each response, a re-
gression model is generated. Based on numerical

simulation results, a polynomial model for the available
data is set as

Y ¼ β0 þ
X
n

i¼1
βixi þ
X
n

i¼1

X
n

j¼1
βijxixj þ … þ ε
ð8Þ

where β0, βi and βij are tuning coefficients; n is the
number of model factors and ε is an error term. Then,
a constrained non-linear approach is selected and used
to solve a numerical multi-objective optimization. A
typical non-linear constrained optimization problem is

finding a vector x that is a local minimum to a scalar
function f(x) subject to constraints on the allowable x,
as in

minxf x
ð Þ;
x∈Rn
ð9Þ

Subject to

ci x
ð Þ ¼ 0; i∈E

ci x
ð Þ≤0; i∈I

where f(x):Rn→R is the objective function, ci(x) are constraint
functions, E is the set of equality constraints and I the set of
inequality constraints. To solve the problem, an algorithm
based on sequential quadratic programming (SQP) is used.
The optimal values for product and process factors are in
Tables 9 and 10.
Finally, a validation test is performed, using the optimized
values for the factors, to check the validity of the predictive
model. At the end of the framework, the output is a virtual
prototype of the housing, correlating to its functional
attributes.
A final elicitation of user feedback is carried out by virtual
prototyping and a Web survey. Through a CAD viewer
(Fig. 14), users can interact with the housing by customizing
it with detailed preferences, as housing and led colours and
housing finishing, and simulating its attachment to different-
sized bracelets.

After final detailing phase and mould design, the production
of a preseries is launched. The dimensions of the housing,
shown in (Fig. 15), are 45 × 37 × 16 mm, and the wall thickness
range from 2 to 0.5 mm, minimizing the use of material and the
housing weight (equal to 15 g without PCB and battery). Both
upper and lower covers are made of polyphenylsulfone
(PPSU), according to the second-level QFD. PPSU is a high-
performance amorphous thermoplastic, used in applications for
surgical tools and instruments, hospital goods and dental appli-
cations because of its resistance to autoclave sterilization.

5 Discussion

The proposed framework is the result of the collaborations we
have experienced with Italian SMEs, belonging to the Emilia–
Romagna region, which are characterized by small-sized en-
terprises, employing less than 50 workers. This context is
characterized by limited financial resources; reduced human
resources, which require employees to simultaneously play
multiple roles; centralized decision-making; short process du-
rations; limited IT and software resources and lack of system-
atic approach in most processes.
Some remarks concerning the application of the proposed
framework will be highlighted. The framework shows to be
effective in the reduction of the design uncertainties, thanks to
the involvement of the user in all the phases of the design

process. The time to market (TTM) is set as the principal
indicator in the evaluation of this approach: by comparing
the TTM of the case study with similar products previously
developed by the same company, a consistent TTM reduction
is noted, even if in presence of a major number of intermediate
iterations with users. The full development of the biomedical
electronic device has taken from 30 to 50% of TTM when
compared with other similar projects of the same company,
commonly characterized by the use of new technology or
application to brand new fields, the demand of strong interac-
tion with users and the external supply of at least one main
component. In the development of the previous projects, the
definition of the user requirements was unstructured and only

one final revision step was provided, leading to major modi-
fications only at the end of the design process. The application
of the proposed framework, on the other hand, anticipates all
the main modifications in the first phases of the design
process.
The framework adopts Web tools for the users’ need and
preference elicitation, which is a main criticality in the devel-
opment of new industrial products, in particular when address-
ing to emerging fields or to particular context due to impor-
tance of the user. Moreover, the problems of scope, of under-
standing and in volatility of requirements, strictly connected
with the selection of the users’ population, are heightened by
the adoption of elicitation Web tools in the framework. The

Web tool communication is mainly characterized by absence
of direct contact between users and, particularly, between
users and designers; absence of human interface and media-
tion; use of written language in the description of needs and
preferences and absence of time constraints in answering.
Although the listed characteristics seem to be only disadvan-
tages, on the other hand, they mainly support the objective and
reliability of the collected needs and preferences, due to ano-
nymity, absence of interviewer conditioning and more reflec-
tive answers. Moreover, when required, the Web tools enable
the interaction and communication among the users. Indeed,
direct interactions are substituted with virtual interactions
among users, between users and virtual prototypes or between
users and designers. Regardless from the tools, the main crit-
icalities of elicitation rise in the involvement of the user and in
the interpretation of the user needs and preferences.
Consequently, the presence of a marketing expert in the design
team facilitates the elicitation, but may represent an additional
constraint for the SME. However, the marketing expert could
be an external resource, because the framework enable the
collaboration between design team members located in differ-
ent geographical locations.
Conventional elicitation techniques are substituted with
equivalent virtual techniques through Web tools, without re-
quiring preliminary knowledge, such as specific programming
language. Moreover, conversational techniques, such as brain-
storming and verbal discussions, are substituted with online
brainstorming and Web forums, mostly used in the e-learning
process for idea comparison and internalization, to stimulate
users’ discussion with peers and experts. Moreover, most of
the selected Web tools help in managing the large amount of
information with the automated postprocessing of the collect-
ed data and in providing visual support (as charts and graphs)
to understand trends and statistics. Even if the Web tools
adopted in the proposed framework may work as single-step
tools in the product development, we included them within a
cloud-based service (as a Google cloud-based one), which acts
as a recipe for linking tools, sharing contents and communi-
cating. In particular, it helps users in understanding the con-
cepts in their complete development; allows them to visualize
and manipulate the CAD data, with a medium level of cus-
tomization possibility and enables the designers (and expert

users) to support users in understanding their real needs and
their prioritization.
The framework integrates state-of-the-art methods and
techniques, in order to face specific issues, such as in the
translation of the user needs into product requirements and
in the selection decisional phase. A disadvantage concerning
the application of the framework may be related to the actual
designer knowledge on the design and decisional methods,
which could affect the efficiency of the framework.
Sometimes, a previous training on the methods would be re-
quired for the designers.
Some considerations related to the methods used in the case
study could be pointed out. In the translation of user needs into
product requirements, QFD is widely used, also in SMEs, due
to its ease of use, even if affected by some limitations. The
proposed NBFD aims to overcome the drawback of the im-
portance attribution to each user need. The quantitative score
formulated for each need, based on the number of users that
consider that need as important for the product, reveals to be
more robust to subjectivism. In the traditional QFD, the de-
signer shows difficulty in interpreting the user’s real needs,
generally due to the user difficulty in understanding the met-
rics of judgement and due to the subjective weight that each
user assigns the same scores, both numerical and fuzzy [71,
72]. Even if the fuzzy approach tends to better decode the real
needs of users, the use of the NBFD allows a further simpli-
fication of the judgment process by the user. In the NBFD, the
designer asks each user to indicate his most important needs
without assigning scoring or ranking, so the difficulty in
decoding the users’ feedback is overcame. In this way, no
preference aggregation techniques are adopted, maintaining
the individuality of each user preference. Moreover, the
NBFD is capable to distinguish preferences based on socio-
demographical or geographical characteristics of the sample
of users. As a disadvantage, the user assigns importance only
to p needs among the m needs previously identified. The num-
ber p, which ranges between one third to one half m based on
the designer’s experience, may force the user to leave out one
or more needs considered as important.
In the decisional phases of the proposed framework, a
fuzzy approach is adopted to face the lack of reliability or lack
of awareness that may affect the user judgments. In order to
describe the user preferences, the use of a verbal judgment
may overcome the difficulties in assigning a score for a qual-
itative judgment or a rank between options. Some limitations
may be represented by lack of reliability of the judgements, in
case of a small sample of users. The group F-AHP, which has
been applied here for group decision-making purposes, uses a
weighting approach to deal with the judgment of three deci-
sion makers. Since these judgments have to be aggregated to
find a unique mean value, the major limitation is related to the
choice of suitable preference aggregation functions. Further
considerations are in [57]. A predefined in-house made

software is implemented and integrated in the framework, and
a consequent fuzzy score evaluation and a defuzzification
procedure generate a ranking vector of the alternatives.

6 Conclusions

This paper presents a systematic user-centred framework that
is able to face the specific issues affecting SMEs, as highlight-
ed in the Sects. 1 and 2. The framework systematically sup-
ports the SMEs’ design team in the solution of design prob-
lems by integrating the user’s viewpoint and the designer’s
perspective, throughout all phases of the design process. The
framework proposes a flow of objects, defines actions in each
phase of the design process, ensures the involvement of users
when required and accordingly suggests appropriate method-
ological approaches. Starting from the analysis of the wide
state-of-the-art and scientific literature, a portfolio of methods
and techniques is proposed and integrated in the framework as
a suitable trade-off between ease of use, efficiency and accu-
racy of the results. The designer is not forced in using specific
methods or techniques, but he can choose them among a sug-
gested portfolio for tailoring his own design process, on the
basis of his know-how and the SMEs’ specific resources.
In accordance to the target of supporting the development
of new industrial products in SMEs, the framework has
proved to be flexible, accessible and easy to use. The frame-
work is capable of integrating well-known and new tech-
niques, tailored on the practitioners’ know-how; it presents a
reduced demand of resources, in terms of money, software,
time mainly due to the use of Web tools and tailor-made tools.
Moreover, it enhances the product development process,
avoiding latter redesign activities or major errors in the intro-
duction of ill-conceived products in the market and reducing
the time to market.
The proposed systematic framework assures to enlarge the
sample dimension of users, both in collecting needs and pref-
erences; shorten responses time of users, both in collecting
needs and preferences and act by means of Web tools includ-
ing virtual prototypes and scenarios.
The framework is tested on the development of the housing
and the related system interfaces of a biomedical electronic
device, to be worn by hospital patients and personnel. Due to
the particular contest of usage, the use of elicitation Web tools
allows to involve personnel from different hospitals as lead
users, for supporting the conceptual design process. In partic-
ular, online surveys and questionnaires, Web forums, virtual
prototypes and scenario elicitation tools have been integrated
in the design process. As a result, the developed housing has
been produced in a limited preseries.
The case study selected for this paper deals with the devel-
opment of a single product: in the future, the framework will
be applied to an industrial configurable product, in order to

further assess the framework in a more complex context and in
relation with different categories of users.
As a further development, for enhancing the usability and
the accessibility of the framework by the user, all the tools
related to methods and techniques involving the users will
be implemented in a single-page application. In this way, these
tools (e.g. elicitation tools, visualization tools, chat and forum,
etc.) will be concurrently displayed and made accessible.