Tailoring and evaluating an intervention to
improve shared decision-making among
seniors with dementia, their caregivers, and
healthcare providers: study protocol for a
randomized controlled trial

Anik M. C. Giguere1,2,3,4*
, Moulikatou Adouni Lawani1,2,3, Émilie Fortier-Brochu1,2,3, Pierre-Hugues Carmichael2,
France Légaré1,5, Edeltraut Kröger2,4,6, Holly O. Witteman1,2,4, Philippe Voyer2,5, Danielle Caron1

and Charo Rodríguez7

Methods/Design
Study design
The study will be conducted in two phases, using interdis-
ciplinary approaches from knowledge translation science,
cognitive psychology, and usability engineering, with a goal
of designing a theory-based knowledge translation interven-
tion to implement shared decision-making. Our specific
objectives are, first, to involve users in the iterative design
of each component of the intervention and, second, to im-
plement and evaluate the effectiveness of the intervention
using a clustered randomized controlled trial (RCT) design.

Study participants and recruitment strategy
We will recruit convenience samples of primary healthcare
providers who work in family medicine clinics (mostly

family physicians, nurses, and social workers), their senior
patients (aged 65+ years) diagnosed with dementia, and the
patients’ informal caregivers. To begin with, we will email
the directors of the family medicine clinics in the province
of Quebec (Canada) to ask if we can recruit clinicians in
their clinics. When they agree, we will present the study
during a regularly scheduled meeting. After the presenta-
tion, clinicians in attendance will be invited to participate in
the study and those who accept will complete the study
entry questionnaire.
We will request that clinicians who agree to participate
ask their senior patients (65+ years) with dementia and
their informal caregivers, if they have one, permission to
be contacted by a member of the research team to solicit
their participation. The research team will meet those
who accept to complete study questionnaires before their
consultation with participating physicians.
From the pool of clinics that agree to participate, we
will select a convenience sample of six clinics located

nearest to our research center (Quebec City) to par-
ticipate in the RCT. We will then select a second con-
venience sample of three clinics that are the next
nearest to Quebec City to participate in the user-centered
designs of both the e-TUDE e-learning program and the
patient DBs. A final convenience sample of five clinics
located elsewhere in the Province of Quebec will then be
selected to participate in the user-centered design of
clinician DBs. Each person will only be invited to one of
these studies.

Phase 1: user-centered design of each component of the
intervention
In phase 1, we will use user-centered approaches to de-
sign: (1) five DB prototypes for clinicians (C-DB); (2) five
DB prototypes for patients and their informal caregivers
(P-DB); and (3) a 70-min e-learning professional pro-
gram on shared decision-making (e-TUDE).

Prototype development
e-TUDE will include four modules, at the end of which
the clinician will be able to: (1) explain SDM, its founda-
tions, its advantages, and disadvantages; (2) use best
practices to communicate risks and uncertainty and
allow patients to understand the issues involved in their
decisions; (3) use various strategies, including the DBs,
to identify the values and preferences of patients; and (4)
integrate all learnings to engage the patient and care-
giver in a shared decision-making process. Guided by
another professional training program that has been de-
veloped and assessed by our team [14], it will include
narrated slides, videos, interactive quizzes, and exercises.
Several content experts (in shared decision-making,
medical education, and instructional design) reviewed
the training program before user testing.
DBs cover health questions that have no single best
answer and are framed to help weigh the benefits/harms
of all options in light of the patient’s individual health
status, as previously published [19, 24]. To adapt the
tool to the needs of each type of user, the DB includes a
version designed for clinicians (C-DB) and a simplified
version for patients/caregivers (P-DB). The C-DB is de-
signed as a continuing education activity. It provides cli-
nicians scientific information to carefully review before
their consultations with patients. It is more succinct
than the P-DB and allows the clinician to critically ap-
praise the evidence by describing the design and partici-
pants
of
included
studies
and
synthesizing
study
limitations using the GRADE approach [36]. The P-DB
is designed to be used during the consultation to en-
courage discussion and to be left with the patient and
caregiver to review after the consultation. It is distinct
from the C-DB, as it presents the information in
complete sentences, uses larger font sizes, and comprises

a value clarification exercise and an instrument to screen
for decisional conflict. We will design the P-DB guided
by the Ottawa Decision Support Framework [37, 38] and
current international standards for decision aids [39].
Several clinical experts involved in the care of seniors
living with dementia (healthcare professionals, informal
caregivers, managers, representatives of community-based
organizations devoted to these seniors, and clinical re-
searchers involved in the organization of primary care or
services delivered to seniors with dementia in the Province
of Quebec) reviewed the prototypes before formal testing.

User-centered and theory-based tailoring

Procedure Using a user-centered design approach [40–
42], we will invite users to evaluate the usability of each
component of the intervention through questionnaires
and interviews (Table 2). We will ask them to complete
a questionnaire based on the Theory of Planned Behav-
ior (TPB) [43, 44] to identify the factors that are likely to
limit their adoption of shared decision-making (along a
number of domains namely, intention, social influence,
beliefs about capabilities, moral norm, attitude/beliefs
about consequences). If on a scale of 1–7, with 1 being
the lowest, participant mean ratings fall < 4 for a given
factor (4 being the middle of the scale), then we will
modify
the
intervention
by
adding/enhancing
behavior-change techniques targeting this lower factor,
inspired from an approach described elsewhere [45, 46].
We will also improve usability based on the ratings on
the other scales and think-aloud results. Results of this
first stage will be followed by a new cycle of design and
evaluation. This iterative process will continue until: (1)
we observe indications of good usability and no significant
problems; (2) users report that they intend to engage in
shared decision-making; or (3) we have conducted a max-
imum of three rounds of design-evaluation-feedback
(Fig. 2). For e-TUDE, each cycle will provide feedback
from five users, for a total of 15 user evaluations. For
the C-DB, each cycle will provide feedback from six
users, for a total of 18 user evaluations per tool. For
the P-DB, each cycle will provide feedback from three
patient-caregiver groups, giving a total of nine evalua-
tions per P-DB. These numbers respect human factor
validation testing [47].

e-TUDE tailoring A total of 15 clinicians will be invited
to review the tutorial during a think-aloud session con-
ducted at their clinic. Initially, a first series of five clini-
cians will complete e-TUDE in the presence of a trained
moderator
who
will
ask
some
questions
from
a
semi-structured interview guide, noting any need for tech-
nical support or assistance in a logbook. When they will
have completed e-TUDE, the moderator will ask them to

complete a questionnaire to identify the factors that are
likely to limit their adoption of shared decision-making
using the ICanSDM scale (a novel scale based on a review
of the published barriers and myths to adopting SDM,
personal communication of Anik Giguere) and other mea-
sures (Table 2). We will then analyze the answers from
these five clinicians and modify e-TUDE to tailor it better
to their needs. Two more series of five clinicians will go
through the same process, allowing to tailor the tutorial at
each cycle (Table 1).

Clinician-decision box (C-DB) tailoring A total of 30
clinicians will participate to the review of the five
C-DBs. Each of the participating clinician will review
three C-DBs, at a rate of one per month over three
months, giving six clinicians per C-DB. We will send cli-
nicians a link to one C-DB by email and the C-DB will
also be accessible on our website [48]. After reviewing
this first C-DB, clinicians will be invited to complete the
questionnaire to identify the factors that are likely to limit
their adoption of shared decision-making and other mea-
sures (Table 2). Their answers will be used to tailor the
intervention, as described in the previous paragraph. After
this initial evaluation and tailoring, we will send each
C-DB to six different users from the same pool of 30 clini-
cians (Table 1). Overall, we aim to collect a total of 90
clinician assessments of the C-DBs (i.e. 6 clinicians/clinic
× 5 clinics × 3 evaluations/clinician).

Patient-decision box (P-DB) tailoring Because of re-
cruitment challenges in this vulnerable population, we
assess only three of the five P-DBs developed. We will
then apply our findings to format all P-DBs, including

those which have not been evaluated. Patients and/or
their caregiver will be invited to review a P-DB together
during a semi-structured interview and then to complete
questionnaires. To ensure assessment of all the P-DBs,
we randomly assigned a P-DB to each patient/caregiver
dyad. The objectives of the 45-min interview will be to:
(1) identify the decision-making needs of participants
relative to the decision presented in the P-DB; (2) dis-
tinguish the reasons influencing their decisions relative
to the clinical situation presented; and (3) solicit feed-
back on changes needed to improve the usability of the
P-DB. After the interview, participants will be invited to
complete questionnaires to identify the factors that are
likely to limit their adoption of shared decision-making
and other measures (Table 2) to inform the ongoing de-
sign of the intervention, as described earlier. We will ob-
tain feedback from three patient–caregiver groups before
modifying the P-DB and asking another group (total of 27
patient–caregiver groups: recruited at a rate of 9 groups/
clinic/month × 3 clinics during one month) (Table 1).

Data analysis
We will transcribe verbatim all the
audio-recorded discussions. Transcripts and comments
collected in the free-text fields of the questionnaires will
be imported as source documents into N’Vivo. To begin
with, two coders (a research assistant and a student) will
independently conduct a thematic content analysis of
the proposed changes and problems outlined during the
think-aloud evaluation of e-TUDE and in answers to
open-ended questions of the Information Assessment
Method (IAM) for the C-DB. Following this preliminary
analysis, the coders, the principal investigators, and a
co-investigator with expertise in human factors (HOW)
will discuss the functionality of each tool, agree on
modifications to improve functionality and modify the
prototypes accordingly.
Using data from the questionnaires, we will evaluate
whether user experience and intention to adopt shared
decision-making change significantly between rounds.
To ensure the relevance and consistency of coding,
the principal investigator (AG) will randomly check

the analysis (10% of interviews) at three different
times.

Phase 2: implementation and evaluation of the intervention
Study design
In this second phase, we will implement the intervention
and evaluate its impact. We will use a two-armed, super-
iority, parallel-group, clustered RCT with a pre-post
evaluation of the impact of the program (Fig. 3). We
randomized family medicine clinics to minimize con-
tamination. A biostatistician who is not involved in the
main research will use a computer random number gen-
erator to randomize the clinics to: (1) immediate expos-
ure to the training program (experimental group); or (2)
usual care with delayed exposure to the program (con-
trol group). We will monitor implementation through-
out the study and will tailor implementation if needed.
The protocol of the trial described in this second phase
addresses recommendations from the SPIRIT 2013 ©
checklist (Additional file 1).

Experimental group (training of clinicians and tools)
In the clinics allocated to the experimental group
(immediate training), the clinicians who agree to par-
ticipate will have access to e-TUDE for one month to
complete it. Thereafter, they will receive the five C-DBs by
email, at a rate of one per week for five weeks. Upon re-
ceipt of each C-DB, participants will be asked to complete
the Information Assessment Measure [49]. Furthermore,
each participating clinician will also be invited to use the
five P-DBs with their patients. To this end, they will receive
a stack of printed copies of the P-DBs for use in home care
consultations and we will also leave some copies in a wall
file in each consultation room of the clinic.

We will evaluate intervention fidelity using a process
measure, the OPTION scale [50–52]. Based on audio-re-
cordings of the clinical consultation, two trained observers
will rate the clinicians’ level of expertise for 12 key
“patient-involving” behaviors. In case of any disagreement,
the observers will discuss to reach consensus.

Control group (usual care)
Clinicians from the clinics allocated to the control group
(delayed training) will practice as usual and have access
to the same training program, but after the end of data
collection (Fig. 3).

Data collection
Clinicians from the clinics allocated to the experimental
group will complete questionnaires after their training
with e-TUDE and after receiving each C-DB (Table 3).
These data will allow us to evaluate whether the inter-
vention changes clinicians’ perceptions of being able to
adopt shared decision-making using the novel ICanSDM
scale (Anik Giguere, personal communication), the role
they prefer during the clinical decision-making process,
and their intention to engage senior patients living with
dementia and their caregivers in decision-making about
a choice of health options.
After the clinicians in the experimental study group
have been exposed to e-TUDE and the C-DBs, the re-
search team will start data collection in both the control
and experimental study groups. We will meet the pa-
tients/caregivers who accepted to participate at the
clinic, immediately before their next consultation. They
will complete the study entry questionnaires and we will
assess baseline levels of patient and caregiver empower-
ment in healthcare (the primary outcome) [53]. We will

also assess caregiver burden [54, 55] as well as patient
quality of life using the QoL-AD questionnaire that will
be completed by the patient, if s/he is able to do so, and
by the caregiver [56, 57].
Then, participating clinicians will audio-record the dis-
cussion during the consultation and the recording will
be transcribed verbatim by a professional transcriber.
This will allow measuring patient/caregiver involvement
in the decision-making process using the third-observer
OPTION-5 scale.
Right after the consultation, we will ask patients and
caregivers their perceptions of the decision-making
process during the consultation using the three-item
CollaboRATE instrument [58, 59] and their comfort-level
with decision-making using the Decisional Conflict Scale
[60, 61]. Three months after consultation, we will meet
patients and caregivers at their home to ask them to
complete again a questionnaire with questions about
healthcare empowerment, caregiver burden [54, 55], pa-
tient quality of life [56, 57], and decisional regret [62, 63].
All data will be entered electronically in double by
two research assistants, at the coordinating center
(Laval University). Checks will be applied at the time of
data entry into a specific field, before the data are writ-
ten to the database. Data integrity will be enforced
through a variety of mechanisms: referential data rules;
valid values; range checks; and consistency checks against
data already stored in the database. The option to choose
a value from a list of valid codes and a description of what
each code means will be available where applicable.

Power calculation
We estimate that a sample of 162 patients will allow us
to detect a mean difference of 1.476 in their empower-
ment in healthcare (corresponding to an effect size of

0.6) between our two groups. Assuming a standard devi-
ation of 2.46 and an ICC (intraclass correlation coeffi-
cient) of 0.02, such a sample would give us a statistical
power of 88% to detect the proposed mean difference at
a significance level of 5% (Table 4). To account for an
attrition and missing data rate of 10%, we have set a
target of 180 patients. A previous study conducted by
our research team yielded an ICC of 0.02 in a similar
setting when measuring the frequency with which cli-
nicians prescribed antibiotics after training in SDM
[64]. We estimate that this convenient sample of 162
patients post intervention will allow us to detect a
mean difference of 2.6% (SD = 4.8, Cohen’s D = 0.55) in
decisional comfort (Decisional Conflict Scale) considering
an ICC of 0.02 at a significance level of 0.05 and with a
power of 80%.
Despite a relatively small number of clusters (six
clinics to be randomized), we are confident that practice
variation will be low enough to allow similar groups at
baseline. Indeed, a recent systematic literature review
reports rather uniform and low adoption of shared
decision-making in the general practices in Canada, with
two studies reporting OPTION scores of 24 ± 8 on a scale
of 0–100 for one study (n = 152) and 19 ± 7 (n = 41) for
the other.

Data analysis
We will evaluate response rates as the number of clinics
recruited divided by the number invited and the number
of clinicians who agree to participate in the study divided
by the number invited. We will also calculate patient re-
cruitment rates as the number of patients recruited per
attending physician per day. Audio-recordings of consul-
tations will be collected by the research team at the end of
each day and transcribed verbatim. Two trained research

assistants will analyze the transcripts independently using
the OPTION-5 scale [50–52] to quantify patient/caregiver
involvement
in
the
decision-making
process
during
consultations.
We will perform descriptive statistical analyses of all
the outcomes and measures. To compare the two study
arms on primary and secondary outcomes, we will use
hierarchical models to take into account the clustering
effects of clinics and clinicians, intervention version, and
repeated measures (for outcomes measured three times
or more). For clinician-based outcomes, the analysis will
take into account the decision considered, clinical site,
sociodemographic characteristics of clinicians, and rural/
urban localization of the clinic. For patient-based out-
comes, the analyses will take into account clinical site,
sociodemographic characteristics and dementia severity
of patients, and rural/urban localization of the clinic.
We will analyze all data following intention-to-treat
principles. Quantitative data will be analyzed using the
SAS statistical package (version 9.4).
To verify intervention fidelity, we will perform a concur-
rent analysis of the implementation processes (patient in-
volvement in decision-making).
For each variable analyzed, according to the type of
variable (continuous or categorical), the goodness of fit
and the assumptions of each model will be assessed. We
will analyze all data following intention-to-treat princi-
ples. Additionally, if the number of missing data is rela-
tively low, then, in addition to analyzing the data by
excluding missing observations, we will also perform a
multiple imputation procedure on the full model and verify
that results were not affected by missing information.

Discussion
By designing tools that help healthcare professionals
empower seniors to make clinical decisions on issues
that affect their own health, this initiative supports
seniors’ wellbeing and independence, the latter being
one of the four principles of healthy aging [65]. The
training
program
will
provide
clinicians,
patients
living with dementia, and their caregivers access to
best available evidence on health options, so that

together they can decide on next steps. In their role
as
partners
in
decision-making,
seniors
and
their
caregivers will experience more decisional comfort
and
have
higher
levels
of
perceived
healthcare
empowerment, while allowing identification of their
priorities.
Ultimately,
this
training
program
will
ensure that patients and caregivers make informed
decisions that reflect their care goals and values.
The self-learning format ensures accessibility in all
regions with online access, even the most remote. The
scientific information will be made available broadly to
all stakeholders: physicians and residents; nurses and
other health or social services professionals; patients
and their caregivers. This continuity of information
among the various stakeholders will ensure better co-
ordination of care and services between the parties,
resulting in better monitoring of care and support of
seniors with cognitive impairment. We expect that
these tools will become an essential reference for the
training of health professionals across the province of
Quebec and for patients with cognitive impairment and
their caregivers.
Ultimately, this project will meet the training needs
of clinicians who care for seniors with cognitive impair-
ment in Quebec. Indeed, our partners and users associ-
ated with continuing professional development (CPD)
have committed to implement, disseminate and build
on project deliverables. Specifically, the CPD sector of
the Office of Education and Continuing Professional
Development of the Faculty of Medicine at Laval Uni-
versity will offer our e-learning training program to
health professionals of every primary care organization
in Quebec. We will also draw on our excellent relations
and involvement in the network of the 12 teaching fam-
ily medicine units of the (RUIS-Laval) and in the front-
line research Network, Réseau-1 to raise awareness of
the tools to users. The revenues generated through the
credits for CPD course will allow to sustain the training
program, notably to update the DBs and expand the
program to offer DBs on additional topics.
Patient recruitment is critical in this project. Our
experience in recruiting clinicians in primary care

settings ensures that we will complete this important
step. The delayed intervention allows that all re-
cruited clinicians are exposed to the training program,
thus facilitating recruitment. In addition, seniors liv-
ing with dementia are typically underdiagnosed in pri-
mary care. Consequently, we will collaborate with the
Quebec Alzheimer Plan, an implementation initiative
currently underway in the Province [66], which aims
to improve the identification of patients living with
dementia in primary care settings. This partnership
will allow targeting clinicians already trained in the
identification of seniors living with dementia and a
more rapid identification of key stakeholders to help
with recruitment.

Strengths and limitations
Our study of a user-centered approach will mainly rely
on
qualitative
evaluations,
which
will
provide
rich
findings to draw some first conclusions on how the ap-
proach influences the vulnerable patients’ and their care-
givers’ experiences of the DBs. The quantitative results
will allow preliminary conclusions on the extent to
which the approaches improve implementation, due to a
limited sample size that could prevent statistical signifi-
cance. This study is also limited because we chose to as-
sign tools to patient/caregiver dyads randomly, to ensure
an equal number of evaluation for each tool. Conse-
quently, the tools that participants will get might not be

those they would have preferred to answer their current
questions, and so this deviates from daily practice.
The pragmatic clustered RCT is the best design to
draw conclusions on the impact of a complex interven-
tion on patient-important outcomes. However, due to its
complex nature, several aspects of the intervention will
be challenging to control. We cannot control if the
clinicians will complete the distance training program
and
offer
the
DBs
to
their
patients,
but
the
user-centered development improves the odds that these
tools will be adopted in practice. We do not either con-
trol if the participants will want to discuss the decisions
covered in the studied DB during the consultations, but
the fact that some of these decisions can be discussed by
participants at any stage of the disease, and that they are
typically rarely discussed (e.g. choosing a support option
for the caregiver, preparing advance directives and a
protection mandate), will encourage their use.

Recruitment status
Recruitement is completed. We are currently collecting
data for Phase two (Fig. 4).