METHODOLOGY
Open Access

Harmonizing evidence-based practice,
implementation context, and
implementation strategies with user-
centered design: a case example in young
adult cancer care

Emily R. Haines1*
, Alex Dopp2, Aaron R. Lyon3, Holly O. Witteman4, Miriam Bender5, Gratianne Vaisson6,
Danielle Hitch7 and Sarah Birken8

Methods: This paper presents a case example in which we used a three-phase user-centered design process to
design and plan to implement a care coordination intervention for young adults with cancer. Specifically, we used
usability testing to redesign and augment an existing patient-reported outcome measure that served as the basis for
our intervention to optimize its usability and usefulness, ethnographic contextual inquiry to prepare the context (i.e.,
a comprehensive cancer center) to promote receptivity to implementation, and iterative prototyping workshops with
a multidisciplinary design team to design the care coordination intervention and anticipate implementation
strategies needed to enhance contextual fit.

(Continued from previous page)
Results: Our user-centered design process resulted in the Young Adult Needs Assessment and Service Bridge (NA-
SB), including a patient-reported outcome measure and a collection of referral pathways that are triggered by the
needs young adults report, as well as implementation guidance. By ensuring NA-SB directly responded to features
of users and context, we designed NA-SB for implementation, potentially minimizing the strategies needed to
address misalignment that may have otherwise existed. Furthermore, we designed NA-SB for scale-up; by engaging
users from other cancer programs across the country to identify points of contextual variation which would require
flexibility in delivery, we created a tool intended to accommodate diverse contexts.

Conclusions: User-centered design can help maximize usability and usefulness when designing evidence-based
practices, preparing contexts, and informing implementation strategies—in effect, harmonizing evidence-based
practices, contexts, and implementation strategies to promote implementation and effectiveness.

Methods
Case example: implementation of a care coordination
intervention for young adults with cancer
Background and project objectives
A substantial step toward this care coordination model
was the development of the first multidimensional meas-
ure of unmet needs designed specifically for adolescents
and young adults: the Cancer Needs Questionnaire -
Young People (CNQ-YP) [43, 44]. However, limitations
to the usability and usefulness of patient-reported out-
come measures like the CNQ-YP (e.g., length, wording
ambiguity, redundancy or missing content, lack of con-
nection between identified needs and follow-up actions)
have frustrated their real-world implementation and ef-
fect on patient outcomes [45, 46]. Despite its potential
limitations, we selected the CNQ-YP as a starting point
for our intervention because of its specificity to the
unique needs of young adults with cancer and because
of preliminary evidence pointing to its face and content
validity [43]. In this project, we used UCD to redesign
the CNQ-YP to optimize its usability and usefulness in
the North Carolina Cancer Hospital (NCCH), identify
context modifications needed to promote receptivity to
its implementation, and anticipate minimally necessary
implementation strategies. Our UCD process (Table 2,
Fig. 2) produced the Needs Assessment and Service
Bridge (NA-SB), a care coordination intervention for

young adults with cancer, and a plan for its implementa-
tion at NCCH. All procedures were approved by the
University
of
North
Carolina’s
Institutional
Review
Board.

Multidisciplinary design team
At the beginning of the project, we convened an NA-SB
design
team
comprised
of
key
stakeholder groups.
Throughout the project, the investigator team presented
prototypes and other information to the design team
and, based on their interactions with prototypes and

collaborative discussion, made iterative improvements to
NA-SB design and implementation strategies.
Design team members included researchers in cancer
care delivery, patient-reported outcomes, UCD, and im-
plementation science (n=4) and prospective NA-SB
users, including NCCH clinical partners (oncologist; so-
cial worker/director of NCCH’s young adult program
[n=2]) and young adult representatives (n=5) nominated
by clinical partners. Nominees were primarily individuals
who had previously expressed interest in research or ad-
vocacy activities related to young adult cancer and, thus,
would be more likely to consider the extensive and on-
going participation that joining the design team would
entail.
To recruit young adult representatives for the design
team, clinical partners connected young adults via email
to the project lead (EH). EH provided them with

materials including a project summary, a breakdown of
their expected role and time commitment, and a brief
summary of UCD. EH then met with each young adult
interested in participating to discuss the project and de-
velop rapport, then met with them all together to build
group rapport. Young adult representatives received a
one-time $150 incentive for participation.

Review and refine prototypes (optimize the thread)
Overview
We conducted three rounds of usabil-
ity testing to examine user interactions with the CNQ-
YP: (1) an online survey assessing young adults’ needs
and preferences for a needs assessment using the CNQ-
YP as a prototype for them to react to, (2) cognitive in-
terviews [52] with young adults to triangulate survey
data with in-depth evidence of their perceptions of the
CNQ-YP’s usability and usefulness, and (3) concept
mapping [53] exercises focused on usefulness, in which
young adult providers mapped needs onto services/re-
sources to address the needs.

Young adult survey

Objectives The objectives are to identify missing con-
tent, streamline redundant or low-priority content, and
identify other usability and usefulness concerns.

Instrument The survey instrument (Additional File 1)
included three sections: (1) study information, consent,
and demographic items (i.e., age, gender, clinical charac-
teristics, social support, educational/vocational status,
health insurance status); (2) the CNQ-YP in its original
form; and (3) items assessing respondents’ perception of
the CNQ-YP. To assess general attitudes toward the
tool, we used items from three Likert-type measures of
feasibility, acceptability, and appropriateness [54]. We
assessed usefulness through two Likert-type items asking
(1) the extent to which respondents thought the CNQ-
YP accurately captured their needs and (2) the likelihood
that they would use services or resources offered to
them based on indicated needs. For each of these mea-
sures, we qualitatively probed respondents on usability
and usefulness issues driving their concerns with the
tool’s feasibility, acceptability, or appropriateness.

Sample and recruitment To be included in the survey,
we required participants (n=100) to be age 18–30 and
have been diagnosed with cancer prior to survey admin-
istration. Although usability testing can be done with

small samples (e.g., n=20) [51, 55], our target sample size
was n=100 because we wanted to achieve breadth in us-
ability data prior to achieving more depth through cog-
nitive interviews. To promote young adult participant
diversity (race, ethnicity, age, geographic region, setting
of care, etc.), we recruited through key contacts (i.e.,
leaders of young adult programs and advocacy groups in
the USA identified by our clinical partners), social media
(i.e., a series of Twitter messages shared by tagging rele-
vant groups and hashtags), and our design team.

Procedure We administered the survey through a se-
cure online platform, Qualtrics (Provo, UT). On average,
the survey took 15 min to complete.

Analysis We used descriptive statistics for respondents’
demographics, needs reported on the CNQ-YP tool, and
perceptions of the CNQ-YP. To identify emergent
themes regarding the CNQ-YP’s usability and usefulness
in free-text responses, we used template analysis [56].

Cognitive interviews

Objective The objective is to triangulate survey data on
CNQ-YP usability and usefulness through a nuanced un-
derstanding of content, wording, or comprehension
concerns.

Interview guide With input from the design team, we
developed the cognitive interview guide to encourage
participants to “think aloud” as they read and reflected
on the CNQ-YP itemset and probe them to comment on
topics such as item content and wording, response op-
tions, format, length, comprehensiveness, and repetitive-
ness (Additional File 2).

Sample and recruitment We purposively sampled from
among survey participants. Consistent with cognitive
interview methodology [52], the target sample size was
small (i.e., n=5–10); however, we prioritized demo-
graphic variation when sampling to promote NA-SB’s
relevance to diverse young adults. We recruited young
adults (n=5) until we reached thematic saturation, i.e.,
when subsequent interviews did not generate new infor-
mation regarding CNQ-YP’s usability or usefulness.

Procedure EH conducted 1-h cognitive interviews (n=5)
via Zoom, a video-conferencing platform. Interviews
were
audio-recorded.
EH
navigated
the
CNQ-YP
through the screen-share function, soliciting partici-
pants’ input on each item. At the end of each interview,
EH summarized her takeaways with interviewees for the
purposes of member checking [57].

Analysis We inductively identified themes, noting con-
cerns related to the CNQ-YP’s usability and usefulness.
We then created a table organizing participants’ con-
cerns within each of the identified themes for presenta-
tion to the design team during our first workshop
(described later).

Concept mapping

Objective The objective is to promote the usefulness of
the CNQ-YP by grouping needs by services/resources
expected to address those needs.

Instrument
The design team approved changes to
CNQ-YP content based on survey and cognitive inter-
view results. We pre-loaded the resulting list of young
adult needs into an online secure platform called Con-
cept Systems Global Max © (CSGM). CSGM included
two concept mapping exercises: (1) sorting an electronic
deck of cards, each containing a young adult need, into
like categories (i.e., “follow-up domains”) that could be
addressed by the same service/resource (e.g., needs re-
lated to depression and anxiety might be grouped to-
gether as potentially addressable by referral to a mental
health professional) and (2) rating needs on Likert-type
response scales in terms of two key pragmatic proper-
ties: importance (i.e., severity of consequences if that
need goes unmet) and actionability (i.e., likelihood that
need can be met through a service or resource) [58].

Sample and recruitment Concept mapping participants
included cancer program providers (e.g., oncologists,
nurses, and social workers) and staff (e.g., program man-
agers and administrators)—i.e., the prospective NA-SB
user groups expected to have the most knowledge about
service and resource delivery for this population. Re-
cruitment through the key contacts established during
survey recruitment was intended to achieve the mini-
mum sample size of n=15 needed for concept mapping
analyses [59].

Procedure Participants accessed the web-based concept
mapping exercises through emailed links to the project
in CSGM. The exercises took approximately 30 min to
complete.

Analysis CSGM used hierarchical cluster analysis to
characterize how participants grouped needs, creating
several potential cluster maps based on proximity among
needs, where proximal needs were more frequently
grouped together as triggering the same follow-up action
than distal ones, and “go-zone graphs,” in which needs
are displayed as points on a quadrant in terms of their
relative importance and actionability. Concept mapping

data was presented to the design team for interpretation
during the first prototyping workshop (described later).

Identify user and contextual requirements (understand
and prepare the fabric)
Overview
We used contextual inquiry [60], including ethnographic
guided tours [61] and interviews, to gather detailed in-
formation about context to inform context modifications
needed to promote receptivity to NA-SB implementation
and the identification of minimally necessary implemen-
tation strategies. In contextual inquiry, which comes
from UCD, in-depth data on a few carefully selected in-
dividuals provides a fuller picture of users and their con-
text [62]. By documenting naturally occurring user tasks
and interactions among patients and providers through
in-depth observation, ethnography, a promising yet un-
derused method for implementation research [63], pro-
vides rich data on implementation context [64, 65],
making it useful for contextual inquiry. Ethnographic
methods are relevant to UCD because they offer a more
nuanced understanding of users and context than trad-
itional questionnaires or interviews, including novel in-
sights on user tasks, attitudes, and interactions with
their environment [22, 26, 66]. Additional File 4 includes
the
Standards
for
Reporting
Qualitative
Research
(SRQR) checklist adhered to for these data collection
activities.

Guided tours

Objective The objective is to capture the contextual ele-
ments beyond just those which users can verbalize, in-
cluding
details
and
motivations
that
have
become
habitual or implicit to the tasks they perform [67].

Instrument To promote the flexibility required for
guided tours [61, 68], we identified potential questions
based on four domains of Maguire et al.’s typology of
user and contextual factors to consider in UCD from
which we could choose: (1) user characteristics, (2) user
tasks, (3) physical and technical environment, and (4)
organizational environment [26] (Additional File 3).

Sample and recruitment To capture the perspective of
potential NA-SB implementers, we conducted guided
tours with our clinical partners at NCCH (n=2). To
capture the patient perspective, we conducted guided
tours with young adults ages 18–30 receiving inpatient
or outpatient care at NCCH (n=10). Consistent with the
preferred approach for determining sample size in quali-
tative research [69], young adults were recruited until
thematic saturation was reached, i.e., when subsequent
guided tours did not generate new information regarding

contextual factors. Our clinical partners at NCCH facili-
tated the recruitment of young adults for guided tours
by distributing a recruitment flyer and connecting EH
via email to those interested.

Procedure EH conducted 4-h guided tours with clinical
partners as they completed clinical, administrative, and
other duties, asking questions about their tasks and
thoughts. EH followed young adults and accompanying
family members from the moment they entered the hos-
pital for their outpatient appointments until the moment
they exited, asking them questions as they interacted
with their environment and healthcare professionals,
while attempting to minimize participant disruptions.
For inpatient guided tours, EH spent 2 h with young
adults receiving inpatient care. EH took extensive field
notes and audio-recorded portions of the guided tours
for which only consenting parties were present. We of-
fered
young
adult
participants
a
$50
participation
incentive.

Analysis We used template analysis, identifying a priori
themes based on Maguire’s constructs and allowing for
the identification of additional themes [56]. To calibrate
our coding schema, EH and a colleague independently
coded excerpts from one set of guided tour field notes
and interview transcriptions per Maguire constructs; EH
proceeded to code the remaining data. For each Maguire
domain, we collaboratively synthesized user and context-
ual factors and created a “translation table” [70], which
translated factors into their implications for NA-SB de-
sign and implementation (i.e., user and contextual re-
quirements).
For
example,
providers
reported
the
importance of integrating new tools into the electronic
medical record; we translated this into the requirement
that NA-SB interfaces with NCCH’s electronic medical
record. All requirements were vetted and prioritized by
the design team during the second workshop (see de-
scription below).

Semi-structured interviews

Objectives The objectives are to review the findings
from guided tours with external users and identify any
areas of divergence or additional needs or contextual
features, thus promoting the generalizability of findings.

Interview guide With input from the design team, we
developed a semi-structured interview guide based on
Maguire’s typology [26] and guided tour findings.

Sample We conducted semi-structured interviews with
young adult providers and advocates who had previously
facilitated survey and concept mapping recruitment:

program managers (n=2) and nurse navigators (n=2)
serving primarily young adults, and consultants (n=2) in-
volved in young adult program development. Given the
variation across interviewees’ contexts (e.g., variation by
location, institution type, model of young adult care,
funding source), we considered the small sample size
sufficient to achieve the objective of the interviews,
which was to identify potential areas where NA-SB de-
livery or implementation may differ across contexts.

Procedure EH conducted 1-h semi-structured telephone
interviews. At the end of each interview, EH summarized
major takeaways for member checking [57]. We audio-
recorded and transcribed the interviews verbatim.

Analysis We analyzed the interview data using template
analysis [56].

Design prototypes based on user and contextual
requirements (thread the needle)
Overview
Through two 3-h work-
shops, our design team collaboratively redesigned the
CNQ-YP (i.e., the thread) with usability and usefulness
in mind, redesigned NCCH care processes (i.e., the fab-
ric) to facilitate the tool’s implementation and usefulness
in routine care, and anticipated minimally necessary im-
plementation strategies (i.e., the needle). It resulted in
NA-SB and a compilation of implementation strategies,
each informed by context and designed to account for
the other’s characteristics.

Design team workshop #1

Objective During the first design team workshop, we
used usability testing data to inform the elimination,
addition, or refinement of CNQ-YP items. We also used
concept mapping data to group needs into follow-up
domains.

Sample The sample is design team members.

Materials Design team members were given a summary
of project information and usability testing results. Add-
itionally, the study team developed index cards repre-
senting each item up for discussion (i.e., those for which
usability or usefulness issues had been identified), which
included usability testing data with respect to that item.

We also developed index cards representing potential
additional items elicited from usability testing data (see
Fig. 3 for an example index card). Finally, attendees were
given “cluster comparison worksheets” (see example in
Fig. 3) which visually depicted, by cluster, the differences
between various cluster maps generated from concept
mapping data.

Procedure To begin the design team workshop, EH
gave a brief overview of the project and usability testing
results. Next, we used index cards and stickers to discuss
each item and vote on decisions as to whether that item
should be eliminated, added, or revised. Votes were then
tallied to arrive at a decision about that particular item;
where voting was split (i.e., greater than two design team
members in opposition), we discussed further until the
design team reached consensus.
Once item revisions were made, we turned our focus
toward grouping items into appropriate follow-up do-
mains. We used the “cluster comparison worksheets” to
review the concept mapping cluster maps and, through
collaborative discussion, selected the most interpretable
cluster map. We then moved items between clusters, as
needed, and labeled each cluster according to the service
that needs in that cluster should trigger. After grouping
high-priority needs by follow-up domains, the design
team identified services/resources at NCCH which cor-
responded to each follow-up domain, establishing expli-
cit
referral
pathways
for
each
domain.
We
also
anticipated implementation strategies needed to facilitate

this kind of multidisciplinary service provision through
collaborative discussion.

Analysis Detailed notes were taken during design team
workshop #1 to capture all discussion points leading to
decisions on itemset content; the meeting was also re-
corded for further elaboration on meeting notes. After
the workshop, EH drafted the revised patient-reported
outcome measure, grouping needs by follow-up domain,
and obtained additional design team feedback via email.

Design team workshop #2

Overview After soliciting user and contextual data
through guided tours and interviews, we convened the
design team for a second workshop during which we
presented them the ethnography findings in juxtapos-
ition with the patient-reported outcome measure and re-
ferral pathways produced during the first design team
workshop. This juxtaposition allowed design team mem-
bers to anticipate context modifications and needed im-
plementation strategies with respect to the redesigned
tool itself. Through popular UCD methods, “storyboard-
ing” (i.e., “sequences of images which show the relation-
ship between user actions or inputs and system” [26]),
“personas” (i.e., using caricatures of key user groups to
convey users’ needs to the design team), and “scenarios
of use” (i.e., using specific examples of how users, con-
text, and NA-SB might interact) [26], we collaboratively
specified who will deliver the needs assessment, when,
how often, and the materials and procedure that will be

used to do so. This workshop was also used to plan for
NA-SB implementation.

Sample Design team members plus various additional
providers involved in young adult care at NCCH (n=6)
including (1) a pediatric oncology nurse practitioner, (2)
a pediatric palliative care social worker, (3) a nurse navi-
gator, (4) a pediatric palliative care physician, (5) a chap-
lain, and (6) a second young adult social worker. The
purpose of including these individuals was to capture
the perspectives of the range of provider groups that
might interface with NA-SB in practice and also to build
buy-in for future NA-SB implementation at NCCH, po-
tentially strengthening referral pathways.

Materials We gave design team participants a packet of
information including a project overview, the revised
patient-reported outcome measure and referral pathways
developed through design team workshop #1, and a
summary of ethnography results. Other materials in-
cluded a storyboard depicting the steps of NA-SB deliv-
ery, personas, and scenarios of use, all of which were
generated based on ethnography findings. Four personas
were crafted to represent four user types: (1) a young
adult receiving care in pediatric oncology, (2) a young
adult with frequent inpatient stays, (3) a young adult re-
ceiving maintenance treatment with appointments oc-
curring less frequently, and (4) a young adult with a
prognosis of less than 1 year. Scenarios of use reflected
various appointment types and were presented using a
flowchart of patients’ appointments. For example, one
scenario included labs, treatment, and a clinical appoint-
ment; another included just treatment; a third included
just a clinical appointment.

Procedure First, we gave an overview of the project and
ethnography results. Second, we discussed the ethnog-
raphy translation table, giving the design team the op-
portunity to vet the research team’s translation of user
and contextual factors into user and contextual require-
ments. We then engaged design team members through
storyboarding, scenarios of use, and personas to inform
the collaborative specification of NA-SB delivery. To fa-
cilitate this discussion, we divided NA-SB delivery into
six segments: (1) young adult receives and completes
needs assessment, (2) young adult “turns in” needs as-
sessment, (3) data is documented, (4) data is interpreted
to identify appropriate services/resources, (5) service/re-
source providers are notified, and (6) services and re-
sources
are
provided.
We
then
walked
workshop
attendees through each segment, priming them with the
user and contextual requirements relevant to that seg-
ment. Together, we specified each segment of delivery,
discussing both a pilot scenario as well as future broader

implementation. The selected specification options were
then vetted in terms of personas and scenarios of use
generated from ethnographic data.
During the second design team workshop, we also dis-
cussed the future implementation of NA-SB, anticipating
barriers and facilitators to implementation and brain-
storming strategies to optimize NA-SB implementation.
This discussion was informed by a list of barriers and fa-
cilitators gleaned from usability testing and ethnographic
data. We used PollEverywhere to rank this list of barriers
from most to least salient. We then discussed the three
barriers ranked as the most salient in terms of the mech-
anisms driving those barriers as well as potential strat-
egies to address them.

Analysis EH took detailed notes during design team
workshop #2 to capture all discussion points leading to
decisions on NA-SB delivery and implementation; the
meeting was also recorded for further elaboration on
meeting notes. We synthesized and analyzed notes in-
ductively to document the results of design team proto-
typing and generate guidance for NA-SB delivery and
implementation.

Results
By ensuring NA-SB directly responded to features of
users and context, we designed NA-SB for implementa-
tion, potentially minimizing the strategies needed to ad-
dress misalignment that may have otherwise existed.
Furthermore, we designed NA-SB for scale-up; by en-
gaging users from other cancer programs across the
country to identify points of contextual variation which
would require flexibility in delivery, we created a tool
not overly tailored to one unique context. To allow for a
more detailed focus on our methods, we have summa-
rized our results in Additional File 5. This file includes
results from usability testing (i.e., participant demo-
graphics, ratings of CNQ-YP needs, evaluation of CNQ-
YP, and grouping of needs from concept mapping),
ethnographic contextual inquiry (i.e., participant demo-
graphics, guided tour, and interview translation tables),
and design team prototyping workshops (e.g., summaries
of item decisions, selected concept mapping cluster map,
anticipated
implementations
strategies).
Briefly,
the
methods described above culminated in an NA-SB
prototype, including a redesigned patient-reported out-
come measure and referral pathways that are triggered
based on needs young adults report, as well as a plan for
implementation. To achieve our NA-SB prototype, many
adaptations were made to the CNQ-YP to promote its
usability and usefulness; for example, we added missing
content (e.g., items on sexual health), removed unaction-
able content (i.e., needs that are not addressable by ser-
vices),
revised
confusing
or
unpalatable
items,

streamlined the tool’s sequencing and response options,
and, importantly, linked the needs assessed by the tool
to referrals pathways expected to address them. In
addition to adapting the CNQ-YP, we also identified
context modifications needed to promote receptivity to
NA-SB implementation (e.g., changes in social worker
workflow to accommodate NA-SB administration; modi-
fication of electronic medical record to allow for docu-
mentation
of
NA-SB).
To
address
remaining
gaps
between NA-SB and its implementation context that
were not addressed by intervention or context modifica-
tions, we anticipated needed implementation strategies
(e.g., building buy-in among providers across disease
groups; taking a phased-in approach to implementation).

Discussion
In this case example, usability testing elicited user con-
cerns about the CNQ-YP that may have limited its up-
take in practice, allowing our design team to redesign
the CNQ-YP to maximize usability and usefulness. For

example, through concept mapping, providers identified
needs assessed by the CNQ-YP which, as originally
written, could not be addressed with available services/
resources (e.g., “I feel frustrated”); assessing such unac-
tionable needs would have produced additional burden
for users, without improving care. Through the survey
and cognitive interviews, young adults identified import-
ant missing content (e.g., sexual health), and other areas
in which the CNQ-YP’s content, length, wording, and
response format were unacceptable. By addressing these
usability and usefulness concerns upfront, we designed a
tool to be more feasible, acceptable, and appropriate to
users.
In this case example, we used ethnographic con-
textual inquiry to obtain a detailed understanding of
users and context. Additionally, we went further than
traditional barriers/facilitators assessments by engaging
users in analysis to promote a shared understanding of
the context: our design team reviewed ethnography find-
ings to ensure that the user interpretation of context
remained central, as opposed to relying solely on the re-
searcher’s interpretation of contextual data.
In this case example, the
ethnography provided valuable source data for workshop
materials, helping us to leverage design team expertise
to identify these usability determinants and prioritize
contextual features to target with EBP redesign, context
preparation, or implementation strategies. For example,
during design team workshop #2, we presented several

alternative scenarios of use, or simple descriptions of
plausible user interactions with NA-SB, to inform the
specification of NA-SB delivery. These scenarios provide
user- and task-oriented information about the context in
which an EBP has to operate [72], and also offer con-
crete examples for design team members to react to. For
example, scenarios of use helped our design team walk
through different patient visit types (e.g., just infusion
versus infusion + clinical visit) to ensure that design de-
cisions about staffing and timing for NA-SB administra-
tion suited the range of potential appointments.
We used UCD to enhance the usability and usefulness
of NA-SB and reduce the number of implementation
strategies needed to embed the tool in routine care.
However, where EBP and context diverge, UCD can help
tailor strategies which make EBP and context more com-
patible. In this case example, we anticipated the areas
where NA-SB provision may clash with user or context-
ual requirements, some of which could not be addressed
by EBP redesign or context preparation. For example,
NA-SB—a tool that spans across multiple domains of
care—will require the cooperation of multiple depart-
ments and disciplines; although users are more likely to
buy into a usable and useful tool [73, 74] and engaging
users in its development likely generated some buy-in,
additional implementation strategies targeting cross-
department buy-in may be required. These remaining
gaps in EBP-context fit inform the selection of strategies
to promote NA-SB implementation. Leveraging UCD to
identify the user and contextual requirements and tailor
implementation strategies addresses an articulated need
in the field [18, 75] and complement approaches for
selecting and tailoring strategies that have recently been
proposed in the implementation science literature [17].
Future work will assess the extent to which UCD mini-
mizes the need for complex implementation strategies
or, when needed, aids in the tailoring of strategies that
are contextually appropriate and minimally burdensome.
As demonstrated by this case example, UCD can help
implementation scientists to operationalize the field’s
commitment to stakeholder engagement. For example,
establishing a design team upfront ensured that users
remained central throughout NA-SB development and
implementation planning. Design team members offered
key insights to inform data collection (e.g., review of in-
struments), data analysis (e.g., selection of concept map-
ping cluster map; prioritization of user and contextual
requirements), and, ultimately, NA-SB and implementa-
tion strategy design. Further, design team members
proved critical to the recruitment of users for usability
testing and ethnographic data collection. UCD also of-
fers methods for translating user feedback into design
decisions, addressing another articulated gap in imple-
mentation
science
[76].
For
example,
the
use
of

storyboards, personas, and scenarios of use allowed our
design team to translate ethnographic data into NA-SB
design features in a way that group discussion without
such engagement methods may not have. Finally, UCD
demands an iterative approach to user engagement,
often with the same group of users reviewing prototypes
at multiple time points; this type of iteration may be a
key moderator in the relationship between stakeholder
engagement and improved EBP design [50]. In keeping
with the iterative nature of UCD, in future work, NA-SB
will undergo additional refinement based on user inter-
actions with our NA-SB prototype.
Applying UCD to implementation science has notable
challenges. Embedding the extensive engagement UCD
requires can sometimes be costly and time-intensive.
Additionally, this level of engagement places issues of
sampling and recruitment at the forefront. For example,
the UCD process hinges on complex decisions about
who counts as a user and which individuals accurately
represent users more broadly. Prioritizing divergent
feedback from multiple user groups [77], or weighing
the relative importance of user feedback with the feasi-
bility of design solutions, may not always be straightfor-
ward. Inexpert application of UCD methods may lead to
“feature creep,” in which new ideas are incorporated into
the EBP without careful consideration and evaluation of
the effects of the added features. UCD’s emphasis on it-
erative design thinking and local insights may also raise
concerns about diminishing fidelity as EBPs are recur-
rently revised to better align with context outside of the
controlled environment where the EBP was originally
designed and tested. Finally, implementation scientists
may struggle to shoulder the challenges associated with
incorporating new disciplines into already multidisciplin-
ary teams and projects (e.g., reconciling terminology and
frameworks). However, if implementation scientists are
to leverage key insights from other disciplines, we must
continue to surmount such roadblocks to knowledge
integration.

Conclusions
Implementing change in dynamic healthcare settings is
complex; understanding the nuances of implementation
requires a multimodal, multidisciplinary purview. To this
end, implementation scientists have borrowed know-
ledge and approaches from systems science [78, 79],
organizational studies [80], cultural adaptation [81],
community-based participatory research [82], behavioral
psychology [83], and quality improvement [84], just to
name a few. We argue that UCD methods like usability
testing, ethnographic contextual inquiry, and design
team prototyping can join the list of approaches avail-
able to implementation scientists. This may first require
investigation of where UCD and implementation science

converge and diverge. Fortunately, efforts to this effect
are currently underway [85]. While points of divergence
may represent barriers to integration of the two fields,
they may also represent important new insights and ap-
proaches for implementation scientists to consider.
Just as embroidery requires the alignment of thread,
fabric, and needle, EBP implementation and sustainment
requires harmonizing EBP, context, and implementation
strategies. The importance of each of these has been ac-
knowledged; however, methods for understanding the
dynamic interplay among them and optimizing each
with respect to the other two are lacking. UCD offers
methods and approaches for achieving this. Future re-
search should explore the utility of collaborating with
UCD experts or embedding UCD approaches in imple-
mentation research [85]. In particular, we argue that
UCD’s potential for promoting harmonization among
EBP, context, and implementation should be tested em-
pirically, work that is currently underway [86]. To the
extent that UCD helps facilitate this harmonization, it
will advance us toward the field’s goal of bridging the
gap between research and practice.