J Genet Couns. 2025;34:e1944. 
﻿ 
  | 1 of 9
https://doi.org/10.1002/jgc4.1944

wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/jgc4

Received: 22 December 2023 | Revised: 13 May 2024 | Accepted: 17 June 2024

DOI: 10.1002/jgc4.1944  

O R I G I N A L  A R T I C L E

Development and preliminary evaluation of a genetics 
education booklet for retinoblastoma

Taylor Irvine1 |   Monica Brundage2 |   Ashna Hudani3 |   Joy Kabiru4 |   Kahaki Kimani5,6 |   
Festus Njuguna7 |   Lucy Njambi5,6 |   Helen Dimaras2,8,9,10,11,12

1The Humanities Program, The University 
of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada

2Human Biology Program, The University 
of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada

3International Development, The 
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada

4Eye Unit, PCEA Kikuyu Hospital, Kikuyu, 
Kenya

5Department of Ophthalmology, 
University of Nairobi, Nairobi, Kenya

6Kenyatta National Hospital, Nairobi, 
Kenya

7Department of Child Health and 
Paediatrics, Moi University, Eldoret, Kenya

8Department of Ophthalmology and 
Vision Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, 
The University of Toronto, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada

9Division of Clinical Public Health, 
Dalla Lana School of Public Health, 
The University of Toronto, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada

10Department of Ophthalmology and 
Vision Sciences, The Hospital for Sick 
Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada

11Child Health Evaluative Sciences 
Program, SickKids Research Institute, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada

12Centre for Global Child Health, SickKids 
Research Institute, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada

Correspondence
Helen Dimaras, Department of 
Ophthalmology and Vision Sciences, The 
Hospital for Sick Children, 555 University 
Ave, Toronto, ON M5G 1X8, Canada.

2 of 9 |    

1  |  BACKGROUND

2  |  METHODS

2.1  |  Phase I: Development of educational booklet

In the first phase of the project, the study team consulted with 

health care and patient knowledge user groups to design, produce 

and refine the educational booklet. Phase I took place from May to 

August of 2018.

2.1.1  |  Knowledge user recruitment and selection

Healthcare knowledge users included: physicians (ophthalmologists 

or oncologists), nurses, support group leaders (counselors), and can-

cer advocacy group representatives. Patient knowledge users in-

cluded parents of children with RB and survivors of RB. Knowledge 

users were identified and recruited from Kenyatta National Hospital 

(KNH; Nairobi, Kenya), the University of Nairobi (UoN; Nairobi, 

Kenya) PCEA Kikuyu Hospital (KH; Kikuyu, Kenya), and Moi Teaching 

Referral Hospital (MTRH; Eldoret, Kenya). Patient knowledge users 

were modestly compensated for their time with provision of refresh-

ments during the consultations and reimbursement for travel where 

appropriate.

2.1.2  |  Design of educational booklet

A human-­centered design approach was employed to iterate the 

content and design of the educational booklet. Over three rounds 

of consultation, the study team met with knowledge users to review 

booklet prototypes and collect feedback for its further refinement. 

In Round 1, consultations were focused on determining the opti-

mal content for the booklet. Knowledge users were asked to sug-

gest the broad categories of information (e.g., diagnosis, treatment, 

cancer genetics, and genetic testing) that they preferred to include. 

Knowledge users were asked to consider these informational needs 

against the quantity of information, with an eye towards avoiding 

reader overwhelm. In Round 2, consultations were focused on de-

veloping figures and images that could convey key messages with 

ease to the patient audience. Initial designs were sketched by a 

graphic design student at the University of Nairobi, instructed to 

create images that were relevant and relatable to a Kenyan audience. 

Round 3, the final phase of consultation, was focused on refining the 

language of the booklet, with the aim of reducing the quantity of 

text without losing important content. Language was reviewed first 

in English and a Swahili version was created by translating from the 

English text. A final review of the resultant booklet was performed 

with patient and health care knowledge users to informally assess 

their views on the final product. Knowledge users in the final review 

were given the option to review either the English or Swahili version 

of the booklet and asked to suggest how the booklet might be imple-

mented and evaluated.

2.2  |  Phase II: Preliminary evaluation of 
educational booklet

In the second phase of the project, a preliminary evaluation was 

conducted to assess the educational booklet's impact on knowledge 

change and its suitability for real-­world use. Phase II occurred from 

September to December of 2018, and the methods below reflect 

suggestions provided by Phase I knowledge users.

2.2.1  |  Participant recruitment and selection

Parents or caregivers of children with RB who could communicate 

in English were eligible for the preliminary evaluation. Individuals 

who were involved in Phase I were excluded. For the ease of re-

cruitment and to facilitate a rapid preliminary evaluation, partici-

pants were recruited only at KNH and a convenience sample was 

sought. Participants were modestly compensated for their time with 

provision of refreshments during the research activities and reim-

bursement for travel where appropriate.

2.2.2  |  Evaluation

The preliminary evaluation was composed of a quantitative knowledge 

test and qualitative focus group discussion. A pre-­ and post-­test ques-

tionnaire (18 short answer and multiple-­choice questions) assessed 

baseline knowledge and changes immediately after independent re-

view of the booklet (for participants with visual impairment or blind-

ness, a study team member read the content of the booklet aloud). 

Test questions focused on clinical characteristics of RB (five questions), 

definitions of genes and cancer (five questions), genetic origins and her-

itability of RB (three questions), and implications of RB genetics (five 

questions). Participants also provided information regarding their re-

lationship to RB, perceived knowledge and confidence about RB, and 

whether or not they would use the booklet. Data were analyzed by 

basic descriptive statistics and changes in pre–post scores by paired 

Student t-­test where possible. The focus group discussion aimed to 

glean: thoughts on the booklet's content, length, design, and desired 

changes; perceived change in knowledge, confidence about RB genet-

ics, and remaining questions; and planned use of the information in 

health-­related decision making. The discussion was audio recorded and 

transcribed, then evaluated using a descriptive content analysis.

2.3  |  Research ethics

Phase I was exempt from Research Ethics Board approval as it was 

not a research activity, but development of an intervention with 

knowledge users. Ethical approval for Phase II was obtained from 

the University of Nairobi (Protocol #UP704/10/2018). Written in-

formed consent was obtained from all participants in Phase II.

3  |  RESULTS

3.1  |  Phase I: Development of educational booklet

3.1.1  |  Knowledge users

Fifteen healthcare knowledge users and five patient knowledge 

users participated in three to five consultations each. Table 1 shows 

demographic details of the knowledge user groups.

3.1.2  |  Booklet content and design

An iterative, phased design process produced an educational book-

let rich in images and stories, with complex genetic information de-

scribed in lay language. The images show cartoon families visiting 

4 of 9 |    

doctors, and simplified diagrams of cells and genes (Figure 1). The 

booklet employs characters and stories to explain the nuances of 

heritable and non-­heritable RB. Core concepts covered in the book-

let include: definitions of DNA, genes, cells, and pathogenic variants; 

cancer development; the genetic development of RB and inheritance 

patterns; consequences of heritable RB versus non-­heritable RB; 

and treatment. The booklet also tackles common myths about the 

origins of cancer (i.e., witchcraft or curse) to curb the stigma associ-

ated with heritable cancer.

3.1.3  |  User guide

An unexpected result of our knowledge user-­directed process was 

that the knowledge users suggested the educational booklet be used 

in two ways: (1) as a take home for patient families (as initially an-

ticipated); and (2) in educational sessions led by trained facilitators 

(e.g., nurses, counselors, and patient navigators), according to direc-

tions found in a user guide (Figure 1). A user guide was therefore 

designed to include suggested language for explaining concepts in 

the booklet, discussion points, and additional (non-­essential) infor-

mation to cover, depending on level of patient understanding. The 

user guide also instructed clinicians on how to employ a ‘teach-­

back’ method to check for patient understanding. The intention is 

to promote dialogue between health professionals and patients that 

eliminates confusion, a feature supported by the literature (Noorani 

et al., 1996; Rushlow et al., 2009). Knowledge users also suggested 

that the content of booklet could be printed as a large format flip-

chart, to better serve as a visual aid during the educational sessions.

TA B LE 1 Phase I knowledge user group demographic details.

Healthcare
15
75

FI G U R E 1 Genetics counseling 
intervention. (a) The genetic counseling 
intervention consists of a counseling 
session in which a facilitator will follow 
user guide to explain concepts in the 
genetic education booklet, stimulating 
questions and discussion with the family 
being counseled. (b) The genetic education 
booklet is rich in images and stories, with 
complex information described in lay 
language in both English and Swahili.

|  5 of 9

3.2  |  Phase II: Preliminary evaluation of 
educational booklet

3.2.1  |  Participants

The final educational booklet was reviewed by six mothers of chil-

dren undergoing treatment for RB at KNH; one mother was also a 

blind survivor of RB. Three of the six additionally participated in the 

knowledge evaluation.

3.2.2  |  Quantitative results

Average knowledge scores improved from 67% pre-­test to 83% post-­

test for the two unaffected mothers (p < 0.001) (Table 2). The one 

survivor/parent scored 83% on both tests. Categories of questions 

that showed improvement were definitions of genes and cancer and 

genetic origins and heritability of RB (Table 3). All participants (3/3) 

reported that the booklet improved their knowledge and rated their 

confidence level as “Good” in making decisions about their affected 

child. When asked if they would share the booklet with family or 

community members, they all answered “Yes” and gave reasons 

including changing the thinking around RB and supporting early 

detection.

3.2.3  |  Qualitative results

Focus group discussions indicated that the participants were sat-

isfied with content and comprehensiveness of the information in-

cluded in the booklet. Participants indicated that it was helpful in 

clearing up misconceptions:

It has given us a lot of information, because at first I 

thought it [retinoblastoma] was maybe witchcraft. In 

fact when they told me it was about genetics, I was 

asking myself, I have never heard of this in my family. 

And I was asking why, my baby? And so now, I have 

gotten this information from this booklet. 

(Participant 1F)

The booklet revealed several areas where further information 

seemed to be desired, specifically on the ability to prevent RB, sec-

ond cancers as well as the role of environmental factors in RB devel-

opment and progression. With respect to second cancer prevention, 

one participant commented:

After I have gone through the booklet, I would like to 

know more about the second cancers. I didn't under-

stand. And can the baby be screened for retinoblas-

toma in the womb? Is it possible? 

(Participant 1F)

Diet came up as a concern for some participants:

Participant 5F: I think you caninclude, which food can we eat, or how 

can we treat it by what we eat. We want to know what we can 

do ourselves.

Participant 2F: And what food to avoid.

They also indicated that the booklet would be useful particularly 

in moments when they felt encouraged about their child's future or 

could use it to encourage others facing similar challenges:

When you see your child is improving from medica-

tion and treatment, you will remember the booklet. 

So then you think, okay this kid can be a cancer survi-

vor. And you can go ahead educating someone. 

(Participant 2F)

It is important to encourage mothers who are 

worrying. 

(Participant 4F)

The discussion on RB genetics was placed in the context of the 

reality of cancer care in LMIC settings. Despite it not being a ques-

tion that was probed for, participants discussed the financial and 

other challenges faced in seeking care for their children. One par-

ticipant suggested the booklet should be used alongside social and 

supportive care interventions as follows:

Participant 2F: They [retinoblastoma families] don't have any hope. If 

they come to hospital they would be depressed. Even if they had 

the booklet it wouldn't help because they wouldn't have any hope.

Facilitator: Then in that case, how could the booklet include support 

you could access?

Participant 2F: Yes it could include counselling or financial support.

As the participants discussed the booklet in the preliminary 

evaluation, they engaged in discussion among themselves and the 

facilitator, using the booklet to explain concepts to each other, sug-

gesting a role for the booklet in peer-­to-­peer support networks. One 

participant put it as follows:

TA B LE 2 Phase II pre-­test post-­test results.

Parents

Participant 1F
12
67
15
83
<0.0001

Participant 3F
12
67
15
83

6 of 9 |    

It is helpful, because we are gaining insight in this dis-

cussion about the booklet. We are learning things we 

didn't know. 

(Participant 2F)

4  |  DISCUSSION

Genetic testing and counseling are essential for cancer care 

(American Society of Clinical Oncology, 2003), but availability, ac-

cess, and quality varies worldwide (Hawkins & Hayden,  2011; He 

et al., 2014; Hill et al., 2015). This is in part attributable to a false 

impression by funders and policymakers that genetic services are 

irrelevant for LMICs (Wonkam et al., 2010). Where genetic services 

do exist, it is predicted that they will soon be unable to meet their 

increasing demand (Trepanier & Allain, 2014). With increasing de-

mand for cancer genetic services in LMICs like Kenya, new models of 

service delivery are needed (Trepanier & Allain, 2014). Specifically, 

these models should take in to account the unique ethical, social, and 

cultural context of the setting they are being designed for (Zhong 

et al., 2021). Our prior work defined a model for delivery of clinical 

genetic services in Kenya that emphasized the need to develop novel 

educational tools, and a patient-­ and community-­centered approach 

to genetic counseling (He et al., 2014). Our current study represents 

a novel patient-­oriented approach to begin identifying and address-

ing such issues while filling the gap in genetic counseling services 

in Kenya. Furthermore, by focusing the work on the prototypic 

heritable cancer RB, our results have wide relevance and applicabil-

ity to the many countries, inclusive of LMICs and also HICs, currently 

shaping childhood cancer policy to improve RB outcomes and qual-

ity of life.

Comprehensive understanding of RB and its heritable conse-

quences is important so that appropriate interventions, such as reg-

ular eye examinations for at-­risk infants, are sought out early enough 

to save lives and vision. The educational booklet described in this 

manuscript showed promise in meeting this aim, as it was developed 

in direct consultation with the patient community. As a result, the 

educational booklet contains the content that families want and 

need to know, described in an understandable format. The combi-

nation of factual content and stories used in the resultant booklet 

has been proven effective in relaying health information (Kitamura 

et al., 2011) and communicating difficult concepts to patients and 

families with low literacy (Houts et al., 2006). Furthermore, the im-

ages and language choices, particularly in the Swahili version of the 

booklet, were tailored to the cultural context of Kenya. Yet, even 

with these culturally specific nuances, the broader content in the 

booklet has potential applicability to other geographic or cultural 

regions struggling with communicating information about heritable 

cancer.

Genetic diagnoses place a significant psychosocial burden on 

families (Eijzenga et al., 2014; Wonkam et al., 2014). Culture and 

society can influence how people interpret genetic health informa-

tion (Solomon et al., 2012). Thus, engaging patients in designing ge-

netic counseling interventions is important so that innovations are 

useful and relevant. However patient engagement is challenging in 

the LMIC context (Janic et al., 2020); while we were able to recruit 

11 patient partners, we did not achieve a 1:1 ratio of patients to 

non-­patients recommended for such work. Importantly however, 

the patients who did participate were able to provide important 

insights into the local context, particularly the need for financial 

support and psychosocial counseling to support the uptake of ge-

netic information. Also of note, one participant indicated that they 

would share the booklet with friends and family to reduce stigma 

around cancer, which is prevalent in the Kenyan context. The issue 

of stigma is increasingly being reported in North American context 

as more diverse populations are being included in research about 

disclosure of genetic results to family (Hunter et al., 2023).

Another outcome of our knowledge user-­guided process was 

the development of a user guide to assist health professionals in 

leading counseling sessions. This was suggested by health care 

knowledge users, noting that they required more support in in-

formation delivery; the user guide was suggested with the in-

tention to help standardize the delivery of genetic information, 

particularly in a context where genetic counselors are rare. In our 

evaluation, the user guide and educational session were not eval-

uated, but instead the booklet was independently reviewed by 

participants. An educational session intervention would need to 

be developed and tested in future. Previously, to address the chal-

lenge of scarce genetic counselors in Kenya, we implemented and 

tested a role-­play based workshop to improve health professional 

understanding and skills regarding genetic counseling for RB (Hill 

et  al.,  2015). This workshop could be modified to train facilita-

tors on the use of the booklet and user guide. Encouragingly, there 

are more and more formal programs starting to introduce genetic 

counseling in sub-­Saharan Africa through twinning, for example, in 

Ethiopia (Quinonez et al., 2021).

The preliminary intervention has shown promise in improving 

knowledge and confidence in RB genetics among parents of children 

with RB. Interestingly, the booklet inspired new questions on screen-

ing for second cancers and prevention of RB, which are key research 

questions yet to be solved globally. Importantly, it also revealed that 

it could be improved to better articulate the limited evidence on the 

role of environmental factors, such as diet, on RB development, to 

alleviate worry or guilt in parents.

Genetic testing can identify the precise pathogenic variant car-

ried by a proband, the discovery of which is essential to predict the 

cancer in at-­risk family members or confirm non-­heritable RB sta-

tus. The Kenyan Ministry of Health guidelines for RB care (Ministry 

of Health Kenya, 2014) include recommendations for genetic test-

ing and counseling; however, since few Kenyan families have been 

able to access RB genetic testing (via North American or European 

laboratories, paying out of pocket), most patients are counseled by 

their clinician based on their phenotype or known family history 

of disease. Therefore, the educational booklet was designed and 

tested in the current context of the absence of genetic testing for 

RB. However, the original study that indicated a need for more ed-

ucation also indicated that patients want improved availability and 

access to genetic testing—motivated by the idea of preventing or 

minimizing the effects of the cancer on future generations (Gedleh 

et al., 2018). Even the patients in the current research had questions 

about prenatal detection and early intervention, though it is cur-

rently only available in the European (Gerrish et al., 2019) and North 

American (Soliman et al., 2016) contexts. Yet, questions like the ones 

from the patients in this study, as well as research on other heritable 

cancers in other parts of Africa, indicate that cancer genetic services 

are desired by the patient community; a study from Nigeria even 

showed that cancer patients are willing to pay out of pocket for can-

cer genetic testing (Adejumo et al., 2023).

We note that the main limitation of our evaluation was the small 

sample in Phase II, a result of limited time and funding. Given these 

anticipated logistical constraints, the study team set out to conduct 

a small preliminary study to gauge the feasibility of proceeding with 

a larger-­scale evaluation. Moreover, the small sample size provided 

an unexpected opportunity for the study team to assess how patient 

engagement could be enhanced, actively involving parents or survi-

vors as partners in the future evaluation; these insights have been 

presented in our published model for patient engagement in LMICs 

(Janic et al., 2020). Embedding patient partners into our study team 

is expected to facilitate recruitment and retention of a sufficient 

sample size in future study (Chhatre et al., 2018).

In summary, our preliminary evaluation indicated feasibility of 

future implementation and formal evaluation of the booklet for its 

efficacy in increasing knowledge and health decision making regard-

ing RB genetics. Patients were critical to its development and of-

fering unique insight from the lived experience of being affected by 

heritable cancer in the Kenyan context. Given that genetic testing 

for RB is being developed now for Kenya, the current intervention 

could be expanded to include a patient-­facing genetic testing report 

to aid counseling sessions for those who have undergone testing.

All authors meet the 4 ICJME criteria as follows: Conception or de-

sign of the work (HD) or acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of 

data for the work (all authors); drafting the work (TI, MB, AH, and 

HD) or reviewing the work critically for important intellectual con-

tent (KK, JK, FN, LN); final approval of the version to be published 

(all authors); and agreement to be accountable for all aspects of the 

work (all authors). Author HD confirms that she had full access to 

all the data in the study and takes responsibility for the integrity 

of the data and the accuracy of the data analysis. All of the authors 

gave final approval of this version to be published and agree to be 

accountable for all aspects of the work in ensuring that questions 

related to the accuracy or integrity of any part of the work are ap-

propriately investigated and resolved.