Electronic Health Record-Embedded, Behavioral
Science-Informed System for Smoking Cessation
for the Parents of Pediatric Patients

Brian P. Jenssen1,2,3
Dean J. Karavite3
Shannon Kelleher2
Ekaterina Nekrasova2
Jeritt G. Thayer3

Raj Ratwani4
Judy Shea5
Emara Nabi-Burza6
Jeremy E. Drehmer6
Jonathan P. Winickoff6

Robert W. Grundmeier1,3
Robert A. Schnoll7
Alexander G. Fiks1,2,3

1Department of Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine, University
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States
2Center for Pediatric Clinical Effectiveness, PolicyLab, and The
Possibilities Project, Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States
3Department of Biomedical and Health Informatics, Children’s
Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States
4MedStar Health National Center for Human Factors in Healthcare,
Washington, Dist. of Columbia, United States
5Department of Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States
6Division of General Academic Pediatrics and Tobacco Research and
Treatment Center, Massachusetts General Hospital for Children,
Boston, Massachusetts, United States
7Department of Psychiatry and Abramson Cancer Center, University
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States

Appl Clin Inform 2022;13:504–515.

Address for correspondence Brian P. Jenssen, MD, MSHP, Division of
General Pediatrics, Department of Pediatrics, University of
Pennsylvania, 2716 South Street 11-201, Philadelphia, PA 19104-
6243, United States (e-mail: JenssenB@chop.edu).

Keywords
►tobacco use
treatment
►clinical decision
support
►human-centered
design

Methods

We applied a rigorous HCD process that engaged participants
from three cohorts in workﬂow analysis and a series of
iterative formative scenario-based usability testing sessions
that captured a range of objective and subjective metrics on
CDS system usability, utility, and intent to use. This work was
performed by a multidisciplinary team with expertise in
pediatric primary care, smoking cessation, CDS, HCD meth-
ods, and software engineering.

System Design
The CDS system was designed to support three cohorts of
system users as follows: (1) parents/caregivers who smoke
(hereafter referred to as parents), (2) primary care pediatric
clinicians, and (3) clinical staff. The initial design of the CDS
systemwasbasedonclinicalexpertiseandresearchontobacco
use treatment in pediatric settings,8,23,35 prior work develop-
ing and evaluating CDS systems for parent tobacco use,20,22

expertise on EHR programming and CDS, and the application
of HCD methods such as usability heuristics, scenario devel-
opment, and cognitive walkthrough.26–31 The ﬁnal system
design was developed through a more detailed HCD pro-
cess,29–31 as described below.

Study Setting, Participants, and Recruitment
This study took place with the Children’s Hospital of Phila-
delphia (CHOP) Care Network, a highly productive primary
care practice-based research network.36 The study was con-
ducted in practices identiﬁed as having higher rates of parent
smoking. Inclusion criteria were as follows: parents were
eligible if they were a self-identiﬁed smoker, aged 18 years,
present at their child’s health care visit, and able to communi-
cate in English; pediatric clinicians were eligible if they were
an attending pediatrician or nurse practitioner; and clinical
staff wereeligibleifthey wereeither theofﬁce managerorlead
patient scheduler. Parent participants were identiﬁed through
EHR patient chart reviews, and study procedures were per-
formed immediately after the clinical encounter and audio
recorded. Pediatric clinicians were recruited via e-mail, and
sessions were performed remotely using a video-sharing
platform and audio recorded as well. Pediatric clinicians
were recruited via purposeful sampling to ensure a range of
conﬁdence and perceived roles in providing tobacco use
treatment (►Table 1).37 Clinical staff participants were
recruited via e-mail, and sessions were performed remotely
using a video-sharing platform. All sessions were audio
recorded. The study was approved by the CHOP Institutional
Review Board.

Usability Testing: Parent System Component
Functional interactive prototypes of the system’s component
intended for use by parents were developed using REDCap
electronic survey building and data capture tools.38,39 This
component was a screening questionnaire with questions
about the parent’s and/or other family member’s tobacco
use, motivational smoking cessation messages, and options
to connect with three evidence-based tobacco use treat-
ments: nicotine replacement therapy (NRT) patch and/or
gum, referral to the Quitline (counseling services via
phone16), and/or referral to SmokefreeTXT (counseling via
text messaging40). Parents interacted directly with system
prototypes on a laptop, allowing the recording of objective
measures including task completion and error rates. In these
sessions, participants were encouraged to talk aloud while
performing tasks,41 following a think-aloud protocol,42 com-
municating their understanding of the user interface and
their selections in performing the tasks. The facilitator
encouraged the parent to say whatever comes into their

mind as they complete the task. This approach (1) gathered
responses to open ended questions on the usability and
functionality of the system and (2) encouraged subjects to
add opinions,ideas,andsuggestions.After theusabilitytesting,
participants completed a system usability, utility, and trust
questionnaire based on the Technology Acceptance Model
(TAM),43,44 followed by a brief semistructured interview.
Interview questions focused on desired features of the system,
general process of screening for tobacco use, content of moti-
vational smoking cessation messages, and tobacco treatment.

Usability Testing: Pediatric Clinician System
Component
High ﬁdelity, semi-interactive, and scenario-based mockups
of the system components used by clinicians were created in
a rapid prototyping application (Axure, San Diego, California,
United States). Usability testing was conducted remotely to
accommodate participants’ availability. While the mockups
were high ﬁdelity, they did not fully support direct interac-
tion. As a result, we applied a pluralistic walkthrough
format45 where test facilitators presented each scenario to
participants and prompted them to describe the scenario-
based action for each screen. If the participant selected the
intended action of the design, the facilitator would proceed
to the next screen. If a participant selected an unintended
action, the facilitator would describe the result of that action
and allow the participant to select another action. If the
participant was unable to identify the correct action, the
facilitator would explain the intended action and proceed.
After the prototypes’ review, participants responded to a
questionnaire based on the TAM to assess perceived ease of
use, perceived usefulness, and intent to use.43 The question-
naire was followed by a brief semistructured interview with
questions about most- and least-liked features, general
satisfaction, suggested changes to the prototypes, and overall
ﬁt of the proposed system within the current visit workﬂow.

Workﬂow Analysis: Clinic Staff System Component
While clinical staff are not direct end users of the CDS system,
they have both an important role in supporting parents using
the system and valuable experience in how the system could
best ﬁt within the clinic workﬂow. Participants reviewed
graphic representations of three distinct workﬂow options
for delivering the parent system including completing the
screening questionnaire prior to the appointment (via the
EHR patient portal), in the ofﬁce on a dedicated tablet, or in
the ofﬁce on the parent’s own smartphone device. After
workﬂow reviews, participants completed a TAM question-
naire rating the system on perceived ease of use, perceived
usefulness, and intent to use.43 Participants then responded
to semistructured questions on the positives and negatives of
each workﬂow and which one would ﬁt best within their
practice workﬂow.

Outcome Measures
Our outcome measures addressed the following two goals:
(1) determine that the CDS system meets the functional
objective of identifying parents who smoke, providing

motivational messages, and connecting parents to treat-
ments; and (2) ensure the system is usable, useful, and likely
to be adopted. For the parent and pediatric clinician user
testing, we captured a mix of objective and subjective data
(►Table 1). Objective data included critical errors (deﬁned as
tasks that participants were unable to complete) and non-
critical errors (deﬁned as tasks where participants encoun-
tered difﬁculty but were able to recover without assistance
to complete the task). Subjective data included participant
response to a pretest demographic questionnaire, postsce-
nario Likert’s scale questions based on the TAM, comments
from the think-aloud protocol, and semistructured interview
questions administered at the end of the usability test
sessions. For clinical staff, outcome measures focused on
ensuring the system was usable, efﬁcient, and ﬁt within the
workﬂow of the clinical staff. The evaluation approach
leveraged the Hierarchical Task Analysis methods46,47 in
which staff reviewed, commented on, and evaluated mock-
ups of proposed workﬂows.

Analysis
Demographic survey responses for each participant cohort
were characterized using descriptive statistics. For parent
and pediatric clinician design review sessions, subjective
analysis involved assessment of think-aloud comments,
questionnaires assessing usability, functionality, general
satisfaction, and responses to open-ended questions that
were coded to identify key themes (►Table 1). Recordings
were analyzed using NVivo 11 (QSR International) analysis
software to code and identify themes. Objective analysis
assessed participant error rate while completing speciﬁc CDS
prototype activities. The research team responded to the
occurrence of errors and/or negative subjective results by
modifying the system and continuing to test with new
participants. For clinical staff sessions, analysis involved
assessment of responses to open-ended questions and ques-
tionnaires assessing usability, functionality, and general
satisfaction. In all, the optimization process ensured that
the system design met users’ needs ,a level of usability,
functionality,
and
usefulness
that
supports
screening
parents for smoking, providing motivational messages, and
connecting to tobacco use treatment.

Sample Size
For the parents and pediatric clinicians, we anticipated
iteratively testing and reﬁning the CDS system prototype
with a minimum of 30 participants. At least 97% of all
problems with software systems can be identiﬁed with 30
participants.48,49 For the clinical staff, we performed work-

ﬂow review with a sample of staff until we reached thematic
saturation.

Results

Participants and Recruitment
The HCD process engaged 70 representative participants
including 30 parents, 30 pediatric clinicians, and 10 clinic
staff. Parents were recruited from 2 different practices,
clinicians from 10 practices, and staff from 5 practices
(►Table 2). The clinicians expressed a range of conﬁdence
in providing tobacco use treatment, including prescribing
NRT.

Parent System Component
Formative testing of the parent system (the screening ques-
tionnaire) was performed over four iterative versions of
system prototypes. Modiﬁcations were primarily in the
editing of system language but also included adding func-
tionality. The initial version was tested with ﬁve participants
and had a critical error rate of 20% and a noncritical error rate
of 60%. All participants reviewing the initial version rated the
system as easy to understand and easy to use. Usability
testing continued for three additional versions. The ﬁnal
version was tested with 10 participants and had no critical or
noncritical errors. Ninety percent of participants rated the
questionnaire as easy to understand and 80% as easy to use
(►Table 3).
Several important design requirements were identiﬁed,
including minimizing the likelihood that the questionnaire
would elicit feelings from parents of being judged for their
smoking, keeping the time spent completing the question-
naire as short as possible, and presenting information rele-
vant to their child’s health as a motivator for behavior
change. Most parents did not feel “judged” regarding smok-
ing behaviors by the content of the questionnaire (93%), and
most parents agreed they would be comfortable ﬁlling out
the questionnaire (90%) and having their child’s pediatrician
know about smoking in their family (77%; ►Fig. 1). The
nonjudgmental aspect of the language and the screener was
also reﬂected during the design screener review, “You are not
judgmental, so yeah. I appreciate it.”
Parent participants shared that the parent CDS system
was easy to complete, and that the information presented
was helpful and informative. One illustrative comment in-
cluded: “It was short, sweet and simple because it was
getting straight to the point ….” Many mentioned their
child’s health as their motivation to quit. We received
overwhelmingly positive feedback on the motivational

messages that lists the beneﬁts of quitting smoking. Despite
its length and level of detail, respondents found it self-
explanatory, helpful and the appropriate length: “I think
that it’s all good components to helping to quit smoking.
Making it brighter in your brain to think about your kids ….”
Participants found the variety of treatment options helpful,
and none of the subjects expressed concerns about the
default opt-in to the treatments.

Clinician System Component
Formative testing of the clinician system was performed over
six iterative versions of system prototypes. Modiﬁcations
included redesign of interaction components, workﬂow,
content, and adding functionality. The initial version was
tested with only two participants but identiﬁed severe issues
requiring a reorganization of user interface elements and
workﬂow. The subsequent ﬁve iterations identiﬁed more
minor issues that required modest changes but also resulted
in discovering requirements for added functionality and
information. During most sessions, questions would arise
from clinician participants about features, functionality, and
workﬂows. We used data from the usability sessions to add
key features, reorganize and change layouts, optimize work-
ﬂows, and provide information about treatment resources
(►Fig. 2).
The responses across all iterations to the pediatric clini-
cian TAM questionnaire were positive. Overall, across all
system versions, more than 95% of participants strongly
agreed/agreed that the system would help them provide
treatment to parent smokers and would improve outcomes
in parent smoking cessation (►Fig. 3). Further, more than
95% of participants strongly agreed/agreed that they would
use the system and that they were satisﬁed with the system.
Pediatric clinician participants were supportive of the
system and its role in helping parents quit smoking. One
illustrative comment included, “I like that it identiﬁes and
uses what I knew was evidence-based tactics for smoking
cessation and it is aligned with my philosophy as far as what
I’m offering.” Some clinician participants expressed the need
for some time to get used to the system before feeling
completely conﬁdent but still conﬁrmed that the system
was easy to use and well presented. One participant
explained: “It’s easy to use. It provides the information
needed. It sort of walks you through it step by step. Resources
are right there at your ﬁngertips … I would think for many
like me we’re not so aware of the options for nicotine
replacement and, again, just for smoking cessation pro-
grams.” Clinicians emphasized the value of automating to-
bacco treatments and documentation as much as possible to
reduce the burden on them during visits with competing
priorities. They were comfortable with treatment being
provided, regardless of a discussion with the parent.

Workﬂow Analysis: Clinic Staff System Component
Review and qualitative assessment of three different work-
ﬂows revealed that staff perceived the EHR patient portal
reminder workﬂow as the most preferred for staff, parents,
and clinicians at their practice (90% agreed/strongly agreed).

They also rated it as the workﬂow that would be the most
efﬁcient and easy to manage (100% agreed/strongly agreed).
However, during the postreview, semistructured interview
participants unanimously preferred having all three work-
ﬂows available as part of the questionnaire completion, as

opposed to relying solely on EHR patient portal workﬂow.
Participants reported that their parent population prefers to
complete questionnaires through a range of modalities. A
multifaceted approach with a combination of questionnaire
completion at home via the EHR patient portal, in the ofﬁce

via tablet, or on a parent’s own smartphone device is widely
utilized for other questionnaires in these practices, and
therefore would be a preferred strategy for this system.

Final System Development
An overarching theme of the design review sessions across all
cohorts was automating key functions as much as possible.
We iteratively developed the ﬁnal CDS system based on the
subjective and objective data from the design review ses-
sions and workﬂow analysis. This system is now live at ﬁve
primary care practices in our electronic health record (EHR).
The system supports screening for parent smoking via
several modalities (personal computer or smartphone de-
vice) prior to the patient’s visit to decrease the burden on in-
ofﬁce completion or in the ofﬁce on a tablet device. If the
parent indicates that they are a smoker, the parent portion of
the system displays information designed to motivate treat-
ment engagement, followed by presentation of three treat-
ment options for them to accept (1) NRT, (2) Quitline, and/or
(3) SmokefreeTXT. The system automatically connects the
parent with the treatment options they selected, and the NRT
is directly delivered to the parent, if interested. The pediatric
clinician is notiﬁed of the parent’s selections within several
key sections in the EHR, including the best practice alert
section, questionnaire review section, and main note, all to
account
for different clinician workﬂows.
The system
includes information to help the clinician in what is often
a difﬁcult conversation about smoking, with simple guidance
on key conversation prompts that motivate treatment. The
system supports automated documentation content includ-
ing the ofﬁce visit progress note, after visit summary, and

billing. Finally, the system will periodically remind the
clinician to follow-up on the parent’s effort
to quit.
See ►Fig. 4 for system workﬂow.

Discussion

We applied HCD processes to develop a CDS system that
supports parent tobacco use treatment through pediatric
settings. We identiﬁed key system functions and features
through initial prototyping. These features were prioritized
and reﬁned though iterative end-user feedback. Previous
work had shown that a CDS system targeted at clinicians
could improve process measures related to parent tobacco
use,23,24 but further work was needed to better incorporate
these systems into ofﬁce workﬂows.20,22 In this study,
parents, pediatric clinicians, and clinical staff all identiﬁed
directly screening parents for tobacco use and then directly
offering treatment through an electronic questionnaire as
critical system features. Parents valued this approach, as it
allowed them to disclose tobacco use in a nonjudgmental
way. Pediatric clinicians and staff felt this approach could
most efﬁciently identify parents and then systematize treat-
ment. Participant interactions with iterative system proto-
types helped identify how to make these key functions
acceptable and usable. Parents valued motivational mes-
sages, informed by behavioral science, that focused on the
beneﬁts of smoking cessation to their child’s health11,12 and
simple,
easy-to-understand
explanations
of
treatment
options. Pediatric clinicians valued automation of parent
screening, treatment, and documentation with simple guid-
ance on key conversation prompts that support treatment.

Similarly, clinical staff valued methods for parents to com-
plete key system features ahead of the visit to decrease in-
ofﬁce workﬂow burdens.
Developing CDS systems using HCD approaches is a
growing area of research interest, as it helps clinical applica-
tion developers move beyond simple prompts and alerts to
systems
that
more
effectively
support
clinical
work-
ﬂows.50–52 Clinicians spend a signiﬁcant portion of their
professional time using the EHR, with a large percentage of
clinicians spending more time interacting with the EHR than
interacting with patients.53,54 EHR-related stress is preva-
lent, and there may be a particularly strong relationship
between poor EHR usability and physician burnout.55 Devel-
oping CDS systems with the end user of the system at the
center of the processes is critical, considering the well-
known time burdens and disproportionate stress on clini-
cians through the current processes.53,55,56 Further, our HCD
approach provides a more holistic approach to system de-
velopment, incorporating usability assessment of the CDS
from both the interface level (parents and pediatric clini-
cians) and the ofﬁce workﬂow level (clinical staff).
Despite our success in achieving our objectives, the EHR
presented many barriers to usability and functionality, pri-
marily due to the inability to account for family relationships.

EHR vendors havefocused oncommunication and data privacy
for adult health care settings, with technological services
developed for the physician–adult patientdyad.Thesesystems
fail to account for the family aspect of child health care,
including the inability to readily link family members and
address health at the family or household-level.57,58

Limitations

Our study has several limitations. First, we do not have data
on the CDS system’s impact on parent smoking cessation
rates. Nonetheless, by leveraging the team’s previous expe-
rience developing effective CDS systems for tobacco use
treatment20,22 and grounding this work in rigorous HCD
methods, our design process maximizes the likelihood of
CDS effectiveness. Second, pediatric clinician usability test-
ing was conducted remotely, using web conferencing soft-
ware, which did not fully support direct interaction with the
prototypes. Thus, we did not have recorded error metrics for
participant interactions with the system. We felt the im-
proved accessibility to pediatric clinicians using this ap-
proach outweighed the effort of in-person testing during
the pandemic. Third, we did not perform a formal power
analysis. We performed formative iterative testing where the
objective was to apply an HCD approach to system design
using high-ﬁdelity mockups prior to development. Literature
on number of participants for summative testing lacks
consensus and is less clear on formative testing.59,60 Fourth,
the facilitator-led usability testing and workﬂow analysis
sessions may be prone social to desirability bias. Fifth, while
we sought a representative sample for usability testing and
workﬂow analysis, participant feedback may not be repre-
sentative of all parent, pediatric clinician, or staff perspec-
tives. Nonetheless, for pediatric clinicians, we did not
identify
meaningful
differences
in
TAM
questionnaire
responses by demographic or professional characteristics,
including, for example, experience in clinical practice. Final-
ly, the CDS system to support parent tobacco use treatment
was limited to a single institution as part of a research effort.

Conclusion

A CDS system to support parental tobacco cessation in
pediatric primary care, developed through a HCD process,
proved easy to use and acceptable to parents, clinicians, and
ofﬁce staff, justifying future efforts to test its impact on
parental smoking cessation outcomes in the clinical setting.

Clinical Relevance Statement

In this study, parents, pediatric clinicians, and clinical staff,
all identiﬁed directly screening parents for tobacco use and
then directly offering treatment through an electronic ques-
tionnaire as critical system features. Parents valued this
approach, as it allowed them to disclose tobacco use in a
nonjudgmental way. Pediatric clinicians and staff felt this
approach could identify parents most efﬁciently and then
systematize treatment.

Fig. 4
Automated process for family tobacco control screening and
treatment delivery. EHR, electronic health record.

Applied Clinical Informatics
Vol. 13

513