Kongjit et al. 
BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making          (2022) 22:202  
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12911-022-01944-0

RESEARCH

Mobile health application for Thai women: 
investigation and model

Chalermpon Kongjit1*, Acrapol Nimmolrat1 and Achara Khamaksorn2 

Methods
Experimental sample
The participants in this study were divided into two 
groups: general target users and IT experts. Random 
sampling was used to recruit 30 Thai females aged 
between 18 and 43. Purposive sampling was used to 
recruit thirteen IT experts with more than 2  years of 
experience in Chiang Mai Province.
Please note that it is assumed that the age ranges cho-
sen in this study represent women of various generations, 
including young adults (18–22), adults (23–27), working-
age adults (28–32 and 33–37) and older (38 and up).
Note that this research focuses only on problems 
related to usability and development, not medical bene-
fits. However, a health response team of qualified doctors 
carried out the research.
The study participants were purposely separated 
into five age ranges, as shown in Table 3. The respond-
ents’ IT literacy skills were self-determined. Their ability 
depended on the duration they had been using smart-
phones. Due to the limited number of participants, not 
all had a medical need for m-health technology. The find-
ings indicated limitations in the mobile development 
experience of some of the IT experts in this study.

Experimental framework
A series of design processes and methodologies were 
used to produce an m-health application that could sup-
port women’s health, thereby achieving the research 
objective. A UCD was implemented to identify prob-
lems and design appropriate functions, content, and a 
graphical user interface. The conceptual framework of 
the research is depicted in Fig. 1. The framework consists 
of four phases, namely: the specification of the context 
of use, specification of the requirements, production of 
design solutions to meet those requirements, and a pro-
totype evaluation.

Context of use specification
In this phase, the research focuses on a deep understand-
ing of the user needs and the problems related to the 
usability of existing m-health applications. Keywords 
were used to classify the existing applications in the Thai 
language, such as: “women’s period, women’s self-assess-
ment, women and mothers, women’s medicine, women’s 
personal medical record, women’s weight control, wom-
en’s organs, etc.”
Of the 156 apps associated with women’s health sup-
porting the Thai language, only 50 were used in this 
study. They were selected after considering the following:

•	 Aim of development (related to women’s health).
•	 Review scores (more than 4-star rating).
•	 Application type (the main features of apps associ-
ated with women).
•	 Cost (free or not more than 5 USD).
•	 Connection type (online request or standalone).

Table 3  Demographics of samples (n = 30)

Points
Characteristic
Percentage 
(n)

Age ranges
18–22
26
8

23–27
20
6

28–32
16
5

33–37
23
7

38 up
13
4

IT literacy skill
Beginner smartphone user
(experience of using a smart-
phone < 1 year)

20
6

Intermediate smartphone user
(experience of using a smart-
phone > 1 year)

66
20

High level smartphone user
(experience of using a smart-
phone > 2 years)

13
4

In the questionnaire survey stage, prospective partici-
pants were sent an invitation letter (via email). A consent 
form was also attached to ensure participant permis-
sion for their data to be used in this online research. 
After character analysis, 30 general users were given 
10–20 min to test each of the 50 apps over a period of 
30 days. Note that devices were not supplied, and con-
nection costs were not supported in this research. Users 
had to install the apps on their own mobile devices.
A single focus-group was arranged with the general 
users, and content analysis was used to count the fre-
quency of respondents’ feedback. These users were then 
randomly separated by name into three groups (10 users 
per group). Thirty-minute interviews were conducted via 
Zoom to collect and categorise different problem-related 

data from each group. General questions for the focus 
group interviews were:

(1)	 What were your reasons for selecting this applica-
tion?
(2)	 What points did you consider?
(3)	 What problems did you find when you trialled the 
application?
(4)	 What points would encourage you to use a particu-
lar application?
(5)	 What was your experience with the apps’ interface, 
function and usability?

This study was conducted solely online. Video record-
ing was not permitted in this research due to ethical 
reasons. However, four staff took notes of respondents’ 

Fig. 1  Conceptual framework and research methodology

answers during the focus group. Note that a health 
response team consisting of four qualified doctors con-
ducted the entire process.
The next step involved analysing the collected data 
related to the app’s graphical design and functionality, 
focusing on two points. The first was the specific prob-
lems users encountered when interacting with the apps, 
and the second was the reason for their positive impres-
sion of some of them. The feedback was then analysed 
and classified to build a taxonomy of the problems and 
the main reasons for their app choice.

Specification requirements
In this phase, thirteen IT experts were recruited to share 
their ideas and provide additional feedback to highlight 
further problems. They were asked to consider the char-
acteristics of the apps corresponding to those in the 
previous phase. The characterisation points were sum-
marised in a questionnaire. Each question was designed 
to determine the core characteristics of a good m-health 
application and prioritise the reasons for that determi-
nation. A numerical scale from one to five was used to 
quantify qualitative feedback on the design to indicate 
the IT experts’ perception of the app’s development 
(Table 7).

Requirement design solutions
A prototype application was constructed from the find-
ings in the earlier phases of the study and was piloted on 
Android’s operating system (OS) platform. The prototype 
contained a list of the contents, features and functions of 
the graphic user interface and its universal design based 
on a summary of the experts’ suggestions and the existing 
taxonomy of the users’ requests. It was developed using 
the MockingBot program.

Prototype evaluation
Individual users were sent the link via ‘Line’ (a popular 
social app in Thailand) to access the first version of the 
prototype app for installation and evaluation on their 
devices. They were asked to test it for 30 min and then 
provide feedback in a questionnaire. Heuristic principles 
[37, 42] were adapted and applied to test the app’s usabil-
ity. The evaluation criteria contained in the questionnaire 
were a modified version of the core usability test criteria 
of [53] and are shown in Table 8.
In the first round of testing, the scores from the ques-
tionnaire were analysed to summarise users’ feedback 
and a t-test statistical analysis was applied to compare 
the average scores. The prototype was then refined based 
on the specific points raised in these findings. This pro-
cess was repeated for the revised prototype, and again 
the data derived was analysed. Meanwhile, the IT experts 

were interviewed to re-check the application’s perfor-
mance after the modifications (Table 7).

Results
Results context of use specification results
The first phase aimed to clearly understand the problems 
women encountered when using m-health applications 
and their goal of using them. As mentioned earlier, the 
initial search yielded 156 applications, 50 of which were 
selected for a review by general users. The main features 
of the chosen applications are shown in Table  4. There 
were 11 categories, which included women’s anatomy, 
women’s content, comfort, disease and medicine. Appli-
cations with these specific characteristics were chosen 
to acquire an insight into the graphical user interface of 
existing healthcare apps.
The frequent use of colour in the apps’ interface was 
also analysed, and the results are shown in Table  5. 
Note that colour use is one of the points of considera-
tion for comfort. Colours can be customised to suit the 
user’s comfort level and directly relate to the user inter-
face. The five* colours most frequently used were white, 
black, pink, blue and green. Therefore, these colours were 
incorporated into the prototype’s UI design.
Most of the issues cited in the general users’ reviews 
are shown in Table 6, which contains the group feedback, 
frequency of answers, number of apps and types of prob-
lems. The results of the focus group interviews are classi-
fied by the most frequent answers (qualitative data). The 
issues were divided into three types: usability, user inter-
face and functionality. For instance, in 35 of 50 apps, the 
users initially did not know how to start using the app (24 
of 30 found this). Indeed, more user interface issues (6) 
were found than usability (3) and functionality (3) issues, 

Table 4  Main features of apps associated with women in the 
Google Play store (n = 50)

Type of application
Percentage (n)

1. Female anatomy
18
9

2. Women’s content
14
7

3. Consolation
12
6

4. Disease and medicine
14
7

5. Blood pressure
12
6

6. Mother
6
3

7. Eyesight and vision
6
3

8. Herbs Medication
6
3

9. Mood assessment
4
2

10.Teeth
4
2

11.Weight control
2
1

12. Hearing
2
1

which indicated that existing healthcare applications 
tend to lack an acceptable user interface.
A process taxonomy of each type of problem was con-
structed based on the above feedback. According to 
Fig. 2, three aspects of these apps were found to be spe-
cifically problematic: usability, UI and functionality. The 
causes of these problems were identified for later correc-
tion in the new app. Examples of user interface-related 
issues were “Some user interfaces are not suitable for 
users”, “The user interface design is not compatible with 
all users”, “I don’t know how to use the application”, “The 
app’s functions are difficult”, “I don’t know the meaning 
of the signs or buttons”, “When I clicked, the application 
didn’t show any results”, and “It was hard to understand 
some of the functions.”
To fulfil the research objective, it is necessary to under-
stand why users had a positive impression of some apps 
and not of others. The reasons for this are shown in Fig. 3 

and ranked one to four based on high-to-low frequency. 
It can be seen that the main reasons users had a positive 
impression of some apps were that they were easy to use, 
practical, familiar and easy to read. The taxonomy results 
were used to identify design points for the prototype app 
in this study.

Specification of requirements
The results of the first round of statements designed 
to collect data from the 13 experts are summarised in 
Table 7. Points that they considered most significant for 
developing a health app for women were prioritised.
These qualitative comments helped define the char-
acteristics of the application and were converted into 
quantitative results using a zero to five rating scale. The 
statements were based on the classification of m-health 
apps’ evaluation criteria, focusing on usability, function-
ality and design (graphical user interface) [54, 55].
The average scores in response to statements 1, 3, 4 and 
6 were high (> 4.5) and reasonably homogenous (10 of the 
13 experts gave a score of 5). Therefore, from the experts’ 
perspective, the key points of statements 3, 4, 1 and 6 
should be prioritised when considering the characteris-
tics of a women’s ideal health app. This enabled some cor-
rections to be made to the design of the prototype app.
The methodology used to design the women’s health 
application in this study is shown in Table 7. The taxon-
omy of the graphical user interface design shown in Fig. 4 
was based on Nielsen’s [25] ten general principles and 
Shneiderman et  al.’s [56] eight golden rules. It includes 
(1) the eight golden rules of interface design, (2) evalua-
tion of user categories, (3) prioritisation of tasks, and (4) 
choice of interaction pattern.

Table 5  Frequency of colour used in women’s apps in the 
Google Play store (n = 50)

Most frequently-used colour
Percentage (n)

1. White
23
35

2. Black
16
24

3. Pink
16
25

4. Blue
12
18

5. Green
8
13

6. Red
6
10

7. Light blue
5
8

8. Grey
2
4

9. Purple
3
5

10. Brown
2
3

11. etc.
3
5

Table 6  Most frequent answers from focus group questioning (lower end cut off at 10)

*Consideration priority level

Most frequent group answers
Frequency of answers 
(n = 30)
Number of applications found 
(average)
Type of problem

User did not know how to start using the app
24*1
35*1
Usability

Difficult to understand some icons or menus
20*2
30*2
User interface

Words or explanations were hard to understand
18*3
25
User interface

Difficult to read text due to small size
16
26
User interface

Too many unused functions
15
27*3
Functionality

Too difficult to understand for use
14
22
Functionality

Many fields had to be input into the application
14
26
User interface

Could not find the ‘return to menu’ button
13
18
User interface

Background colours did not suit the app contents
12
27*3
User interface

The application was inappropriate for use
12
13
Usability

App did not fit my size mobile device (impractical)
11
13
Usability

Some functions were unnecessary
10
17
Functionality

Page 9 of 20
	

The taxonomy of the universal design of the graphical 
user interface illustrated in Fig. 5 was based on the users’ 
problems and the IT experts’ suggestions. It consists of 
(1) design for women and (2) the components of a uni-
versal design.

This design uses universal design principles for women 
to increase its usability. Since female users are different 
from men, using appropriate colours, textures, interac-
tion, and refinement reinforce their emotional satisfaction. 
Hence, the findings in this phase were used to develop the 

Fig. 2  Process taxonomy summary of problems with existing women’s m-health apps

Fig. 3  Taxonomy: reasons for selecting applications

Page 10 of 20

app prototype with women’s anatomy or women’s content 
in mind. The frequency of colour use, application prob-
lems, design taxonomy, end-users’ and IT experts’ sugges-
tions were considered in the next phase.

Production of required design solutions
Since the results of the previous phase enabled the devel-
oper to understand the required characteristics of the 
UI, a prototype application with female-related content 

was developed and written for the Android OS platform 
using the MockingBot program. The design of this pro-
totype (as shown in Table 8) contained the following five 
essential functions: a period calendar, self-assessment, 
personal notes, counselling, and notification reminders.
Screenshots of each function are shown in Fig.  6, 
together with the main menu and user information. The 
five colours most used in the existing apps chosen by Thai 

Fig. 4  Taxonomy of graphical user interface design for women

Table 7  Summary of IT experts’ comments in round 1

*Level of priority

Statements
Experts’ scores
AVG
SD

5
4
3 2 1

1. Women’s health applications should be easy to use and customise
10
2 –
1
–
4.615*3 0.869

2. Women’s health applications should be designed by understanding users based on their experience
3 10 –
–
–
4
0.438

3. Women’s health applications should contain consistent functions
10
3 –
–
–
4.769*1 0.438

4. Women’s health applications should contain necessary functions with practical use
10
2 1
–
–
4.692*2 0.630

5. Women’s health applications should contain an image as a universal symbol, readable text size, and icons or 
menus that make them easier to understand
9
1 2
1
–
4.384
1.043

6. Women’s health applications should contain appropriate colours and elements and clearly visible content spaces 11 1
1
–
–
4.769*1 0.599

Page 11 of 20
	

women were used for this prototype to attract Thai female 
users and enhance their acceptance of the new app.
In fact, Thai users’ choice of colours was found to be 
different from those preferred by foreigners [57]. Based 
on the frequency of colours in the apps associated with 
women in the Google Play store (as shown in Table 5), 
Thai users favoured lighter tones and a mixture of con-
trasting colours. Therefore, this information was used 
to establish a strategic colour design throughout the 
new application.

Prototype evaluation
The first prototype was evaluated through a question-
naire completed by end-users and IT experts. After the 

prototype was released and pilot-tested, responses were 
categorised into three dimensions: users’ requirements, 
application functionality and graphical user interface. 
The criteria for the evaluation, which were modified 
from those of [51], are shown in Table  9. The users’ 
feedback results, separated by age and IT literacy skills, 
are shown in Fig. 7A, B. The average scores and stand-
ard deviation of each question in both groups are pre-
sented in Fig. 8. The difference between the groups was 
determined by the P value when P < 0.05.
As shown in Fig.  7A, older users gave lower scores 
than younger ones. The lowest score was given to Q5 
regarding the interface elements. Users commented they 
found it hard to use the functions due to the menu size, 

Fig. 5  Taxonomy of universal design principles

Table 8  Analysis of the feminine functions of the prototype app

Function
Aim

Period calendar
This function is used to calculate upcoming period dates and fertile windows

Self-assessment
This function is used to record body temperature, weight and height. The data is visualised by plotting it on a graph 
combined with the period calendar

Personal note
This function is used to record features such as period symptoms, daily notes and other information not included in the 
self-assessment function

Counselling
This function provides a counselling feature that involves chatting with doctors

Reminders and notifications This function provides reminders and push-notifications for the next period, fertile window and stage of pregnancy. Users 
can enable and disable notifications for each event

Page 12 of 20

unclear icons, inappropriate colours and font size. On 
the other hand, users with a high level of IT skills gave 
the app higher scores than beginners (Fig. 7B). The lat-
ter were found to be older users. Hence, users’ IT back-
ground appears to be a significant factor in assessing the 
app’s performance, especially for those unfamiliar with 
m-health applications. The results of each criterion were 
assessed and compared between the expert and end-user 
groups, as shown in Fig. 8.

The following observations were made from the first 
round of the evaluation;

(1)	 Q1 and Q2 were given a high score by both end-
users and experts, with sample comments like “I am 
very new to m-health apps, but this one is easy to 
navigate”, “It is easy to enter text or numbers”, and 
“The screen is appealing to women”. These results 
indicated that the prototype application was per-

Fig. 6  Graphical user interface and usability design for developing the prototype app

Page 13 of 20
	

ceived to be a design that meets users’ requirements 
in terms of practical use and simplicity. There was 
no difference between the two groups, with P > 0.05.

(2)	 Q3 was given a high score by both end-users and 
experts, with sample comments like “The results of 
the period calculator are accurate”, “I appreciate the 
self-assessment result of tracking periods”, and “The 
reminder of an upcoming period is very useful and 
accurate”. These results indicated that the prototype 
application is accurate and reliable. There was no 
difference between the two groups, with P > 0.05.
(3)	 Q6 was given a high score by both end-users and 
experts, with sample comments like “The app’s con-
tent on the screen fits my phone” and “The applica-
tion has a simple and friendly writing style, making 
it easily readable”. These results indicated that the 
prototype app’s screen size was appropriate and 
clearly visible. There was no difference between the 
two groups, with P > 0.05.
(4)	 Q1, Q2, Q3, and Q6 were given higher scores than 
Q4 and Q5. Points with an average score of nearly 
4.0 needed to be improved. These were related to 
incompatibility between the functions and interface 
elements, such as the size of menus, size and posi-
tioning of icons, colours and font sizes.

Table 9  Evaluation criteria

Questions
Evaluation criteria

App user’s requirements (usability)

Q1
1. Practical and understandable 
when used

Q2
2. Simple design

Use of app’s functionality

Q3
3. Provides accurate and reliable 
results

Q4
4. Compatibility between core 
features and user interface

Graphical user interface

Q5
5. Consistent pattern of menus, 
icons, colours and fonts

Q6
6. Appropriate screen size and 
clearly visible

Fig. 7  Average scores of each question with end-users separated by age range (A) or IT literacy skills (B)

Page 14 of 20

(5)	 Both end-users and experts gave Q4 a low score. 
The experts perceived that the core features were 
inappropriate for functionality, noting that “The 
function is not practical for the calculation of users’ 
information” and “The function has no clear pur-
pose, which confuses users”. It was noted that the 
average score of all users was P = 0.057 the first 
time and P = 0.061 the second time.
(6)	 Both end-users and experts gave Q5 a low score. 
The experts perceived that the menus’ size and 
positioning of icons, colours, and font sizes were 
inconsistent. They commented that the standard 
button size was too small and suggested increasing 
it and removing the menu explanation. It was noted 
that the average score of all users was P = 0.048 the 
first time and P = 0.055 the second time.
(7)	 The results of the statistical analysis demonstrated 
that the only significant difference between the end-
users and IT experts was related to Q5 (P = 0.048). 
The end-users liked this pattern more than the 
experts did. This indicated that the latter perceived 
that the menus, icons, colours and font size on the 
graphical user interface of the prototype needed to 
be improved to enhance users’ experience.

The core features of the UI of the prototype app were 
improved based on these findings by altering the menu, 
font and icon sizes, repositioning the icons and chang-
ing colours to achieve greater usage efficiency and user 
acceptance. The revised version also had the menu 
explanation removed to reduce the screen size. Some 
of the instant comments were “the menus are too small; 
increase the size but consider the proportion of the 
screen”, “The menu explanation reduces the space on the 
screen. Replace it with signs or symbols”, “increase the 

task screen”, “increase the font size”, and “Change signs 
and symbols to make them easier to understand”.
The universal symbol for communication was also 
changed to increase users’ perception, and the majority 
of the text displayed was fixed by increasing font size. In 
addition, inadequate command elements, such as interac-
tive buttons, labels and text in textboxes, were corrected 
to enhance users’ experience. The screenshot results are 
shown in Fig. 9.
In the second round of evaluation, the lower scores and 
comparison of the average scores were used to consider 
which points needed correction in the second prototype.
The average score of Q4 and Q5 was observed to have 
increased to P = 0.061 and P = 0.055, respectively, in 
the second round. This indicated that these improve-
ments had met the criteria of the corrected points, and 
the trend of the users’ feedback scores was similar. Inter-
estingly, the average Q1, Q2, Q3, and Q6 scores also 
increased, indicating that improving the app’s function-
ality had also increased users’ satisfaction. There was no 
difference between the two groups, with a P value of 0.05.
The functionality and graphical user interface were the 
factors that had most affected users’ satisfaction. Some of 
the sample comments were, “I prefer the new main but-
tons more than the previous version because they are 
more visible and they look nice”, “The counselling chan-
nel and graphical elements are more helpful with the 
addition of the list of doctors and their profiles”, “The 
chat box can be better operated with fingers”, and “I can 
edit my information better”. These comments indicated 
that the revised version had increased the efficiency of 
the app’s usage and users’ satisfaction.
Furthermore, since the comparison did not indicate a 
significant difference between end-users and IT experts, 
the new version appeared to meet the needs of both 
groups.

Fig. 8  Average scores based on t-test statistical analysis

Page 15 of 20
	

Fig. 9  Before and after corrections

Page 16 of 20

The evaluation was based on Lewis’s evaluation crite-
ria with a focus on users’ requirements, the application’s 
functionality and the graphical user interface.
The results of the second round evaluation by the 
13 IT experts were assessed in an interview based on a 
modified version of the questions in Table 7 to determine 
whether or not the application met their expectations. As 
can be seen from Table 10, the majority of their primary 
concerns had been addressed.

Discussion
Although many m-health applications have been devel-
oped for commercial purposes, few were developed 
based on evidential research or research studies. Most of 
the existing apps were found to have unnecessary func-
tions and inappropriate graphical user interfaces that 
annoy users and reduce their usability [26, 27, 58, 59].
An iterative process of continuous testing and refining 
has been found to solve many problems in the healthcare 
realm. Yet, many of these m-health applications have not 
undergone repeated testing to ensure they meet their 
objective. This includes m-health apps that, despite being 
purported to be for women, are ignorant of individual 
users’ needs and lack user customisation and functional 
tasks and content.
According to empirical literature [26, 27], user inter-
face, functions, and usability are the main factors that still 
challenge designers and developers of m-health appli-
cations. Although they are commonly used worldwide, 
most high-performance health apps are based on the 
English language, making them useless for non-English 
speakers or those with a low level of IT literacy. Hence, 

there is a need to research and develop local m-health 
apps for women in their own language.
Therefore, to fit the context of Thai healthcare, a modi-
fied design framework was produced in this research for 
developing an app to solve problems related to the user 
interface, functionality and usability. The design frame-
work of the app was based on a UCD process [29], an 
appropriate development methodology previously used 
to develop several m-health applications [32, 60].
An iterative process with a user-centred design was uti-
lised in this study to tackle the critical challenges before 
presenting a final prototype app to users for testing. In 
addition, the results of interviewing IT experts indicated 
that the most significant features of the app were usabil-
ity, functionality and UI design [55]. Functionality was 
evidently more important than other aspects from an IT 
perspective. Therefore, close attention was paid to func-
tionality design, usability and UI (in that order of prior-
ity) when developing the new app [27, 56].
However, it was found from the results of the focus 
group interview that usability was the main issue for end-
users, rather than the UI and functionality. According to 
user feedback in similar investigations, the most signifi-
cant problematic features of currently women’s m-health 
apps are the frequency of colour use, interface elements 
and functionality [57, 59]. Asian users enjoy an abun-
dantly colourful user interface with cartoonish animation 
elements, while Europeans prefer information to be pre-
sented in an organised clinical way [30, 31].
The women’s m-health application prototype was 
designed and analysed based on taxonomies of UI design 
and universal design principles. An analysis of the app’s 
essential functions was made from the perspective of 

Table 10  Summary of results of experts’ evaluation in the second round

*Primary concern rating

Questions
Expert scores rating
AVG
SD

5
4
3
2
1

1. This women’s health application provides high usability, being easy to use and customise.
Do IT experts agree with this point?
11
2
0
–
–
4.846*1
0.376

2. This women’s health application is clearly understandable based on users’ experience.
Do IT experts agree with this point?
10
3
0
–
–
4.769*2
0.439

3. This women’s health application contains consistent functions.
Do IT experts agree with this point?
7
6
0
–
–
4.538*3
0.519

4. This women’s health application provides the necessary functions and is practical to use.
Do IT experts agree with this point?
4
9
0
–
–
4.308
0.480

5. The universal symbol image, size of text, and icons or menus make it easier to understand 
this women’s health application.
Do IT experts agree with this point?

7
4
2
–
–
4.385
0.768

6. This women’s health application uses appropriate colours and elements, and content spaces 
are clearly visible.
Do IT experts agree with this point?

10
3
0
–
–
4.769*2
0.439

Page 17 of 20
	

both end-users and IT experts by comparing the average 
score of a t-test statistical analysis of the two groups. In 
the first round of the evaluation related to usability, there 
was no difference between the two groups’ average func-
tionality scores, with a P value of 0.05. In contrast, the 
two groups’ average scores for UI design were different in 
terms of the consistent pattern of menus, icons, colours 
and fonts, with a P value of 0.048. Therefore, the perspec-
tives of the two groups were inconsistent.
Several researchers [61–64] mention that UCD frame-
works have been developed to create m-health apps 
because the involvement of end-users in the develop-
ment process is beneficial for a clear understanding of 
their needs. Hence, a revised prototype app was pro-
duced with improvements based on feedback from the 
first round of testing.
Feedback from the second testing round indicated that 
end-users and IT experts were satisfied with the correc-
tions in the revised version. The inconsistent perspectives 
of the two groups had been rectified, and their average 
score was similar, with a P value of 0.05. Therefore, the 
two groups’ evaluation of the prototype was the same, 
indicating the research hypothesis was accepted.
Since the graphical user interface and usability were 
found to have a more negative effect on most users than 
the app’s functionality, this process facilitated the crea-
tion of an effective m-health application that responds to 
women’s needs.
The last result of the IT experts’ evaluation in the sec-
ond round of testing indicated that the most significant 
factor had changed due to reacting to the end-users’ 
problems and lack of design [22, 23]. The IT experts 
agreed that usability must be prioritised when developing 
the app, and the user interface and functionality design 
should be the second and third priorities, respectively 
[20, 21, 23, 24].
Therefore, by focussing on the application’s functional 
performance rather than other points, the IT experts 
miscalculated the design priority in this study due to 
their different perspective. As a result, the app’s functions 
might not have performed well for end-users, especially 
Thai women with low levels of IT literacy. As mentioned 
earlier, the use of the system is directly related to end-
users’ IT skills. An application is unlikely to be popular 
with older groups if it is highly functional but ignores the 
significance of clear usability. Hence, Usability Design is 
the first factor that needs to be considered, together with 
the user interface and functionality, when designing an 
application for older women.
Lastly, many researchers [57, 65, 66] who have stud-
ied the influence of colour over the years have found 
that men and women prefer significantly different 

colours. Therefore, it is necessary to use a strategic col-
our design when developing an m-health application for 
Thai women. The women surveyed in this study favoured 
colours such as pink, which is strongly associated with 
youthful femininity and white, which is related to purity 
and innocence [67, 68]. However, there was an interesting 
difference between the choice of colours of Thai users and 
foreigners. Based on the frequency of colour use, lighter 
tones and a mixture of colours between dark and light 
tones are generally favoured by women [69]. Curiously, 
black is preferred to pink, blue, and green in applications 
for Thai women, despite not being a universally-loved 
colour by most females. This indicates that app colour 
customisation can be used to put users at ease.
It was also found that some designs are unsuitable for 
Thai users. For instance, while most users could easily 
identify the exit labels in the first version of the proto-
type, Thai users did not understand the icons. Therefore, 
functionality is not likely to encourage Thai users to use 
an app they consider difficult to use.

Conclusion
An examination of the m-health apps for women cur-
rently available for Thai women confirmed the need to 
design and develop a more efficient application. The 
research questions were answered, as shown below.
Firstly, three main problems related to the usability, UI 
and functionality of current m-health apps were high-
lighted in a trial by Thai women. It was also found that 
functionality alone cannot encourage Thai women to use 
an app they consider awkward to use.
Secondly, end-users with different levels of IT literacy 
confirmed that usability, rather than the perfect amount 
of functions, was the most significant element encourag-
ing them to use a women’s m-health application. The user 
interface was the second most significant element.
Thirdly, it was found that IT experts’ perspective of 
developing a women’s m-health application was different 
to that of end-users. The application’s functionality was 
the most significant factor for IT experts, rather than the 
usability and UI.
Lastly, it was evident from the research that the joint 
involvement of end-users and IT experts is essential to 
enable developers to analyse, prioritise and establish 
an effective strategy for developing an m-health app for 
Thai women. Obviously, there is no perfect way to design 
such an application. However, the application designed 
and developed in this research is based on a systematic 
method and conceptual framework and illustrates that 
an efficient m-health application for Thai women is pos-
sible. By using a strategy based on User-Centred Design,

Page 18 of 20

extracting knowledge from IT experts and consulting 
end-users to determine problems, it can be done.

Limitations
Four limitations are notable in this research. First, the 
study sample was restricted to a single group of end-
users (educated women who use smartphones and live in 
Chiang Mai); this limited the number of end-users and IT 
experts available.
Second, due to the limited number of participants 
mentioned above, it could be said that the test evalua-
tion criteria were modified to recruit sufficient research 
participants (e.g. The number of questions was reduced). 
This leads to the conclusion that the number of partici-
pants is insufficient to represent all Thai women.
Thirdly, due to the specific design of this prototype for 
basic menstrual tracking, there are limitations in its use 
by pre-menopausal adolescents and post-menopausal 
adults. Therefore, future research could develop and ana-
lyse a health application for older women.
Lastly, two iterations to improve the application design 
are insufficient to revise the application prototype ade-
quately. A third session of product testing and revision 
would be advantageous.