User-Centered Design and
Development of the Modular TWIN
Lower Limb Exoskeleton

Matteo Laffranchi 1*, Stefano D’Angella 1, Christian Vassallo 1, Chiara Piezzo 1,
Michele Canepa 1, Samuele De Giuseppe 1, Mirco Di Salvo 1, Antonio Succi 1,
Samuele Cappa 1, Giulio Cerruti 1, Silvia Scarpetta 1, Lorenzo Cavallaro 1, Nicolò Boccardo 1,
Marialaura D’Angelo 1, Claudia Marchese 2, Jody A. Saglia 1, Eleonora Guanziroli 3,
Giacinto Barresi 1, Marianna Semprini 1, Simone Traverso 1, Stefano Maludrottu 1,
Franco Molteni 3, Rinaldo Sacchetti 2, Emanuele Gruppioni 2 and Lorenzo De Michieli 1

1 Rehab Technologies Lab, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Genova, Italy, 2 Centro Protesi INAIL, Istituto Italiano per
l’Assicurazione contro gli Infortuni sul Lavoro, Vigorso di Budrio, Italy, 3 Villa Beretta Rehabilitation Centre, Valduce Hospital,
Costa Masnaga, Italy

USER NEEDS AND DESIGN
REQUIREMENTS

The design process that enabled the user-centered development
of TWIN followed two consecutive phases as listed below:

1.
An “exploratory phase” was characterized by the investigation
of the user needs to establish a set of user-centered design
requirements (Martin et al., 2006; Chandran et al., 2020).
2.
A “formative phase” which was designed based on the
international standard IEC 62366-1:2015 on the application of
usability engineering to medical devices (Scherer and Gouveia
Filho, 2019). This phase sustained the participatory evaluation
processes adopted to progressively improve the system
usability, iteration by iteration (Simonsen and Hertzum,
2010).

This process can be summarized in the conceptual scheme
shown in Figure 1. After completion of the exploratory phase,
the formative phase which follows includes iterations where the
design of the device and its subsystems are continuously assessed
and updated to comply with the set user requirements. The
formative phase may also update the design requirements of
the device to comply with possible additional request emerged
during the above-mentioned participatory evaluation.
Considering
the
literature
in
wearable
robotics,
the
most characteristic trait of our approach is the adoption of
methodologies typically exploited in industrial contexts which

2

User Requirements Update

Questionnaires
Focus Group
User
Requirements

Exploring the Users’ Needs

EXPLORATORY PHASE
FORMATIVE PHASE
Iteratively Improving the Device

System
Design and
Development

Formative
Assessment
Sessions

Design Update

FIGURE 1 | The design process employed in TWIN consisted of two main stages: the exploratory and formative phases, which directly involved users and the
stakeholders.

TABLE 1 | Occurrence of lesion based on type and level.

Type
Level

Complete
Incomplete
Not speciﬁed
Cervical
Dorsal
Lumbar
Not speciﬁed

69%
27%
4%
22%
68%
6%
2%

target at achieving the development of systems with high
technology readiness level (TRL), and according to users’ needs.
Indeed, the TWIN exoskeleton was considered a medical device
in all its development phases. Consequently, we adopted the
perspective of user research and the international standards of
usability engineering for medical devices (Privitera et al., 2017;
Bitkina et al., 2020). This choice constitutes one of the original
contributions provided by this manuscript to the domain of
wearable robotics research.

Exploratory Phase: Analysis of User Needs
As part of the exploratory phase, we ﬁrst conducted a
preliminary series of studies based on questionnaires and
focus groups involving patients, aimed at understanding their
primary needs and requirements (Shah and Robinson, 2008).
This
information
was
then
translated
into
requirements
for
new
device
concepts
and
control
strategies
that
were taken into account for the implementation of the
TWIN exoskeleton.
This investigation was conducted in collaboration with the
Centro Protesi INAIL (i.e., the Italian National Institute for
Insurance against Accidents at Work) in Vigorso di Budrio
(Italy) and with the ISTUD foundation. The study comprised a
questionnaire and three focus groups that took place in three
SCI centers assisting SCI patients. Data collection was performed
between June and October 2014 and inclusion criteria were: age
>18 years; at least 6 months from spinal unit hospitalization;

no related psychopathological comorbidity. Included subjects
granted the authorization to treat personal data, in accord
with national laws (D.Lvo. 196/2003) and GDPR regulation.
The questionnaire was made available electronically on diﬀerent
platforms and web resources that are usually accessed by spinal
patients and was advertised in many hospitals and spinal units.
Questions regarded: (1) socio-demographic information; (2) SCI
information; (3) domestic life; (4) work/school; (5) free time, hobby,
and sport; (6) health condition and quality of life; (7) autonomy
in everyday life and transfers (autonomy in domestic and non-
domestic duties, and autonomy with respect to diﬀerent ways of
travelling); (8) standing (habits, perception of standing beneﬁts,
opinions related to strength, and limits of available orthoses); (9)
exoskeleton (impressions of available devices, of their utility and
utilization, preferences, and interest for a possible new device).
We collected 107 questionnaires. The interviewed population was
composed by 79% males with average age of 44 years, conﬁrming
the results of a previous study on the Italian population (Pagliacci
et al., 2003). Table 1 summarizes the type and level of lesions of
the interviewed patients.
We also performed focus groups, in which a moderator
stimulated the discussion between a group of selected patients
and collected their response, impressions, and feelings toward
the covered topics. A co-creation session followed, where subjects
were asked to brainstorm and provide potential use case scenarios
and design inputs. Focus groups were organized in three Italian
spinal cord centers: Montecatone Rehabilitation Institute (Imola,

3

A
B
C

battery

low noise

lightweigth

aesthetic

0

20

40

60

80

100

Occurrence [#]

from/to car/

autonomy

in/outdoor 

donning

0

20

40

60

80

100

gait speed

stability

free hands

stairs

0

20

40

60

80

100

priority #1
priority #2
priority #3
priority #4

& portability

wheelchair

use

time

life

FIGURE 2 | Questionnaire outcomes. Perceived priorities for: (A) exoskeleton features, (B) exoskeleton wearing, (C) exoskeleton use. Histograms represent the
number of subjects indicating the features reported in the abscissa as top priority (light gray bars), second priority (gray bars), third priority (white bars), or fourth
priority (dark gray bars).

17 people−14 males); Unità Spinale Unipolare of Careggi
hospital (Florence, 7 people−6 males); Unità Spinale Unipolare
of Alesini hospital (Rome, 8 male people).
The data analysis that followed focused on the aspects that
were signiﬁcant to the development of the exoskeleton device,
to draft conclusions which could in turn be useful for the
following design phases. Therefore, we aimed at understanding:
(1) main adversities encountered during daily life, (2) opinion
and perception of SCI subjects on the beneﬁts obtained by
adopting a standing posture, and (3) opinion on the use
of exoskeletons.
Regarding adversities encountered in personal life, collected
data reported shared diﬃculties in traveling and commuting,
mostly related to architectonic barriers, both during travel and
at destination. Indeed, many people complained about the lack
of autonomy during commuting, which is often by car and
aﬀected by the diﬃculties of transferring from wheelchair to
car and vice versa. Only 58% of the interviewed people found
this transfer easy to perform, while others rely on external
help. It must also be noted that traveling and visiting friends
were indicated as the free time activities mostly aﬀected by
the injury.
We observed the attitude toward the standing posture and
found that 58% of the interviewed subjects used devices for
standing that are not orthoses, on average 3 days per week for
around 90 min per session. Only 8% used a knee-ankle-foot
orthosis (KAFO) and they all judged the device very useful.
Around 29% of the participants declared that they did use
KAFO for some time but then they abandoned the device for
diverse reasons, such as fatigue, time issue, diﬃculty of use, etc.
However, almost the totality of the sample (93%) believed in the
beneﬁcial eﬀects of standing on rehabilitation and for improving
health condition and thus demonstrated a positive attitude
toward the development of a device truly designed around their
needs. Addressing issues related to the features of exoskeleton,
92% of people with incomplete lesion and 74% of subjects
with complete lesions demonstrated interest in them, and they
indicated lightweight and portability as the top priority, followed

by battery life (>2 h), low noise, and aesthetics (Figure 2A). With
respect to battery life, given that a typical exoskeleton session
performed by an expert user lasts about 1 h, we decided to set
2 h as the lower bound, so as to allow the use of the device for 1–2
training sessions.
Regarding device wearing features, the highest priority was
represented by the possibility of being worn and removed quickly
and autonomously, also from/to the wheelchair or the car, and to
be used both indoor and outdoor (Figure 2B). Finally, on usage
features, the interviewed sample stated that standing without
arm support and stability, are more important than speed or the
possibility of access stairs (Figure 2C). Overall, what emerged
were speciﬁc suggestions for an eﬀective application of robotics
to people with SCI. Their feedback could be summarized in two
main key needs, i.e., the device should be used autonomously
and should be practical to facilitate its employment during its
daily usage. Based on the results reported in Figure 2 and on the
feedback given during the focus groups, the main user-driven
requirements for the development of the TWIN exoskeleton
were drafted.
As expected, the ﬁrst two requirements are directly linked to
autonomy and have therefore been prioritized. Stability during
use is directly linked to the safety of the device, whereas cost
eﬀectiveness, although not reported in Figure 2, has been added
because all the subjects verbally complained about the current
cost of these machines during focus groups. Finally, from the
focus groups, we had insight that long battery life is required to
make the subjects feel safe and autonomous during the session.
These requirements were then employed to draft conceptual
layouts of the machine in cooperation with industrial designers,
so as to co-develop the device to address usability as well as
technical issues. These aspects were all taken into account for
the design of the TWIN exoskeleton. Another priority that is not
listed in the requirements was represented by the possibility of
reaching a standing posture with free hands, but the practical
implementation of this point required solutions that were in
contrast with most of the other priorities and was thus left for
future developments.

4

This preliminary study triggered the development of TWIN
and its formative assessment.

Formative Phase: Iterative Improvements
of the Device
The international standard IEC 62366-1:2015 and its related
technical report IEC 62366-2:2016 (Kendler and Strochlic, 2015)
indicate methods to be used for the formative evaluation phase
to assess the usability of medical devices. This evaluation
must be carried out starting from the most preliminary design
iterations throughout to the ﬁnal prototype so as to guarantee
that usability is considered during the whole design process.
Accordingly, the role of the formative evaluation is to guide
the iterative and participatory design and development of the
system for progressively resolving its most critical usability
issues. The standard IEC 62366-1:2015 deﬁnes how formative
evaluation can exploit a heterogenous set of techniques to collect
individual feedback, including qualitative observations expressed
(spontaneously or partially guided by a user researcher) by a
limited number of subjects for checking major usability problems
of each preliminary prototype. These subjects can include both
ﬁnal users and stakeholders—e.g., caregivers and orthopedic
technicians who, according to their own expertise, heuristically
predict critical ﬂaws in systems usability (Bitkina et al., 2020).
The standard IEC 62366-1:2015 also establishes that, after
completion of the formative evaluation, the design process
will be concluded with a summative assessment, which is
deﬁned as the validation of the system on usability and safety
aspects before its certiﬁcation and release. Diﬀerently from
the formative assessment, the summative assessment typically
requires a comprehensive (especially quantitative and objective)
test of the ultimate iteration of the system, possibly with the
involvement of numerous users. Before proceeding with the
summative assessment, clinical trials are currently performed on
the device for the advanced stages of the formative phase.
In order to improve the methodological rigor of our formative
assessment, its advanced sub-phases will focus on the correlation
of subjective and objective indices to obtain consistent measures
of exoskeleton usability. First of all, the protocol will include
standardized questionnaires on perceived (subjective) usability:
the System Usability Scale (Brooke, 1996) to investigate the
caregivers’ (which will manage the GUI of the TWIN software)
perspective; the NASA-TLX (Hart and Staveland, 1988) for
deepening our understanding of the patients’ cognitive load in
using the device. The questionnaire scores of the users will be
analyzed according to (objective) motor and physiological data
collected during the exoskeleton usage (and exploited to assess
the user’s eﬀort, for instance) (Kozlowski et al., 2015). We plan
to analyse observable patients’ behaviors during autonomous
donning/doﬃng and in the execution of training. Such a
multimodal approach is just a demonstration of our plans in
matching the subjective and the objective measures for showing
a ﬁnal, and comprehensive, estimation of system usability which
will be carried out in the near future.
This paper focuses on the ﬁrst 36 months of exploratory
and formative phases of TWIN. Initially, 10 healthy volunteers

TABLE 2 | Requirements of the TWIN exoskeleton.

#
Requirement

1
Lightweight and autonomous portability

2
Quick and autonomous donning and setup

3
Stability when standing/walking

4
Cost effectiveness

5
Long battery life (>2 h)

6
Comfort

7
Safety

participated to the tests. They had no neurological or muscular
diseases. Once the TWIN device underwent a ﬁrst series of
iterative improvements and was assessed to be ready for user
trials, a second stage involved one 31-year-old SCI patient with
a complete D5 lesion and experience in the use of lower limb
exoskeletons. All the participants gave written and informed
consent before their inclusion in the study. The tests respected
the standards of the Declaration of Helsinki (rev. 2013) and were
formally approved by the ethics evaluation committee Comitato
Etico Interaziendale Bologna-Imola of the Pharmaceutical
Department U.O.C. Farmacia Ospedale Maggiore, Bologna, Italy
(Protocol number: CP-POR1-01 ver.01).
During the sessions of the formative phase, the evaluation
was carried out in empty areas, under the supervision of
qualiﬁed personnel to ensure the safety of the subjects. Both
subjects and supervisors were instructed on how to use the
exoskeleton. During exoskeleton sessions, which consisted in
walking tasks, the users were invited to freely express their
opinions on the experience, following semi-structured interviews
too. Meanwhile, objective observations (e.g., asymmetries in
posture of legs skin irritation in contacts points, user’s tendency
to self-rotate) were collected to integrate and conﬁrm the insights
oﬀered by the subjects’ opinions.
According to the reports, the participants especially focused
on issues related to comfort, leading to e.g., structural
reﬁnements of the braces (as described later in section Braces).
They also paid special attention to safety: for example, this made
the developers improve the gait patterns via software to approach
a more stable trajectory (as explained in section Control System).
These evaluation sessions resulted in the spontaneous emergence
of comfort and safety as additional requirements, which were
set along with those listed in the previous section. Hence, they
were added to the preliminary list of ﬁve requirements addressed
previously and were included in the development process to be
taken into consideration for further revisions of the device.
Table 2 presents the full list of requirements set for the
development of the Twin exoskeleton.

MECHATRONIC DESIGN OF THE TWIN
LOWER LIMB EXOSKELETON

The whole development process was guided by the exploratory
and formative processes described in the previous section. It

5

indeed featured a continuous exchange of information between
developers and end users (i.e., patients and clinicians) to
incrementally and iteratively validate the design choices and the
exoskeleton’s components (e.g., structure, braces, control) once
they were implemented.
The
user-centered
design
approach
adopted
in
this
work was not focused on the betterment of exoskeleton
performance in the conventional sense: our goal was to
develop novel device concepts which could enable new use-case
scenarios for the improvement of usability-related aspects of
the device.

Concept Layout Design and Iterative
Co-creation Process
Based on the user-centered requirements outlined in Table 2, a
concept study was carried out to deﬁne possible layouts of the
exoskeleton to guide the mechatronic design. Requirements #1,
2 have a few implications: (1) the device must be donned on
and oﬀby the subject quickly and autonomously (2) it should
be meant for a joint use in combination with the wheelchair,

and (3) it should be compatible with personal transportation
vehicles (Figure 2B). Notably, the only existing commercial
exoskeleton that deals with these issues is the Parker Hannaﬁn’s
Indego. It indeed presents a modular structure made of ﬁve
modules (waist, R/L thigh, and R/L shank-foot) which is meant
to be autonomously assembled or disassembled by the user
and to facilitate transportation and donning operations. The
modularity concept has therefore been integrated within this
device which eﬀectively represents a step ahead toward usability
in the context of personal use: this exoskeleton is therefore
considered as the reference gold standard for this work. Inspired
by the design concept of the Indego exoskeleton, we developed
TWIN by adopting the idea of a modular structure which could
be autonomously assembled and by extremizing modularity
with the goal of further impacting on user’s autonomy. Indeed,
the modules which compose the TWIN exoskeleton have been
increased to a number of 9. These are: waist, R/L hip motor,
R/L thigh link, R/L knee motor, R/L shank link, and foot. We
decided to minimize the number of overall actuators (hip and
knee motors only) to comply with requirements #1 and #4. One
of the advantages of high modularity is that the exoskeleton can

ΔL

RIGHT
HIP
MOTOR
JOINT

RIGHT
KNEE
MOTOR
JOINT

RIGHT
FEMUR

RIGHT
ANKLE

RIGHT
HIP
MOTOR
JOINT

RIGHT
KNEE
MOTOR
JOINT

RIGHT
FEMUR

RIGHT
ANKLE

RIGHT
HIP
MOTOR
JOINT

RIGHT
KNEE
MOTOR
JOINT

RIGHT
FEMUR

RIGHT
ANKLE

LEFT
HIP
MOTOR
JOINT

LEFT
KNEE
MOTOR
JOINT

LEFT
FEMUR

LEFT
ANKLE

LEFT
HIP
MOTOR
JOINT

LEFT
KNEE
MOTOR
JOINT

LEFT
FEMUR

LEFT
ANKLE

LEFT
HIP
MOTOR
JOINT

LEFT
KNEE
MOTOR
JOINT

LEFT
FEMUR

LEFT
ANKLE

PELVIS

PELVIS
PELVIS

EXO
LEXO

LEXO

A
B

E

C
D

FIGURE 3 | The modularity design concept adopted in the development of the TWIN exoskeleton. (A,B) The user can freely wear the lighter and smaller parts of the
exoskeleton before, after or between two exoskeleton sessions for ease of transportation and device management. (C,D) The user can wear the motor and battery
modules as well when he needs to use the exoskeleton. (E) The lateral mounting modular design concept. Considering the in-line type of mounting shown in the left,
donning requires additional space (1LEXO), in the limb direction. Because of this reason, unless the exoskeleton is mounted following a speciﬁc sequence (either
bottom-up or top-down), this scenario may result in awkward donning operations. On the contrary, the adopted lateral mounting system does not require any
additional space to be mounted and is free from donning sequence constraints.

6

be quickly disassembled by the user into small sub-units, so as to
facilitate its management and transportation. Indeed, we decided
to design a concept layout which allowed to divide the modules
into two main groups. The ﬁrst group includes the heavy,
cumbersome and costly parts (i.e., motor modules and batteries),
whereas lighter, inexpensive and “tailored” components can be
classiﬁed into the second group (links and braces). This choice
aims to bring direct beneﬁts to both the production cost and
usability perspectives and further diﬀerentiates our work from
the Indego exoskeleton. Thanks to TWIN’s design, the patient
can wear the modules that less hinder the degree of movement
and autonomy, i.e., the links and braces, before, after, or between
exoskeleton sessions, Figures 3A–D. This brings a number of
usability-related beneﬁts:

1)
it minimizes the number of needed donning operations
between sessions (only motors and batteries need to be
assembled to start a session);
2)
it greatly simpliﬁes transportation of the device by allowing
the user to carry only the motor and battery modules in a
hand luggage;
3)
it
facilitates
compatibility
with
the
wheelchair
and
personal vehicles.

Furthermore, given the high number of modules, we strategically
decided to make the motor units to be mountable laterally to
further facilitate donning and assembling operations. From the
usability perspective, we argue that this method is to be preferred
with respect to “in-line” mounting such as that employed in the
Indego exoskeleton. Indeed, the latter forces the user to perform a
speciﬁc donning sequence and may result awkward as it requires
additional axial space to be mounted, as shown schematically in
Figure 3E. Instead, our approach facilitates donning and it allows
the user to choose the mounting sequence that can best adapt to
the speciﬁc context, Figures 3A–D. This is another step toward
usability, which further diﬀerentiates TWIN with respect to the
Indego exoskeleton.
From the production cost perspective, the extremization of
modularity directly implies saving because the “tailored” parts,
i.e., braces and links, which need to be produced in various
sizes, are physically separated from the high cost components,
i.e., batteries and motors. This facilitates economy of scale in
the production of the costly modules and is therefore agreeable
with Requirement #4. On the other hand, requirements #3 and #5
were not directly related to the physical layout of the exoskeleton,
and were instead implemented through appropriate control, and
electrical dimensioning, respectively.
Finally, the two requirements emerged in the formative phase,
i.e., #6 and #7 on comfort and safety, have been be considered in
all aspects of the design, ranging from e.g., the development of
the braces to the implementation of the gait patterns as explained
in the following sections.

System Overview and Architecture
Based on the requirements deﬁned in Table 2, the anthropometry
of the European population, direct comparison with other
existing exoskeletons, and engineering constraints, TWIN’s
speciﬁcations were broken down and set accordingly with

TABLE 3 | User-driven speciﬁcations of the TWIN exoskeleton.

Type
Value

Target walking speed
1.5 km/h

Max patient’s weight
110 kg

Target weight
20 kg

Battery autonomy (continuous usage)
3 h

Min-max sizes
5th to 95th percentile

the parameters in Table 3. The target walking speed was not
prioritized accordingly with the results shown in Figure 2. Its
target weight has been set to be realistically achieved using oﬀthe
shelf mechatronic components. In fact, as the full weight of lower
limb exoskeletons for SCI might result rather high for enabling
the user to perform the operations required in autonomous use,
we decided that the structure of TWIN should have been “broken
down” into a number of modules, each featuring much smaller
mass than that of the full device. Furthermore, the weight of
the exoskeleton is supported by the structure of the device itself
through the soles. Therefore, the user won’t bear the weight
of the exoskeleton during use. We hence focused on providing
an answer to weight issues highlighted by requirement #1 by
extremizing the modularity of the device, so as to allow the
user to handle small and light modules that could easily be
managed individually.
The four actuation modules can be easily donned on and oﬀ
by means of lateral quick release connectors placed on both ends
of each actuation module, which implement the key concepts
explained in the previous section to facilitate the implementation
of requirements #1 and #2. The novel quick release system has
been custom designed and is a crucial component as it opens
up to new use-case scenarios in the ﬁeld of personal use of
lower limb exoskeletons. Still, the design of this subsystem is a
major technical challenge that implies critical electromechanical
design which must ensure the transmission of both the structural
mechanical load and function of electrical connector. Indeed,
this component is subject to high values of stress when the
exoskeleton is in use, which need to be borne by the mechanical
structure, and at the same time it needs to provide continuity
in delivering voltage supply and safely stream data throughout
the whole structure. Regarding the control of gait parameters,
they can be set using a mobile device-based GUI, whereas each
step is triggered by means of an Inertial Measurement Unit
(IMU)—based system. The actuation guarantees a maximum
walking speed of 1.5 km/h on patients weighing up to 110 kg.
Structural parts (pelvis, femur, tibia) and braces of diﬀerent
sizes are provided to adapt the device to the anatomy of the
patient. The battery pack is located at the back of the device and
guarantees up to 3 h of continuous operation. The full device
weighs 23 kg and is shown in Figure 4.
Finally, a custom motherboard located in the battery pack
area behind the back of the user is employed as central control
unit (CCU) to coordinate the actuation units and provide
measurements and diagnostics. Particularly, a Xilinx XC7020

7

A
B

FIGURE 4 | (A) TWIN’s modular structure and lateral mounting of the modules,
(B) The TWIN lower limb exoskeleton in walking mode worn by a subject. The
person wearing the exoskeleton gave permission for the use of her image.

Zync-7000 series system on chip (SOC) executes the high-
level control.
Regarding the autonomy of the battery, this speciﬁcation has
been set to be suﬃciently high, allowing to perform 1–2 walking
session with some degree of reserve. Finally, the exoskeleton
can be worn and support patients’ weight so as to cover the
vast majority of the European population, in the range 5th-
95th percentile.

Quick Release System
The challenge was to develop a mechanism system with
lateral release which could bear the complex, multi axial,
force-torque load imposed on the structure, at the same
time guaranteeing patient safety, high structural stiﬀness to
comply with requirement #3, power supply and data streaming
continuity. Despite the fact that “in-line” coupling layout (e.g.,
Indego style) might seem preferrable because it copes well with
both axial load and bending moments, this choice has again
been discarded to prioritize device usability and ease of donning
(requirement #2) through lateral mounting. The lateral quick
release system was speciﬁcally designed to require little manual
eﬀort for the patient during use, at the same time ensuring high
mechanical and electrical safety, following the IEC 60601 medical
electrical devices safety standard (IEC, 2020).

Mechanics
The mechanism is shown in Figures 5A,B: the male component
is composed of a large pin that features three further small
radial pins equally spaced by a 120◦angle, whereas the female

counterpart is made by a hollow cylindrical shaped part that
was machined to present three helical-shaped grooves. When
the male part enters its counterpart, the three radial pins get
engaged into the three corresponding grooves machined on the
female component by means of manual application of torque on
the handle in the clockwise direction. Given the helical shape of
the grooves in the female part, when the user applies torque in
the clockwise direction, the male part of this system, which is
located to each extremity of any of the motor modules, slides
along its axis until the mechanical end-stop is reached, when the
pin reaches the end of the groove machined on the female part,
Figure 5B. The groove proﬁle, in its ﬁnal part, transitions from
helical to straight, to ensure the stability of the male part when
engaged within the female, Figure 5B. Furthermore, three spring
plungers have been radially arranged on the female component.
These get engaged with three corresponding holes machined
on the main pin of the male component when the handle
reaches its end stop, with the dual function of providing acoustic
feedback to the user on the successful locking of the system
and to additionally ensure mechanical locking safety, Figure 5.
Indeed, when the plungers are engaged, they lock the male
part in its end stop position to avoid accidental disengagement.
Hence, to unlock this part, it is necessary to pass a certain
torque threshold value which can be regulated by appropriate
preload of the plungers’ springs which was set to 7 Nm. Please
note that, although the torques applied to the structure during
exoskeleton use are signiﬁcantly higher than the required level to
unlock the quick disconnect system, the shape coupling proﬁles
of this component, Figure 5, decouple the structural loading
from the torque loading of the handle. As a result, the male
and female components are stressed in traction/compression
mode. The main male pin and its counterpart are both
machined using 41CrAlMo7 hardened steel, while additional
gas nitriding treatment has been performed on the surfaces.
This allows to increase Vickers hardness to a value of HV1150,
which guarantees very high wear-resistance performances and
reduced friction. FEM simulation was also performed on the
main components of this critical system to validate their
design. The load scenario used in this simulation replicated
that measured by a motorized dummy exoskeleton which was
equipped with force/torque sensors (please refer to section
Structure and Actuation Unit for more details on this device).
To obtain this data, a healthy subject simulating leg impairment
wore the exoskeleton while position controlled to perform
the walking patterns described in our previous work (Vassallo
et al., 2020). The worst-case load scenario is summarized in
Table 4, where the Y axis represents longitudinal axis of the
lower limb, the Z axis is the medio-lateral axis and the X axis
completes the triad.
Results from this simulation conﬁrm that the critical
components, i.e., the main male pin and its counterpart, are
able to withstand the load, reaching a peak stress of 441 MPa,
which allows validation of the design, taking into account a safety
factor of about 2. The male quick disconnect halves are placed
on both ends of the actuation modules, whereas their receptacles
are placed at the ends of the structural parts described in section
Structure and Actuation Unit.

8

A

C

B

Handle

Male connector frame

Radial pins
Plunger holes
Male component 
(electrical)

Shape coupling

Female connector frame

Spring plungers

Female component
(electrical)

Shape coupling

X

Y

Floating area

Floating shape coupling

Floating
connector

Air gap

Board frame

2 mm

2 mm

FIGURE 5 | The quick release electromechanical connector. (A) General assembly and main components of the mechanism. (B) Detail of the female component. (C)
The ﬂoating electrical connector board. The ﬂoating connector and its frame (Floating shape coupling) are ﬁxed to the board. An air gap is left between the board’s
ﬁxation holes to implement a ﬂoating area of 2 mm in both the vertical and horizontal directions.

Electrical Connections
Given that requirement #2 expressed the need of performing
quick donning and setup, we decided to develop an embedded
quick release that could incorporate electrical connections
(voltage supply and CAN communication) as well, so as to
allow to achieve both mechanical and electrical connection
in one simple step. This solution additionally favors usability
by eliminating any external cabling which could possibly
result in entanglements with external objects during use.
From the technological perspective, though, this constitutes a
further challenge. Indeed, ensuring stable electrical continuity
over a connector that is subject to considerable mechanical
stress is particularly challenging, especially in this case where
compactness is paramount and where the applied load is a
combination of multi-axial forces and torques. To solve this
issue, we designed a system which mechanically decouples the
electrical connection from the structural parts of the connector.
Indeed, the female electrical connector was mounted on a
“ﬂoating board,” which is able to freely move on its plane up to
2 mm on both horizontal and vertical directions. This range of
movement is so small that it does not pose robustness problems
if all the cable routing and soldering of the terminations are
made appropriately. This was achieved by means of a speciﬁc
loose ﬁt between the ﬂoating board and the structural frame,
Figure 5C. This prevents unwanted stress to be generated by
deformation of the mechanical structure when under stress.
The centring between male and female electrical connectors is
guaranteed by the custom-made connector frames which allowed
shape coupling as shown in Figure 5. The electromechanical

TABLE 4 | Load conﬁguration used for the FEM simulation.

Load
X
Y
Z
Total

Force (N)
250
−300
290
486

Torque (Nm)
56
19
−45
74

design choices adopted in the development of the quick release
system, have permitted to obtain the highest safety of this
critical component, which additionally allowed TWIN to obtain
compliance to IEC 60601 standards.

Actuator Sizing
The dimensioning of the actuators and battery unit of the
TWIN exoskeleton was based on the speciﬁcations set in Table 3.
Given that the walking pattern of exoskeletons for this type
of application is signiﬁcantly diﬀerent with respect to healthy
subjects’ physiological gait velocity/torque proﬁles, we decided
not to use human biomechanical gait data as reference values
for the design as they would result unrealistic and require
signiﬁcantly higher mechanical power than needed. Indeed,
motion patterns replicated by exoskeletons are rather diﬀerent
compared to those of healthy subjects. To obtain more realistic
data, we therefore developed and used a custom-made “dummy”
motorized lower limb exoskeleton that was fully sensorized for
the purpose of recording the load applied to the exoskeleton
actuators and structure during position-controlled walking,
standing and sitting and use them for appropriate actuators

9

-50

0

50

34
36
38
40
42
-50

0

50

Torque 
[Nm]
Position
[deg]

Hip meas
Hip ref
Knee meas
Knee ref

Hip meas
Knee meas

-50
0
50

-100

0

100

-50
0
50

-100

0

100

Angular velocity [rpm]

Torque 
[Nm]

Hip
Knee 
HD nominal
Motorpeak
HD peak
Motornominal
A
C

B

FIGURE 6 | Torque-velocity characteristic of the actuator modules of the hip and the knee joints, transposed for a 110 kg patient weight. (A) Trajectory references and
tracked positions. (B) Measured torques. (C) Torque/speed plots and mechatronic limits of the actuation system.

dimensioning. A classical robotic trajectory was set as reference
for the position-controlled system, Figure 6A (T1 as explained
in Vassallo et al., 2020), and a healthy male subject, 60 kg,
wore the exoskeleton performing a few steps simulating full
leg impairment.
The recorded joint-space velocity-torque proﬁles of the knee
and the hip, Figures 6B,C, were then scaled up to respect
the patient’s weight and walking speed specs set in Table 3,
so as to properly size the motor-gearbox modules accordingly
to worst-case conditions. This data was later processed by
a dynamic model of the actuator module to determine an
appropriate combination of motor and gearbox, which could
respect the required velocity, torque and power values. A torque-
velocity graph that reports the results of these simulations is
shown in Figure 6C. All the results in Figure 6 show that
an appropriate combination to be used for the actuation of
the hip and knee is composed of the brushless motor Maxon
EC90 and the Harmonic Drive CSD-25-100-2A-GR-BB 100:1
gearbox. The motors employed for the knee and hip had
diﬀerent nominal voltages, 24 and 36 V, respectively, to meet
the diﬀerent torque/speed requirements of these two joints.
Each motor is controlled by a custom-made board which
features a PWM controlled three phase Mosfet bridge inverter,
which compensates the variable input voltage with the motor
control algorithm.

Battery Units and Electronic Architecture
Regarding the battery unit, referring to requirement #5 and
the speciﬁed target value set in Table 3, we assumed an
exoskeleton’s battery life of 3 h. Assuming the device operating
in typical conditions, i.e., walking at the set target speed as
deﬁned in Table 3 performed by an average european weight
wearer (70.8 kg, Walpole et al., 2012), we computed the average
power consumption required by the TWIN Exoskeleton to
compute the task, which was about 59 W. Hence, it results that
battery pack charge should be at least 177 Wh. This value,
combined to a nominal voltage that is compatible with the
chosen motors and a peak power output that can deal with
the worst case operative conditions (subject weighing 110 kg
walking at 1.5 km/h), deﬁned the main target values for the

battery unit. We therefore designed a battery unit made by
a combination of two Accutronics CMX820P Li-ion battery
packs, which can deliver a total energy of 189.4 Wh and a
peak power output of 482 W, with a nominal voltage of 28.8 V
and maximum current peak of 15 A, which are compatible
with our requirements. The batteries are mounted in a docking
system that allows to change batteries when needed to simplify
cabling and ease of replacement. Each pack is monitored
by an internal BMS which to the motherboard via SMBus.
The BMS includes safety, diagnostics, and communication
functionalities. The two battery packs are paralleled by an or-
ing ideal diode circuitry, and the current delivered to each leg
is measured via shunt current monitors.” Furthermore, these
battery units are IEC62133 certiﬁed and can therefore assure
safety of the TWIN exoskeleton accordingly with the IEC60601-
1 norms.
The electronics architecture of the TWIN exoskeleton is
presented in the Supplementary Figure 1. The main component
of this system is the custom main motherboard (named SMEX
in the diagram) which is based on a Xilinx Zynq-7000 SOC
running a Linux OS. The SOC interfaces to a variety of sensors;
including two independent IMUs, doubled for redundancy and
cross checking, a battery voltage sensor and two separate leg
current sensors, used for monitoring, logging, and diagnostic
purposes. The custom SMEX motherboard also implements
several communication peripherals, including Ethernet, Wi-Fi,
and Bluetooth for diagnostics and interface to host devices (PC or
tablet), two separate CAN Bus lines (one for each leg) for internal
communication to the motor boards, and one SMBus line for the
communication to the battery packs. The SMEX motherboard
exchanges CAN bus packets with the motor control boards.
Particularly, the SMEX sends to the motor control boards the
reference set-points, according to the selected control strategy,
while the motor control boards sends messages back regarding
joint absolute position, status, and motor current readings. Each
active joint features a custom motor control board, including
a PWM controlled three phase Mosfet bridge inverter, to drive
BLDC or PMSM motors from 18 to 60 VDC, up to 35 A motor
current. The motor current is monitored via low-side shunt
current monitors.

10

RF5

RT-L

Batteries
Backpack
CCU

RT-M
RT-S
LT-S
LT-M
LT-L

LF5
LF4 LF3 LF2 LF1
LHU

LKU

RF4
RF3
RF2
RF1
RHU

RKU

W-S

W-M

W-L
Motor

Harmonic Drive

Quick Disconnect
distal link

Quick Disconnect
proximal link

A

B

FIGURE 7 | (A) The main structural parts of TWIN. From the top, batteries, and backpack, Central Control Unit (CCU); W-S, W-M, and W-L are three waists sizes
(small, medium, large); RHU/LHU are right and left hip motor unit; RF1,…, RF5 and LF1,…, LF5 are right and left femur sizes; RKU/LKU are right and left knee motor
unit; RT-S, RT-M, RT-L, LT-S, LT-M, LT-L are right and left tibia sizes; AFOs are located inside the shoes, ranging from 38 to 46 EU shoe size. (B) The actuation module
used for actuating the exoskeleton. A Maxon EC90 ﬂat motor is coupled to a 100:1 CSD Harmonic Drive gear. Two quick disconnect systems are located at both
proximal and distal link extremities.

Regarding the available sensing, each joint contains a fast-shaft
quadrature encoder (6,400 pulses per revolution), used for
motion control, three phase hall-sensors used for commutation,
and a custom slow shaft absolute potentiometer, that is used
for calibration purposes and redundancy. The reference joint
trajectories are treated as setpoints that are tracked by using a
PI controller.

Structure and Actuation Unit
The structure of the TWIN exoskeleton is largely made by welded
Al7075 T6 aluminum alloy proﬁles. This choice was made to
keep the overall structural weight low as well as to minimize
costs as outlined by requirement #4. Four main structural parts
can be identiﬁed. These are: (1) waist; (2) femur; (3) tibia; (4)
foot, Figure 7A. The waist was designed so as to replicate a “C-
shape” proﬁle which accommodates the proportions outlined in
Dreyfuss (1993). Three sizes of waist have been designed to cover
the set anthropometry requirements (Dreyfuss, 1993). This part
is also responsible for housing the battery pack and CCU, that
are located at the back of the device in separate modules that
can be disconnected separately thanks to a custom-made dock
that is rigidly ﬁxed to the waist module. This allows ease of
battery replacement. The femur modules are located between
the hip and the knee motors and are composed of a straight
link that employs a rectangular shaped Al7075 T6 aluminum
alloy proﬁle which ends on both sides with receptacles of the

quick disconnect system. A total of six sizes of this link have
been manufactured to accommodate the anatomical variation
among the population with suﬃcient precision. Indeed, given
that the gap between one size and the next is 2 cm, a maximum
misalignment of 1 cm can manifest between the motor and the
physiological joint1.
The tibia comes in one size that is able to ﬁt the diﬀerent
patient lengths thanks to a regulation system that was designed
for the purpose. The upper end mounts a quick disconnect
receptacle that is employed to connect this segment to the knee
motor module. The lower end of this segment connects to
the foot.
The foot comprises a passive elastic ankle joint, which
is then connected on its lower end to a custom carbon
ﬁber-based footsole. Passive elasticity is implemented using a
simple mechanism made of linear compression springs placed
antagonistically which can be preloaded by means of two socket
screws. These screws can also be employed to set the ankle
joint’s equilibrium point, as well as its stroke, to accommodate
its conﬁguration to each patient’s need, Figure 7A. The ankle
mechanism design was inspired by that implemented in the
ReWalk exoskeleton.

1This of course holds true for measurements of the user limb lengths that are
performed correctly by the clinician/physiotherapist.

11

The structure has been dimensioned using the force/torque
data recorded in the dummy exoskeleton in the experiments
explained in section Actuator Sizing, employing a safety factor
of 2.5. Finally, these calculations have been validated by means of
FEM simulations.
Regarding the actuation unit, the Maxon EC90—Harmonic
Drive
CSD-25-100-2A-GR-BB
100:1
gearbox
assembly
is
implemented as shown in Figure 7B. The proximal link
is connected to the motor’s frame whereas the distal link
is connected to the Harmonic drive’s output shaft.

Braces
The interface between the patient and the machine stands
as a critical aspect of exoskeleton development. Hence, they
should converge on a variety of aspects such as: ergonomics,
comfort, safety, anthropometry, and aesthetics while maintaining
biomechanical and functional requirements. Although comfort
did not emerge directly from the initial user need analysis
phase, we implicitly took this aspect as priority during the
formative phase as highlighted in section Formative Phase:
Iterative Improvements of the Device where we discuss about
the role of their contribution within the formative assessment of
usability. Indeed, the delicate skin of SCI patients can be easily
damaged by the generation of unwanted forces or pressures on
the contact points. This holds true also if the user wears the braces
over their own clothes as the avoidance of these unwanted eﬀects
depends on a combination of good structural design (mostly to
avoid pressure concentrations in the orthogonal direction) as well
as on a good choice of materials to avoid chaﬁng eﬀects of the
brace or cloth against the user’s skin. Hence, the braces must
guarantee a safe and comfortable interfacing with the wearer
(Requirements #6 and #7, Table 2) so as to in turn accommodate
safe and stable walk as outlined by requirement #3. TWIN is
currently equipped with a pair of thigh and shank braces for each
leg and a waist brace as the uppermost connection to the patient,
for a total of ﬁve human-machine interfaces Figure 8.
All braces employ Velcro R⃝-based straps to achieve correct
tightening during donning procedure. The inner region in
contact with the patient is made of spandex material, which
ensures biocompatibility and reduces shear forces on patient skin,
main causes of skin lesions. The outer region is made using
denim for durability. The waist brace is composed of a central
portion which is directly connected to the structure by means
of bolts and two lateral bands wrapped around the patient and
can be tightened on the front. This brace additionally hosts a
pair of stiﬀwings that are hinged on the waist structure and
can rotate on the transverse plane: this additional DOF helps to
accommodate lateral weight-shifting on the support leg during
gait, while providing maximum patient-exoskeleton connection
of tilting movements in the sagittal plane, achieving higher
controllability of the machine’s step trigger (please see section
Control System). Finally, this brace houses a coccyx support
connected to the waist structure, which avoids excessive lumbar
hyper-lordotic postures. A semirigid shell, which can tilt in the
transversal and sagittal plane, is placed on top of the coccyx
support inside the brace to allow rotations of the sacrococcygeal
region to avoid generation of shear stress on the patient’s skin

Thigh Brace

Shank Brace

Waist Brace

FIGURE 8 | The brace modules—The waist (top), femur (middle), and tibial
(bottom) braces and their DOFs.

(Figure 8—top right). The frontal portion of the brace acts as a
thoracic stabilizer preventing the patient from collapsing, which
is critical for SCI patients with higher level of injury. Each
thigh can partially rotate (see Figure 8—middle right) around
the femur, which ease donning/doﬃng procedures. The shank
brace is composed of a hinged semirigid plate which hosts the
patient tibia and can tilt in the sagittal plane. The medio-lateral
position of the brace can be adjusted to account for diﬀerent
postures or deformities in the knee joint by means of a leadscrew
mechanism (see Figure 8—bottom right). This mechanism is
inspired by that employed in the ReWalk exoskeleton shank
brace design.

CONTROL SYSTEM

As the patients targeted in this work are complete SCI, we
opted for a position control-based scheme to provide full support
to the patients during use. The identiﬁcation of predeﬁned
gait trajectories to be employed on lower limb exoskeletons is
typically obtained by ﬁtting mathematical curves to temporal
sequences of desired joint angles that are often inspired by
biological gait patterns. In contrast to this, in Vassallo et al.
(2020) we proposed predeﬁned gait trajectories for the TWIN
lower-limb exoskeleton, generated in Cartesian space, by using
a basis function interpolation method which was designed so as
to maximize stable walk as outlined by requirement #3. Such
approach allows to guarantee the length and clearance of each
step, despite the variation of tibia and femur lengths. Thanks
to this, the trajectories are fully parametrizable to better ﬁt user
needs. In any of the gait patterns, steps are triggered by reaching
a set of two torso inclination thresholds. Torso inclination

12

angles were measured by the IMU sensor located in backpack of
the device.

Computing the Reference Trajectory
The kinematic model of the TWIN exoskeleton is shown in
Figure 9A. It has been developed based on Denavit-Hartenberg
convention, considering the bilateral actuations of the knee and
hip as q1, q3 and q2, q4, respectively. Conversely, the tibia and
femur links length, and hip-COM distance, are deﬁned as lT, lF,
and lH. These lengths are ﬁxed and do not change during the
whole session with a patient. We deﬁne θT as the tilt angle of the
torso with respect to the frontal plane, β the ﬂexion angle of the
support ankle, and θF the orientation of the swing ankle. Given
the absence of sensors on the ankle joints, β cannot be measured.
Therefore, we estimate its value, that is comprised between two
values βmin and βmax, which are set according to the patient’s
need during the setup phase by using the regulation screws as
explained in Section Structure and Actuation Unit.

The Design of the Gait Pattern
The gait pattern is generated by an interpolation approach,
consisting
in
multiplying
basis
functions,
normalized
in
amplitude and over time, and depend on the desired step length
L and height H. The reference trajectories are represented
in the Cartesian space by the following Equations: (1)
xF (t) = x0
F + L fx (t), (2) zF (t) = z0
F + H fz (t), (3) x0
T + L gx (t),
where (xF, zF) represent the swing foot coordinates, and xT
the torso ones. x0
F, z0
F, x0
T represent the foot coordinates at the
beginning of the step. The basis functions fx, fz deﬁne the walking
shape while gx is a 6th order polynomial. These functions are
normalized and assume a value which can range from 0 to 1. A
more detailed description of the deﬁnition of the basis function
is given in Vassallo et al. (2020). Given the reference trajectory
in the Cartesian space xF, zF, xT, we compute the joint angles
based on the following assumptions: (i) θT = β + q1 + q2 with
{β∈R, βmin ≤β ≤βﬂex}, (ii) θT(t) = 0, ∀t ∈[0, tS] where tS
is the step duration.

q1 = sin−1
 
xT −
 
lT sin (β) + lH sin(θT)


lF

!

−β
(1)

q2 = θT −q1 −β
(2)

q3 = cos−1
 
a2
x + a2
z −l2
F −l2
T
2lFlT

!

(3)

q4 = tan−1
 zF −zT

xF −xT


−tan−1

lT sin(q3)
lF + lT cos(q3)


(4)

A representation of the gait pattern is shown in Figures 9B,D.
Particularly, Figure 9B shows the basis functions, that are
employed to compute the joint angle trajectories shown
in Figure 9C. Figure 9D shows the corresponding cartesian
representation of the foot trajectory on the sagittal plane.
An overview of the described control system is shown in
Figure 9E: the basis function fx, fz, the desired step length L,
the clearance H, and the step duration tS are inputted to the
high-level control, which in turn extrapolates time-continuous
reference trajectories in the Cartesian space. Then, the inverse

kinematics equations of the system allow to compute the related
joint angles q1(t), q2(t), q3(t), q4 (t) based on the speciﬁc
exoskeleton dimensions lH, lF, lT. Finally, the reference joint
positions are sent to the four motors via the CAN-bus. At the
motor-board level, the local low-level control transforms these
inputs into a PWM’s duty-cycle value, which is returned by the
PI controller, to drive the motor.
The development of the gait pattern was made to comply
the following aspects: (1) stability and safety, which was priority
according to requirement #3 and requirement #7, (2) similarity
with those employed in existing exoskeletons, (3) experience
gained in pilot trials. The resulting trajectory is characterized
by a marked clearance and an emphasized heel-strike to comply
with requirement #3. In fact, in humans, the heel-strike to toe-oﬀ
movement has an important role, widely studied in literature: the
foot arches compliance reduces metabolic energy consumption
during locomotion, help balance and, consequently, improve
stability (Stearne et al., 2016). Most importantly, this approach
is also beneﬁcial to the safety of the patient because it is meant
to avoid the potential hazard caused by accidental stumbling
(requirements #3 and #7).

Trigger
The trigger scheme’s function is to initiate steps based on the
intention of the user by elaborating signals coming from the IMU
sensor located in the CCU compartment. The pitch P and roll R
angles are deﬁned as the tilt of the waist unit with respect to the
frontal and sagittal planes, respectively. When these angles both
pass the threshold values Pt and Rt_Left, or Rt_Right, the step trigger
is activated. These parameters can be set according to patient
needs. This functionality can be observed in the plots shown in
Figure 10B.

MECHATRONICS SYSTEM EVALUATION

The validation of the device’s mechatronics as well as a
preliminary evaluation of the ergonomics and the feasibility of
the designed gait trajectories have been carried out by testing the
device on healthy subjects and on one SCI subject, as discussed in
section Formative Phase: Iterative Improvements of the Device as
part of a formative assessment of usability which focused, in this
case, on the eﬃcacy and the eﬃciency of the advanced prototype
of TWIN which is the result of the ﬁrst 36 months of development
and formative phase. The subjects were asked to perform straight
walk from a starting to a ﬁnal point located 10 m away at their
preferred speed. Figure 10A reports a sequence of images of the
patient, while the plots of IMU data, position, torque, and of
an extract of two steps are reported in Figure 10B. This task
was freely repeated by the subject in each session—after 30 min
the trials were stopped in order to monitor the conditions of
the participant (especially on potentially sore areas—coccyx and
tibia). The joints’ torque, speed, as well as the IMU data were
recorded during trials with the patient and were used to assess
and validate the mechatronic design. Figure 10B shows the trend
of lateral and frontal inclination of the exoskeleton, as well as the
angular positions and torques of the joints, while the step trigger
times are denoted by the vertical dotted lines.

13

A
B
C
D

E

FIGURE 9 | (A) The kinematic model of TWIN. (B) The basis functions fx and fz are represented by the continuous and dashed lines, respectively. (C) Reference joint
trajectories, in position control, during a stride. (D) Cartesian trajectory of the swing foot during a step. In (C) and (D) plots, the step is ∼0.8 m long with a peak height
of ∼0.20 m. (E) Conceptual block scheme showing the control architecture of the TWIN lower-exoskeleton.

DISCUSSION

Thorough eﬀort was dedicated during the whole development
phase to satisfy the user-centered requirements set in the
initial ﬁeld research reported in Table 2 (system portability,
donning and setting autonomy, standing/walking stability, cost
eﬀectiveness, long battery life) and in the formative process
(comfort, safety). These requirements involved signiﬁcant
implications to the mechatronics of the device according to a
strict adoption of quality management system for medical devices
(i.e., ISO 13485:2016), and in function of its usability, as deﬁned
by IEC 62366-1:2015. Consequently, the safety of the device
(Requirement #7) was tested according to the IEC 60601 safety
standards, while other usability-related aspects, like comfort,
were assessed by means of a periodical analysis of feedback from
both expert clinicians and users. Furthermore, a preliminary
clinical evaluation was conducted on one SCI subject for a ﬁrst
ﬁeld test of the whole system, while TWIN’s distinctive features
with respect to both commercial and research exoskeletons have
been considered in the evaluation. These investigations enriched
the formative assessment itself by exploiting user research to
iteratively improve the diﬀerent prototype versions of the TWIN

system as required by the standards of IEC for the usability
engineering of medical devices.
Regarding comfort, i.e., Requirement #6, the SCI user verbally
expressed high appreciation of our bracing system compared to
the exoskeleton he daily uses at home, i.e., ReWalk. The user also
did not report any skin injuries in the points of contact with the
exoskeleton and no signs of lesion in the critically stressed areas
(tibial tuberosity and sacrococcygeal). Similar positive feedback
was also given by clinicians, which conﬁrmed its suitability to
operate on the delicate skin of SCI subjects. Of course, this
cannot be considered as deﬁnitive validation but is in fact taken
as an initial positive result to feed further iterations of the
formative assessment.
Another signiﬁcant outcome of the clinical test on the SCI
subject is that TWIN’s trajectory patterns facilitate the stability of
the user due to its emphasized heel strike, as explained in detail
in our previous work (Vassallo et al., 2020) and this is agreeable
with respect to usability too.
Finally, from the mechatronic perspective, plots from the
clinical trial on the SCI patient (Figure 10) demonstrate that
the system can track the trajectory imposed by the CCU for
straight walking at 0.35 m/s. At the same time, the delivered

14

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
-10

5

20

IMU data
[deg]

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
-50
0
50

Joint  angles
[deg]

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Time [s]

-40

0

40

Joint  torque
[Nm]

R
Rt_Left
Rt_Right

P
Pt

LHC
LHT
LKC
LKT
RHC
RHT
RKC
RKT

RK

A

B

FIGURE 10 | (A) Walking sequence of the SCI subject performing straight walk in controlled environment. (B) (Top) Roll and pitch angles as recorded from the IMU,
and corresponding thresholds, (Middle) reference and recorded angular joint positions, (Bottom) torques delivered by the joints. The dotted vertical lines denote the
step trigger. A pause of 0.15 s between the trigger detection and the actuation of the motors was intently set to signal the patient a step was about to be performed.

torques are below the nominal torque of the Harmonic drive and
well below the peak torque value of 110 Nm. Furthermore, the
values of delivered current are within the continuous operation
limits of the motors and do not generate heat during functioning,
meaning that the actuators operate in their nominal range. This
safe operating condition, which is well-below the mechatronic
operational limits of the exoskeleton, occurs because the device
was operating under the following conditions: (1) the user was
an expert exoskeleton user and knew how to use the machine
with conﬁdence, (2) the walking speed was about one third of
the maximum allowable speed, (3) the task was performed by a
user weighing 63% of the maximum allowable weight. Although
further trials will be needed to validate this design, e.g., on
patients with higher weight, and at higher walking speed, the
obtained results are a clear indication that the mechatronic design
is reasonably sized.
Furthermore, comparing TWIN with the state of the art,
and focusing speciﬁcally on the requirements initially outlined
in Table 2, we can state that Indego is the exoskeleton which
best managed to address Requirements #1 and #2 (Lightweight
and autonomous portability, Quick and autonomous donning,
respectively), among existing commercial and research devices.
In order to improve these characteristics, TWIN introduced
a novel design primarily addressed to maximize autonomous
use by developing a structure characterized by a higher
number of modules with respect to the Indego exoskeleton,
coupled with an unconventional lateral mounting solution.
These features can greatly facilitate donning and allow the
user to mount the modules according to the sequence that

can best adapt to the context. In addition, although we
slightly exceeded the target weight (TWIN weighs 23 kg),
high modularity allows users to keep the lightest (9.8 kg,
i.e., 43% of the total weight) and most comfortable modules
donned on when the exoskeleton is not in use, accordingly
with the considerations made in sections Concept Layout
Design and Iterative Co-Creation Process. We hence argue
that this solution considerably simpliﬁes autonomy of use
and transportation, with the goal of facilitating independent
domestic usage that is paramount to guarantee high frequency
of use and therefore maximize the beneﬁt provided by the
exoskeleton training.
Regarding
other
requirements,
most
commercial
exoskeletons, such as the Ekso, ReWalk, Indego, to name a
few, present battery life that is lower than the target imposed by
Requirement #5. Hence, TWIN also oﬀers advantages in terms
of battery life, allowing the user to make longer exoskeleton
sessions, hence facilitating intensive training.
Regarding Requirement #3, all the cited exoskeletons, to the
best of our knowledge, can guarantee stability when standing,
whereas a dedicated comparative study would be needed to draft
conclusions on walking stability. Nevertheless, we argue that,
compared to the “traditional” patterns adopted by e.g., ReWalk or
TWIICE, the trajectory designed for TWIN may bring additional
beneﬁts related to stability because of its emphasized heel-strike
which also facilitates stumble-free walking patterns (Vassallo
et al., 2020).
Furthermore, considering all existing exoskeletons, there
is still room for improvement on requirement #4, i.e., cost

15

eﬀectiveness. Indeed, although exoskeleton companies are
striving to keep low costs, the current market price of these
devices make them hardly aﬀordable to the average user.
Regarding TWIN, the strategic choice to adopt standard and low-
cost components in the device design will allow to set a highly
competitive target price in TWIN, which will be close to that of
the most inexpensive commercial lower limb exoskeletons.
To provide a general overview of the diﬀerences of
TWIN’s design concept and related priorities we can state
that other designs might endow a stable standing/walking, cost
eﬀectiveness, long battery life, high comfort, high safety, (i.e.,
req. #3–7). However, most of these priorities are not jointly
considered in a “holistic” way and, in most cases, are not
meant to directly tackle autonomous portability and, related to
this, quick and autonomous donning and setup (req. #1, 2).
An exception can be made for the Indego exoskeleton which
adopted a similar modular design strategy to that of TWIN,
as explained in section Concept Layout Design and Iterative
Co-Creation Process.
Finally, we argue that the employed user-centered approach
very much ﬁts the development of healthcare robots such
as exoskeletons. Indeed, we experienced great eﬀectiveness
to plan and continuously adapt design goals and activities
toward the satisfaction of user needs. In addition to this,
the employed approach has demonstrated to provide a vast
number of insights that drove technological as well as
design choices.

CONCLUSIONS

This work presented the design of TWIN, a novel lower
limb exoskeleton for personal use of SCI subjects, and the
user-centered design approach adopted for its development.
This device is the result of a joint eﬀort coming from
a tight cooperation between engineers, industrial designers,
physical therapists, physiatrists, and SCI patients, which jointly
cooperated in an iterative development process, which started
with the deﬁnition of a set of ﬁve user-centered design principles,
that were subsequently integrated by two other requirements
that emerged during the formative processes. An initial concept
layout analysis was presented to show how this device was
conceived to maximize usability. The consequent advantages
and novelty of the proposed solution, which is mainly based
on high modularity and lateral mounting, were highlighted,
especially considering the state of the art. A series of iterative
tests were implemented as part of the formative evaluation
of TWIN, following the requirements established worldwide
by IEC 62366-1:2015 for the usability engineering of medical
devices. Moreover, preliminary results showed that the device
mechatronics is capable of delivering the torque/speed proﬁles
required for a typical exoskeleton session. Overall, the device
was assessed positively by the SCI subject and expert clinicians,
from both the comfort/ergonomics perspective and feasibility of
the walking pattern. From this initial assessment and discussions
with users and experts in the ﬁeld, we claim that the successful
design of personal aids must rely on detailed analyses of the needs

and the lifestyle of users. Indeed, user-centered design techniques
require the implementation of careful analyses of users’ need
before the design of any prototype. Similarly, the formative
assessment needs to be executed since the very beginning and
throughout the whole development process. We believe this can
only be achieved by means of a rigorous application of user-
centered design and co-development approaches, as presented in
this work.
Future work on TWIN will include the summative assessment
of the device and its clinical evaluation on a larger subject
population. In this future study, speciﬁc focus will be devoted to
the quantitative evaluation of usability.