Protocol

Effectiveness of an Integrated Engagement Support System to
Facilitate Patient Use of Digital Diabetes Prevention Programs:
Protocol for a Randomized Controlled Trial

Katharine Lawrence1, MD, MPH; Danissa V Rodriguez1, PhD; Dawn M Feldthouse2, MSN, RN-BC; Donna Shelley3,
MD, MPH; Jonathan L Yu1, BS; Hayley M Belli4, PhD; Javier Gonzalez1, BS; Sumaiya Tasneem1, MPH; Jerlisa
Fontaine1, BS; Lisa L Groom5, MSN, RN; Son Luu1, MPS; Yinxiang Wu4, MA; Kathleen M McTigue6, MD, MS,
MPH; Bonny Rockette-Wagner7, PhD; Devin M Mann1, MD, MS

1Healthcare Innovation Bridging Research, Informatics, and Design Lab, Department of Population Health, NYU Langone Health, New York, NY,
United States
2Clinical Systems & Clinical Transformation, Medical Center Information Technology Clinical Informatics Department, NYU Langone Health, New
York, NY, United States
3Department of Population Health, NYU Langone Health, New York, NY, United States
4Division of Biostatistics, Department of Population Health, NYU Langone Health, New York, NY, United States
5NYU Rory Meyers College of Nursing, New York, NY, United States
6Division of General Internal Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United States
7Department of Epidemiology, Graduate School of Public Health, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United States

Katharine Lawrence, MD, MPH
Healthcare Innovation Bridging Research, Informatics, and Design Lab
Department of Population Health
NYU Langone Health
227 E 30th St
New York, NY, 10016
United States
Phone: 1 646 929 7870

Methods

The Integrated Framework for the Development of
Digital Health Behavior Change Interventions

The dDPP engagement intervention uses an integrated
framework that combines established theoretical models for
behavior change with effective digital health implementation
strategies (Figure 1). This combination leverages both theoretical
and pragmatic approaches to the development, implementation,
and evaluation of digital behavior change tools and provides a
structure for both outcomes and process measures.

This integrated framework adapts the Capability, Opportunity,
and Motivation Model of Behavior Change (COM-B); the
Technology Acceptance Model (TAM); and the Johnson and
Johnson (J&J) approach to engagement in digital behavior
change interventions. COM-B is a comprehensive model
developed by Michie et al [22] who identify 3 components of
behavior (capability, opportunity, and motivation) that may be
activated and/or suppressed to elicit targeted actions and effect
change. This model is widely used in behavior change health
research and has been proven effective for designing health
interventions targeting disease prevention [23-26]. The TAM
is an information technology framework based on the Theory
of Reasoned Action that conceives of beliefs and attitudes as
determining intentions, which in turn dictate behavior. It asserts
that perceptions of usefulness and ease of use by end users will
directly influence intention to use new technology, leading in
turn to its adoption [27,28]. TAM and its subsequent versions

TAM2 and TAM3 have been widely applied to explain the
adoption of HIT [29,30]. The J&J approach to digital health
engagement derives from the belief that user engagement with
digital behavior change interventions (DBCIs) is a precursor to
improved health outcomes. Engagement with DBCI can be
divided into 2 types—Big E and Little e—with Big E describing
engagement with targeted health behavior (eg, weight loss) and
Little e representing engagement with the digital behavior
change intervention itself (eg, weight tracking) [19]. This
combined framework leverages the core relevance of older,
well-accepted models (particularly TAM, which was first
developed in the 1980s) while acknowledging the innovative
contributions of later theories that address new areas of
exploration in digital behavior change, particularly digital app
development.

In addition to our theoretical model, we use complementary
strategies of user-centered design (UCD) and Agile project

management for the design, development, and implementation
of our engagement intervention (Figure 2). UCD and the related
Design Thinking (DT) process have emerged as novel
frameworks for product development and research in health
care, particularly in the areas of health care technology and
digital health product development [31]. UCD uses repeating
cycles of ideation, prototyping, testing, and refinement to
develop digital health interventions in collaboration with end
users 
(eg, 
patients, 
providers, 
health 
administrators,
technologists, other stakeholders), with the goal of building
products that are appropriate, acceptable, and usable for those
users. The iterative nature of UCD also allows for continual
innovation, adaption, and refinement of products over time.
Agile is a process derived from software development that

involves the identification and review of key requirements (eg,
needs, preferences, expectations of users) and the continuous
generation of partial deliverables for stakeholders and end users.
Agile processes include users at every stage of product
development and allow stakeholders to be actively involved in
the development process, from inception to implementation.
Decisions and changes to a product are discussed among the
multidisciplinary team to arrive at the best solution for the study
intervention. As the intervention evolves, the computational
system will evolve to address the changes. Applying the
strategies of UCD and Agile facilitates the development of
targeted, acceptable, and adaptable digital health interventions,
thereby improving the likelihood of both effectiveness and
adoption and adherence by users.

dDPP Platform: Noom

Our study (NCT04049500) will use the commercially available
application Noom to provide patients with a dDPP platform.
Noom is a mobile health behavior change lifestyle app based
on the CDC’s DPP that allows users to log their meals, weight,
and exercise and physical activity minutes. Noom connects
users with an individual behavior change coach and support
group and provides a DPP curriculum through daily articles that
cover topics including diet, exercise, and healthy behavior
psychology. The core philosophy of Noom is to work with the
user to adopt a healthier lifestyle in a way that best fits the user’s
individual life. Preliminary studies of Noom showed high levels
of effectiveness and acceptability compared with in-person
DPPs. In overweight or obese adults with prediabetes,

participation in Noom was associated with significant weight
loss at 24 and 65 weeks, which exceeded the CDC DPP 5%
weight loss requirement [7,32]. In one study, participants
exhibited a dose-dependent response with greater mean weight
loss at 65 weeks in those who engaged more in the program
[32]. In addition, certain metrics of in-app engagement such as
weekly logged meals, weigh-ins, and group posts were shown
to predict weight loss [32]. Noom is a well-established
commercial dDPP platform with a growing market share and
considerable brand recognition and robust customer and
technical support.

Study Overview

This study will consist of 3 phases.

•
Phase 1 will combine a theory-based approach to behavior
change with UCD and Agile software/technical strategies
to
•
Identify the needs, requirements, preferences, and
constraints of users (patients, clinical providers,
ambulatory practice management and technologists,
dDPP coaches, and technical teams).
•
Co-design a patient- and provider-facing engagement
intervention (ie, mobile app, text messaging system,
EHR visualization) to support patients’use of the dDPP
and assess its usability via iterative prototyping and
user testing.

•
Phase 2 will consist of a single-arm feasibility pilot among
patients with prediabetes using the engagement intervention
tool and a validated third-party vendor dDPP platform to
assess the preliminary effectiveness of the engagement
system and further refine the intervention.
•
Phase 3 will consist of a two-arm randomized controlled
trial (RCT) to evaluate the impact of the engagement
intervention tool plus the dDPP platform versus the dDPP
platform alone on health outcomes (weight, BMI, and A1c)
and engagement in the dDPP.

Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria for Patients and
Providers

Eligible patients will have been diagnosed with prediabetes (A1c
level of 5.7-6.4 in the last year) or have risk factors for diabetes
(obesity and family history). In addition, they must have access
to smartphones or internet-connected tablets and be able to read
and write English. We will exclude patients who have ever been
diagnosed with diabetes (A1c level>6.4) or those with
contraindications to weight loss, dietary adjustments, or
moderate physical activity. Patients whose weight may vary
considerably over the study’s timeframe for reasons other than
the intervention (eg, cancer, pregnancy, ascites, severe
congestive heart failure) and patients with severe psychiatric
disease, dementia, or vision or other impairments that would
prevent them from being able to access and use the dDPP app
will also be excluded.

Eligible providers will have at least 2 years of experience
providing care to patients with prediabetes or risk factors for
diabetes in the outpatient setting.

Phase 1: Intervention Design

Study Design

In this phase of the study, we will employ UCD techniques to
identify use cases, needs (requirements), preferences, and
constraints of a targeted digital engagement intervention and
use Agile methodologies to guide the intervention’s technical
development.

Setting and Participants

This study will be conducted within the ambulatory practice
network of New York University Langone Health (NYULH).
The network cares for more than 7.64 million diverse patients
throughout New York, New Jersey, and Florida and includes
more than 8000 health care providers. Practice sites include

academic faculty practices, community clinics, and Federally
Qualified Health Centers. The entire ambulatory network shares
a single integrated EHR (Epic).

Enrollment for the intervention design and development phase
will include 25 to 30 diverse stakeholders or key users—patients
and health care providers who meet our inclusion criteria, health
technologists, behavioral change theorists, and dDPP vendor
staff (coaches and developers). Sample size estimates for this
phase were based on best practices for maximizing the power
of qualitative research, which recommend 6 to 8 participants
per qualitative method, with additional participants as needed
to achieve goal data collection and/or thematic saturation.
Previous UCD studies suggest that 2 to 3 cycles of user testing
are required to reach saturation [33].

Procedures and Data Collection

In this phase, we will apply the UCD model of empathize,
define, ideate, prototype, and test to iteratively gather
information, define, design, and refine the engagement
intervention. This method will be applied over several cycles
until a minimum viable product (MVP) of a workable
intervention prototype is developed. The tools deployed for this
process (eg, DT workshops, think-alouds, and usability testing)
have been described extensively elsewhere and have been used
with success by this and other research teams in the development
of digital health technologies [33-37].

In the empathize and define stage, we will conduct focus groups
and interviews to capture experiences and baseline needs of key
users including patients, providers, technologists, and content
experts in diabetes prevention, digital health engagement, and
behavior change theory. This information will be used to inform
the focus of the subsequent stages. In the ideate stage, we will
use a series of structured DT workshops developed in response
to results from the previous stage to engage a multidisciplinary
group in the organized predesign of possible intervention
solutions. Specific ideation sessions will focus on the patient-
and provider-facing components of the engagement intervention
and interactions of the intervention with the commercial dDPP
platform.

In the prototype and test stages, a select number of solutions
will be chosen by the multidisciplinary group and the research
team for further development to be undertaken by the research
and technical teams. These prototypes will undergo a series of
structured think-aloud and usability testing sessions with key
users (patients and providers) and will be iteratively refined
based on results from these sessions until no further substantive
changes are required and an MVP is developed. Usability testing
will include both the intervention itself and the intervention
integrated with the commercial dDPP platform. Usability testing
participants will be asked to complete demographic surveys and
pre- and posttesting surveys.

Data Analysis

Qualitative data from interviews, focus groups, DT workshops,
and usability testing will be recorded, transcribed, and coded
both deductively to evaluate relevant domains of our integrated
theoretical framework (eg, user requirements, preferences, and
constraints; barriers and facilitators to tool use; ease of use,

usability) and inductively to identify emergent themes and
concepts. Coders will meet to review their coding, conduct team
debriefing meetings, and reach a consensus on code names and
meanings. Once all transcripts have been collaboratively coded,
analytic domains will be identified and major and minor
thematic areas will be described. Quantitative data from user
testing surveys will be analyzed using basic statistical methods
to identify significant associations between intervention use
and relevant demographics.

Results from the qualitative and quantitative data analysis will
be used to identify key user stories, a core technique in Agile
methodologies for the identification of units of technical
development work through the lens of a user [38,39]. User
stories will be converted by the technical team into a series of
discrete technical requirements and constraints that will be used
to inform the technical build of the engagement intervention.
User stories, requirements, and technical work or tasks will be
tracked and completed using Agile project management software
(ClickUp).

Phase 2: Feasibility Pilot

Study Design

Following phase 1 development of an intervention MVP, we
will conduct a single-arm pilot test to further evaluate the
feasibility and the process of implementing the intervention.
The findings will inform additional refinements in advance of
the RCT.

Setting and Participants

The study will take place across 2 ambulatory care practices
within the NYULH ambulatory network, selected based on their
practice size and volume of patients with prediabetes. In total,
20 patients who meet the inclusion criteria will be enrolled; 5
to 8 providers whose patients were enrolled in the study will
also be enrolled. The sample size is based on best practices for
maximizing the power of qualitative research and estimates of
the number of users needed to inform additional rounds of
prototype refinement. For feasibility studies, 24 to 50
participants are generally recommended [40]. Additional patients
and providers may be recruited until thematic saturation is met
and/or no further refinements to the intervention are identified.

Procedures and Data Collection

Eligible patients will be identified through (1) the review of
patient data in the EHR and (2) provider referrals. Eligible
participants will be consented by a member of the research team.
Consented patients will be enrolled in the commercial dDPP
and receive the patient-facing engagement intervention
developed in phase 1. Patients will receive information and
training on both the national DPP and the intervention dDPP
and will be guided through downloading and enrolling in the
dDPP platform. Patients will also receive wireless connected
step trackers and weight scales and will be instructed on how
to connect their devices to their dDPP account and upload their
health data. Eligible physicians whose patients have been
enrolled in the study will be included in the study and will
receive the provider-facing engagement intervention developed
in phase 1.

Patients and providers will be asked to complete surveys at
various points throughout the study.

Patient-level data include the following:

•
Participant demographics: a self-report survey will collect
patient sociodemographic data including age, sex or gender,
race or ethnicity, and occupation. This will be compared
with the patient data available in the EHR.
•
Baseline engagement readiness survey: a self-report survey
of areas related to digital engagement and health behavior
change, including digital literacy, technology readiness,
disease self-management and self-efficacy, quality of life,
time management, and perceptions of their provider.
•
Use behavior: patients’dDPP use behavior will be measured
by the research team at regular intervals throughout the
study period, including the following dDPP features: meals
logged, steps logged, exercise and/or physical activity
logged, weights logged, and interactions with other dDPP
features. Patients will also complete quarterly self-reports
of engagement in the dDPP, including features used and
motivation to use features.
•
TAM survey: self-reported responses to questions derived
from the validated TAM survey that assesses the perceived
ease of use, usefulness, and quality of the patient-facing
engagement intervention. This survey will be administered
quarterly throughout the patients’participation in the study.
•
COM-B survey: a self-report of questions adapted from the
well-established 
COM-B 
framework 
and 
related
questionnaires, assessing capability, opportunity, and
motivation of patients to (1) use the dDPP and (2) engage
in health behavior change around diabetes prevention.

Provider-level data include the following:

•
Provider demographics: a self-report survey will collect
relevant provider demographics, including years of practice,
practice type, and patient panel information.
•
Use behavior and usability testing: providers will be
interviewed at regular intervals regarding their use of the
provider-facing engagement intervention, impact on patient
management, impact on clinical workflows, and overall
experience and evaluation.
•
TAM survey: a self-report of questions derived from the
validated TAM survey that assesses the perceived ease of
use, usefulness, and quality of the provider-facing
engagement intervention. This survey will be administered
quarterly throughout the providers’ participation in the
study.

Data Analysis

We will use descriptive statistics to summarize all patient- and
provider-level outcomes and assess their relationship to patient
engagement and activity data derived from the dDPP platform.
All qualitative data collected via surveys will be analyzed using
deductive and inductive (grounded theory) approaches, as
described in phase 1. The results of quantitative and qualitative
analyses in phase 2 will inform intervention approaches and
assessments in phase 3.

Phase 3: RCT

Study Design

In phase 3, we will conduct a two-arm pragmatic RCT to
evaluate the impact of the engagement intervention tool plus
the dDPP platform versus the dDPP platform alone on relevant
prediabetes health outcomes and patient engagement in the
dDPP.

Setting and Participants

The study trial will use a practice-level cluster-randomized
design, with 1:1 randomization of 40 primary care practices
resulting in 20 clinics per study arm. Randomization will be
stratified by clinic size to ensure even distribution of
different-sized clinics to the two study arms. The proposed
sample size provides 80% power to detect a 30% increase in
dDPP session completion and a 2 kg increase in 12-month
weight loss in the intervention arm relative to the control. This
calculation assumes 20% attrition, two-sided tests with a type
I error rate of 0.05, and an intraclass correlation coefficient of
0.05.

We will recruit patients who meet the inclusion criteria with
primary care providers at the study sites through the patient
portal, an increasingly common and effective approach for

recruitment [41-43], and through population-based outreach
from NYULH prediabetes registries with assent from primary
care providers. Intervention participation will last 12 months.

Patients enrolled in the intervention arm will receive access to
the dDPP platform and the engagement system developed and
refined in phases 1 and 2. Patients in the control arm will receive
the dDPP alone. Providers in both arms will receive information
on the study and educational material for their patients. Patients
will receive enrollment and onboarding information and training
for dDPP, the engagement system, and the home devices (weight
scales and pedometers or fitness trackers), as outlined and
refined in phase 2. In addition to the home devices, upon
enrollment, patients will be provided a home A1c testing kit and
instructions for its use for the study.

Procedures and Data Collection

Eligible patients will be identified and enrolled as in phase 2,
with applicable modifications as identified through phase 2
study design review and optimization.

The main health outcomes assessed in phase 3 are listed in Table
1 and correlate to health measures most commonly monitored
in patients with prediabetes and goal outcome measures assessed
by the dDPP.

Table 1. Phase 3 study outcomes.

Collected at (months)
Data source
Construct and measure

Clinical outcomes

Baseline, 6, and 12
Noom (via a wireless scale)
Weight reduction (kg)

Baseline, 6, and 12
Noom (via a wireless pedometer)
Physical activity (steps per day)

Baseline, 6, and 12
A1c home test kit
A1c (%)

Engagement outcomes

Weekly
Noom
Patient engagement

Weekly
Noom
Number of dDPPa log-ins

Weekly
Noom
Number of dDPP lessons completed

3, 6, 9, and 12
Patient portal 1-item survey
Perceived provider involvement with dDPP progress

adDPP: digital diabetes prevention program.

Changes in body weight will be our primary weight-based
outcome. Second, we will assess the achievement of a 7%
weight loss goal (the DPP weight goal). Weight will be collected
from a Bluetooth-linked wireless weight scale, a validated
process that automatically reports weigh-ins to the dDPP
platform server [6,44-46]. In addition to providing the scale and
weight measurement protocol, regular checks of weight data by
research staff will be conducted to identify and follow up on
values that appear invalid and comparisons with EHR-based
data from clinical visits during the study period. Physical activity
will be assessed using validated accelerometers or pedometers
integrated into the dDPP platform [47-50]. A1c will be assessed
using home A1c devices, which have been shown to be safe and
equivalent to laboratory testing and are increasingly used in
pragmatic digital studies to avoid unnecessary burden on
participants [44,51,52].

Patient engagement in the dDPP will be measured using data
on log-ins, lesson completion, feature interactions, and messages
with coaches and social groups. These data will be reported at
regular intervals from the dDPP using a secure application
programming interface. Perceptions of engagement will be
assessed at both patient and provider levels via a survey at 6-
and 12-month intervals. To assess the determinants, process,
and outcome measures associated with our theoretical model
(capability, opportunity, motivation, ease of use, and usability)
and relevant implementation outcomes (acceptability, adoption,
cost, and sustainability), patients and providers will be asked
to complete the surveys outlined in phase 2, with applicable
modifications as identified through phase 2 design review and
optimization. Data collection will occur at study enrollment
(baseline) and 6- and 12-month intervals.

Data Analysis

All data will be descriptively summarized using frequencies
and percentages for categorical variables and means and SDs
for normally distributed data or median and IQR for skewed
continuous variables. All available data will be included in data
listings and tabulations with the number of missing values
indicated. All analyses will follow the principle of
intention-to-treat. Before analyzing the data, we will compare
drop-out and missing data across study arms to assess whether
any patient characteristics were associated with the missing data
and, if necessary, perform additional analyses using multiple
imputation methods.

The primary clinical outcomes (weight reduction or BMI,
physical activity, and A1c) will first be analyzed as continuous
variables using generalized estimating equation (GEE) models.
Each GEE model will include a categorical indicator variable
for the randomized study arm (control as reference), a variable
corresponding to measurement time (baseline as reference), and
an interaction term of the 2 variables. We will explore adjusting
for any baseline demographics, use behavior, and survey
responses that may be unbalanced between study arms. A
Bonferroni-Holm correction method for multiple comparisons
will be used to control the type I error rate of 0.05. A similar
GEE model with a logit link function will be used to analyze
the achievement of a 7% weight loss as a binary dependent
variable.

We will also explore the extent to which engagement with the
program acts as a mediator. We propose using a single mediator
causal model approach with bootstrap-derived confidence
intervals to measure the intervention’s effect on weight loss,
physical activity, and A1c through the specific mechanism of
patient engagement.

Privacy and Security

Privacy and security of users’ data will be maintained by both
the primary research team and the dDPP vendor in accordance
with institutional and industry standard practices. We will ensure
that participating patients and providers are informed of potential
data requirements, usage, storage, and safety policies related to
their study participation and follow standard procedures to
address privacy breaches if they occur. All trial data will be
saved on a dedicated server, available only to the study staff.
Data will not be shared with third parties.

Informed Consent and Ethics Approval

Approval will be obtained through the NYULH Institutional
Review Board. Participation in this trial is voluntary, and all
eligible patients will be informed about the aims, risks, and
benefits of the trial. Patients will be provided with written
information and a consent form and given time to review the
materials fully and ask questions before consenting. All patients
can decline to participate in this trial and can withdraw consent
at any time without penalty.

Results

The project was initiated in 2018 and funded in September 2019.
Enrollment and data collection for phase 1 began in September

2019 under an Institutional Review Board (IRB) quality
improvement waiver granted in July 2019. As of December
2020, 27 patients have been enrolled and first results are
expected to be submitted for publication in early 2021. The
study received IRB approval for phases 2 and 3 in December
2020, and phase 2 enrollment is expected to begin in early 2021.

Discussion

This proposed research will identify the needs and perspectives
of key stakeholders in diabetes prevention management and
incorporate them into the design and development of a targeted
solution to support patient engagement and clinical integration
of dDPP platforms. We will use the findings of this study to
inform a larger scale study to assess the effectiveness and
implementation of this intervention in routine ambulatory
practices and diabetes prevention care. This type of
technologically integrated support system has the potential to
improve both patient engagement in an evidence-based dDPP
and the experience of care by providing more seamless access
to crucial elements of diabetes prevention for both patients and
providers. This in turn may facilitate both disease management
and the patient-provider relationship and ultimately improve
health outcomes.

Strengths

The strengths of this research include its pragmatic, multiphased
UCD, which allows for iterative development and testing of
digital interventions before deployment in a full RCT, thereby
improving the likelihood of successful deployment and reducing
the risks of technical problems, bias, or error in the clinical trial
phase. Our use of an integrated theoretical framework that
combines behavioral theory with UCD and Agile approaches
will ensure that our intervention is both pragmatically and
theoretically appropriate. Our partnership with a well-established
third-party dDPP vendor leverages existing technology that has
considerable market penetration and brand recognition and has
been effectively user tested and validated in the consumer
marketplace, rather than requiring the development of an
in-house dDPP product. The extensive experience of this
research team in developing, deploying, and evaluating digital
health technologies will facilitate optimal study rollout
[36,37,53-61].

Limitations

There are several potential limitations to this study. First, we
are only recruiting a small number of patients in phase 1 to
identify the requirements of our intervention, which may not
be representative of the broader population of patients with
prediabetes in our health system. Therefore, it is possible that
the features of our intervention will not apply to a larger or more
diverse population. To address this, we have partnered with our
system’s patient advisory committee, which is composed of
representative samples of patients who act as patient advocates
in research study design. The planned randomized trial will help
us gain additional insights into the generalizability of our
intervention. Second, although we are able to adapt the
components of our intervention to the requirements of our users,
we are unable to make changes to the third-party dDPP platform
we have partnered with. It is possible that barriers to engagement

and health behavior change will be driven by features of the
dDPP platform, rather than our intervention. To address this,
our process and outcome instruments will explicitly include
questions of usability, ease of use, user experience, capability,
opportunity, and motivation for both the Little e interventions
(our engagement system and Noom) and Big E (diabetes
prevention and lifestyle modification) to allow for analysis of
each element. Finally, although the science of patient
engagement is becoming more robust, there is still incomplete
understanding of the moderators and mediators of engagement
in digital applications, particularly digital health tools. It is
possible that our study measures and instruments will not
completely capture the nuances of user experiences, preferences,
drivers, and behavior patterns that comprise engagement in
digital behavior change technology or that then translate to
behavior change itself. We have attempted to address this by

enlisting experts in diverse fields of behavior change, patient
engagement, behavioral economics, and digital technology and
elsewhere to develop theoretically grounded, contextually
relevant methods and measures.

Conclusions

Our findings will help develop, evaluate, and validate
technology that facilitates patient engagement in digital behavior
change interventions for diabetes prevention and integrates
dDPP platforms into existing clinical workflows for providers.
Integrated clinical tools that can facilitate patient-provider
interaction around dDPPs may contribute to improved patient
adherence to these programs and improved health outcomes by
addressing barriers faced by both patients and providers. Further
evaluation with pilot testing and a clinical trial will assess the
effectiveness and implementation of these tools.