Designing AINA - Intercultural Human-Centered
Design of an AI-based Application for Supporting
the Diagnosis of Female Genital Schistosomiasis

Nicolas J. Lehmann
Freie Universit¨at Berlin
Berlin, Germany

Muhammed-Ugur Karag¨ulle
Freie Universit¨at Berlin
Berlin, Germany

Pauline Meurer
Charit´e -
Universit¨atsmedizin Berlin
Berlin, Germany

Elen Niedermeyer
Freie Universit¨at Berlin
Berlin, Germany

Petrit Vidishiqi
Freie Universit¨at Berlin
Berlin, Germany

Laura Pysz
Freie Universit¨at Berlin
Berlin, Germany

Marlene Kreß
Freie Universit¨at Berlin
Berlin, Germany

Lea R. Muth
Institute of Computer Science
Freie Universit¨at Berlin
Berlin, Germany

Hermann Feldmeier
Charit´e -
Universit¨atsmedizin Berlin
Berlin, Germany

Bodo Randrianasolo Sahondra
K’olo Vanona
Antananarivo, Madagascar

Oliva Rabozakandraina Tiana Onintsoa
K’olo Vanona
Ambanja, Diana region, Madagascar

Agn`es Voisard
Freie Universit¨at Berlin
& Fraunhofer FOKUS
Berlin, Germany

Angela Schuster
Charit´e -
Universit¨atsmedizin Berlin
Berlin, Germany

III. METHODOLOGY

The design for the multi-sided AINA application uses a
Human-Centered Design (HCD) approach and consists of an
analysis phase in which the mental models of the users in the
ﬁeld, their tasks, and environmental conditions are captured
and transformed into an interaction design as a collection of
requirements in the form of task ﬂow charts. The analysis
follows the following structure:

A. Analysis

1) Processes, Stakeholders, and Users: First, the mental
models of the development team are captured by recording
the processes for the AINA application from their perspective
in the form of a process diagram. For each process step, the
groups of people involved in the process are then recorded,
and ﬁnally, the user groups of particular relevance to the
AINA application as primary, secondary, and tertiary users are
identiﬁed.
2) Interviews with Identiﬁed Users: Subsequently, inter-
views will be conducted with the identiﬁed user groups. The
particular challenge in this project is the intercontinental and
intercultural communication with the user groups on-site since
the development team consists of German physicians and com-
puter scientists. The user groups are primarily located in rural
areas of Africa, especially Madagascar. Another constraint
is the currently active COVID-19 pandemic, which leads

432

to severe limitations in the availability and communication
ability of the relevant user groups, especially in Africa. The
interviews are then transcribed and synthesized in the form of
key ﬁndings.
3) Target Groups and Personas:
Based on the results
of the interviews, the users are divided into target groups.
Each target group is detailed by socio-demographic factors
and application-speciﬁc skills and abilities. The target groups
deﬁned in this way are then transformed into virtual represen-
tations, so-called personas. These personas serve as a visual
and illustrative aid for the development team in developing the
AINA application from the user’s perspective.
4) User Stories and Scenarios: For each developed per-
sona, use cases in the form of user stories are derived from
the key results of the interviews. A user story has the ﬁxed
form ”As a PERSONA, I want FUNCTIONALITY, so that
BENEFIT.”.
Finally, the user stories of a persona are summarized in a
scenario. The scenario represents a short everyday story of a
persona, which, in addition to all user stories of the persona,
illustrates the environment and circumstances of using the
AINA application.
5) Interaction Design: For each scenario of the developed
personas, task ﬂow charts are created that depict the target
group’s requirements behind them. In a ﬁnal step, the de-
veloped task ﬂow charts are merged into a single large task
ﬂow chart. The ﬁnal task ﬂow chart thus represents the entire
interaction design of the AINA application.

B. Design and Evaluation

After the analysis has been completed, the development
proceeds with iterative design and evaluation phases. First,
adjustments are made to the design based on the ﬁndings
of the previous phase, or a new design is developed. Sub-
sequently, non-participatory evaluation methods are used to
identify and correct signiﬁcant errors in the developed design
and level the design based on radical knowledge by applying
best practice models. Subsequently, the resulting design is
evaluated together with the identiﬁed users using participatory
evaluation methods. Finally, the results of all evaluations are
synthesized into key insights and processed for the subsequent
design phase.
1) Design Phase: In the design phase, a radical design
is created based on the ﬁndings of the preceding evaluation
phase. Therefore, we try to design strongly along the users’
mental model to capture the users’ essential needs. The
adherence to best practice guidelines explicitly does not play
a role.
2) Non-Participatory Evaluation Phase: The ﬁrst evalua-
tion phase serves as the ﬁltering and smoothing phase for the
developed radical design and consists, in the ﬁrst step, of using
a heuristic evaluation to identify and eliminate signiﬁcant
errors in the design. In the second step, the design is smoothed
by adapting it to best practice guidelines, i.e., Material Design.

a) Heuristic Evaluation: The heuristic evaluation used is
based on the ten heuristics of J. Nielsen [29]. These rules allow
the evaluation of the interface in order to identify and correct
signiﬁcant errors. The evaluation is carried out in a group of
four persons who systematically examine the design in the
respective phase. The investigation results are ﬁrst noted in
bullet points and ﬁnally formulated in the form of key ﬁndings.
b) Best Practice Leveling (Material Design): Since the
AINA application should run on Android1-based devices and
iOS2-based devices, the application is developed as a cross-
platform application using the Google Flutter3 framework. The
Material Design4 framework is used for the application design,
which acts as a best practice and thus as a smoothing and
leveling model for the developed design. By adding a leveling
phase, the development of a design that is too radical can be
avoided so that the user’s mental model is not positioned too
far away from the typical design standards of other application
providers. The design leveling pursues only making minor
changes needed to establish conformity.
3) Participatory Evaluation Phase: In the second evalua-
tion phase, users develop the AINA application in the form of
participatory evaluation methods. The participatory evaluations
take place via intercontinental video conferences. The video
conferences happen either in French or Malagasy, depend-
ing on the user group. Due to the lack of language skills,
interpreters are present in addition to the direct participants
of the evaluation. Due to the cross-cultural characteristics of
the region, a deliberate attempt for speciﬁc user groups was
made to reduce the number of participants and homogenize
by gender; otherwise, some of the evaluation participants may
not express themselves honestly or at all.
a) Thinking-aloud Method: In order to capture the men-
tal model of the users, the thinking-aloud method was chosen
as the primary participatory evaluation method. In this method,
the developed prototypes are presented to the users virtually,
and the users receive predeﬁned tasks that they must solve
with the help of the prototype. All AINA prototypes were
created in FIGMA5 for this purpose in order to be able to
share them over long distances via the Internet in parallel with
the video conferences held. The users are asked to express
their emotions and thoughts aloud while solving the tasks. This
setting is recorded and transcribed afterwards with appropriate
annotations. The resulting ﬁndings are synthesized as key
insights.
b) Action Analysis: In addition to the thinking-aloud
method, an action analysis was also conducted, as this was
appropriate due to similarities in the method structure. An
action analysis is a quantitative evaluation of the number
of actions or clicks a user needs to solve a given task to
derive a statement about user acceptance. The fewer actions
or clicks a user needs to perform the given action, the better

1Android: https://www.android.com/ (Online; Accessed May 2, 2022)
2iOS: https://www.apple.com/de/ios/ (Online; Accessed May 2, 2022)
3Google Flutter: https://ﬂutter.dev/ (Online; Accessed May 2, 2022)
4Material Design: https://material.io/ (Online; Accessed May 2, 2022)
5FIGMA: https://www.ﬁgma.com/ (Online; Accessed May 2, 2022)

433

Fig. 2. Processes of the AINA application.

the developed design. Since the thinking-aloud method already
provided a ﬁxed set of tasks, the number of user actions and
clicks was measured and evaluated in parallel to the thinking-
aloud method.

IV. ANALYSIS

A. Processes, Stakeholders, and Users

In the beginning, a diagram of the processes that the AINA
application is designed to facilitate was created to capture our
mental model visually. The process diagram is illustrated in
Figure 2 and contains the four main lines of action

• Support for FGS diagnosis,

• Reference guide for FGS and differential diagnosis of
FGS,

• FGS advanced training and examination to become an
FGS expert, and

• Expert labeling of FGS images.
The AINA application primarily aims to support local med-
ical personnel in diagnosing FGS. For this purpose, the local
medical staff can take photos with a suitable smartphone and
have the images analyzed by the AINA application’s artiﬁcial
intelligence (AI). As a result, the AINA application gives the
medical staff a statement about the patient’s probability of
having FGS and eventually recommends further examinations
to increase or decrease the likelihood of an FGS diagnosis.
In order to provide the medical staff with knowledge about
FGS as independent of time and place as possible, the AINA
application has a reference book on NTDs, especially on FGS.
The AINA application has a human-machine feedback loop
(reinforcement learning) that allows the AI to improve con-
tinuously. This requires labeled FGS image data. FGS experts

can label medical images showing FGS-speciﬁc alterations of
the cervix. FGS experts are identiﬁed through a standardized
qualifying examination on FGS, which includes a virtual
recognition of FGS lesions through visual diagnosis. The
qualifying examination serves as an access barrier to the
labeling process and ensures high-quality FGS labeling.
In the FGS diagnosis storyline, the primary users are medi-
cal health workers working in rural areas of Africa. In addition,
secondary users are physicians, nurses, and midwives.
Therefore, we identiﬁed medical health workers, physicians,
nurses, and midwives as primary users from the process
participants.

B. Interviews

Interviews were conducted with the identiﬁed users. The
interviews were conducted in the form of online conferences.
Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, only a few participants were
available for the entire three-month survey period. Neverthe-
less, several interviews with representatives of all user groups
could be performed. The goal of the interviews was to develop
target groups based on the identiﬁed users and understand their
mental models.
Interviews were conducted in English, French, and Mala-
gasy. Interpreters translated from French to English or Mala-
gasy to English when necessary. The number of participants in
the interviews was kept low to reduce social desirability and
barriers due to occupational, gender, and cultural hierarchies.
Furthermore, when possible, we ensured that only women
were interviewed and avoided the presence of hierarchically
more senior health professionals when conducting the inter-
views.
The results of the interviews allowed us to obtain a detailed
picture of the participant’s level of knowledge about FGS
and the working conditions existing in rural areas of Africa,
particularly Madagascar. In general, there was little experience
with FGS. Stable IT infrastructure was only partially present
in primary health care facilities. Medical care was considered
inadequate due to low presence, density, funding, and medical
personnel qualiﬁcation in rural areas. Patients’ access to health
care was limited due to long travel distances to reach a
physician.

C. Target Groups and Personas

From the interview results, we identiﬁed the two target
groups

• medical professionals with high FGS expertise and

• medical professionals with low FGS expertise
for the AINA application.
The target groups have different roles in the usage of the
AINA application. The mobile AINA application primarily
addresses medical professionals with low FGS expertise to
support them in diagnosing FGS. Although medical profes-
sionals with low FGS expertise beneﬁt more from this feature,
the mobile FGS reference tool addresses both target groups
equally. An adequate medical professional with low FGS ex-
pertise can be invited by medical professionals with high FGS

434

Fig. 3. Persona of medical professionals with high FGS expertise.

Fig. 4. Persona of medical professionals with low FGS expertise.

expertise to increase their competencies by pursuing online
training with the AINA Web service. Candidates have the
opportunity to take online training on FGS and take the exam
to become a medical professional with high FGS expertise.
After successfully passing the qualifying examination, they
become medical professionals with high FGS expertise and
have the opportunity to label FGS image data for the AI-based
algorithm of the AINA application.
Finally, we developed personas for the identiﬁed target
groups, which are shown in Figure 3 and Figure 4.
Miora Rakotomalala represents a medical professional with
high FGS expertise. She is a medical physician and 48 years
old. She is married and has two sons. She is very communica-
tive and motivated. Her FGS expertise is exceptionally high,
whereas her afﬁnity for technology is somewhat weaker than
average.
Marie Rakotonirina represents a medical professional with
low FGS expertise. She is a midwife, single, and 26 years old.
She is very communicative and highly motivated. Her FGS
expertise is low, and her afﬁnity for technology is slightly
stronger than average.

D. User Stories and Scenarios
For both personas, a set of user stories was developed,
which, based on the needs and mental model of the users,

describe the entire functional scope of the AINA application.
Based on the interviews, we then used the user stories to
develop scenarios that take particular account of the living
conditions and the social and cultural characteristics of the
region.

Excerpt of the scenario of Marie Rakotonirina:
... Because of the emergency, Marie rides her motorcycle
about 12 km from her home to the nearest community health
center, where several patients are already waiting for her.
She immediately begins to examine the patients. During the
examination, she suspects that a patient is suffering from
FGS. To conﬁrm her suspicion, Marie takes a photo of the
patient’s cervix and, after obtaining the patient’s consent,
uploads the image to the AINA mobile application, which
conﬁrms her suspicion. Marie begins further examination.
Suddenly, a male physician appears in her treatment area,
and Marie immediately hands the patient over to the attending
physician. After the physician addresses Marie directly and
asks her what she has done so far regarding the patient,
Marie begins to exchange ideas with the physician. After
questioning Marie, the physician diagnoses the patient with
FGS and asks Marie to treat the patient by administering
praziquantel. After the treatment, Marie explicitly informs
the patient and her companion that she does not have a
Sexually Transmitted Disease (STD) to avoid the otherwise
usual stigmatization of the patient by other villagers as far
as possible. After the educational talk, Marie devotes herself
to the next patient without taking a break. After Marie has
ﬁnished her work, she stays at the Community Health Center
for a while to upload the pictures taken that day via the AINA
application since she does not have an Internet connection
at home. After that, Marie uses the AINA application to
educate herself about the symptoms of FGS and takes one or
two mockup online qualifying examinations to pass the FGS
expert qualifying examination as soon as possible so that she
feels more conﬁdent in her diagnosis, but also so that she
can rise in the esteem of her direct supervisor, for whom she
has great respect, and have the opportunity to speak up when
asked about FGS. She then leaves the Community Center and
goes home. ...

E. Task-Flow Charts

Detailed task ﬂow charts were created for the complete
scenarios of both personas, depicting all individual aspects of
the AINA application. Figure 5 shows an excerpt from the task
ﬂow chart for the scenario of the persona Miora Rakotomalala,
which depicts the process of labeling FGS images.
Finally, the two resulting task ﬂow charts are combined
into one task ﬂow chart that depicts the entire interaction
design and, thus, all functional requirements of the AINA
application. The interaction design developed in this way
serves as the basis for the developed design of the prototypes
in the following phase, Design and Evaluation.

435

Fig. 5. Excerpt of ﬁnal task ﬂow chart: Labeling of FGS pictures.

Fig. 6. Excerpt of ﬁrst design based on the analysis (in French).

V. DESIGN AND EVALUATION

In the Design and Evaluation phase, a three-stage iterative
process is used to ﬁrst develop designs from the insights gained
in the preceding iteration, which are then evaluated using non-
participatory and participatory methods.

A. First Iteration of Design and Evaluation

The ﬁrst design, presented in excerpts in Figure 6, imple-
ments the ﬁnal task ﬂow chart from the analysis phase in a
rudimentary design, consisting of simple control elements and
an otherwise plain design.
1) Findings of Heuristic Evaluation: The visibility of the
system status of the ﬁrst prototype is still strongly underdevel-
oped. The user receives almost no feedback after a function is

triggered and loading time occurs. The ﬁrst prototype still uses
numerous technical terms and thus only incompletely speaks
the user’s language. The implementation of the navigation
design does not yet allow users to end all actions prematurely.
Furthermore, the ﬁrst prototype does not use consistent nam-
ing. Also, error messages have not yet been incorporated into
the design. Users currently still have to remember which area
of the application they are in because, with a few exceptions,
it does not contain any hints about this. Shortcuts are also not
supported by the ﬁrst prototype. The design does not yet claim
to be aesthetic or minimalistic. The application documentation
is only accessible via the start screen so far.
2) Findings of Leveling with Material Design: As a follow-
up to the ﬁrst design iteration and the heuristic evaluation, the
used controls and icons were replaced by relevant (simple)
material design elements. Their positions and basic layout
were not changed.
3) Findings of Thinking-aloud Evaluation: The users re-
ceived a set of tasks that they had to solve independently with-
out help using the AINA application. They were continuously
asked to express their thoughts and feelings.
a) Task 1: Find and Read Information about FGS:
Two-thirds of the users had slight difﬁculties ﬁnding their
way around the given interaction design. Another third had
more signiﬁcant difﬁculties and expressed an increased level
of frustration. In addition, users criticized the lack of an option
to select a suitable language. The control elements used were
described as somewhat unintuitive. The arrangement of buttons
and keys seemed confusing to one-third of the users. All users
criticized the font size, as it was difﬁcult to read on mobile
devices. In particular, the combination of long text passages
and small font size led to frustration among users.
b) Task 2: Take a picture, let AINA diagnose it, and then
upload it to improve AINA’s diagnostic quality: All users had
difﬁculty following the instructions in the AINA application
due to the use of overly technical terms. Likewise, control
mechanisms such as holding a button longer to open context
menus were described as unintuitive. All users had problems
with using elements such as images or texts themselves
for navigation and explicitly wished for buttons to navigate
through the application.
c) Task 3: Take a test to become a FGS expert: All users
had little difﬁculty in performing the assignment. Two-thirds
of the users said they did not know which step they were
currently in and would like to see a corresponding indicator.
About half of the users were also concerned with the number
of questions remaining to be solved.
d) Task 4: Label a FGS picture: One-third of the users
had particularly great difﬁculty in recognizing FGS symptoms.
A typical behavior among all users was clicking with the
mouse on parts of the FGS images where they suspected
symptoms. Users expressed that they wished they could see
what selections they had already made, even before saving
their input. All users complained about the poor contrast of the
images. All users expressed increased frustration with marking
FGS symptoms on the images using minimum bounding

436

Fig. 7. Excerpt of second design based on results of ﬁrst iteration.

boxes, both because they were unfamiliar with the concept
and perceived the control of the minimum bounding boxes to
be particularly complicated.
4) Findings of Evaluation using Action Analysis: The Ac-
tion Analysis was performed in parallel with the Thinking-
aloud method of the ﬁrst iteration and is therefore based on
the same set of tasks. It measured the number of clicks users
need to complete one of the following tasks compared to the
optimal number of clicks.
a) Task 1: Find and Read Information about FGS: Two-
thirds of users averaged a negative deviation of about 40%,
and one-third averaged a negative deviation of about 60% in
terms of the optimal number of clicks needed to complete the
tasks.
b) Task 2: Take a picture, let AINA diagnose it, and
then upload it to improve AINA’s diagnostic quality: All users
averaged a negative deviation of about 55% in terms of the
optimal number of clicks needed to complete the tasks.
c) Task 3: Take a test to become an FGS expert: On
average, the ﬁrst half of the users have a negative deviation of
about 25% and the second half of the users have a negative
deviation of about 35% in terms of the optimal number of
clicks needed to complete the tasks.
d) Task 4: Label an FGS picture: Two-thirds of users
averaged a negative deviation of about 120%, and one-third
averaged a negative deviation of about 40% in terms of the
optimal number of clicks needed to complete the tasks.

B. Second Iteration of Design and Evaluation

1) Findings of Heuristic Evaluation: The second prototype
uses a burger menu to allow navigation uniformly across the
different components of the AINA application. Breadcrumbs
that show the user where they are within the application are
missing. The language of the application matches the user’s
language in all parts except the documentation. All terms are
now used consistently across the different components of the
application. The user also has the option to exit all dialogs
directly. Error messages have been developed for all possible
system actions, explaining the error to the user in an under-
standable way. The system still does not have any shortcuts. By
applying the basic rules of Gestalt theory [30] in the second

prototype design, the design is aesthetic in the sense of the
arrangement of the elements. All unnecessary information has
been reduced as much as possible. The documentation is now
accessible from anywhere in the application via the burger
menu.
2) Findings of Leveling with Material Design: As a follow-
up to the second design iteration and the heuristic evaluation,
the header, content and footer sections, and the menus were
given a consistent format. In addition, icons, labels, and
controls used were consistently uniﬁed according to their
function based on Material Design.
3) Findings of Thinking-aloud Evaluation: The users re-
ceived a set of tasks that they had to solve independently with-
out help using the AINA application. They were continuously
asked to express their thoughts and feelings.
a) Task 1: Find and Read Information about FGS: All
users had difﬁculties with the newly introduced navigation
elements, especially with the idea of the burger menu, as
this hid the possible navigation destinations in their percep-
tion. They wanted visible navigation elements. The improved
structuring of text passages by breaking up long texts and
consistently positioning information elements was perceived
as positive. Unfortunately, the revision of the manual, based on
AI guidelines for medical devices, did not reduce the number
of technical terms used, so all users commented negatively on
this.
b) Task 2: Take a picture, let AINA diagnose it, and then
upload it to improve AINA’s diagnostic quality: All users
commented positively on the use of the new controls. The
requirement to obtain approval for medical data processing
prior to recording and uploading was considered beneﬁcial but
was not described as user-friendly. All users commented posi-
tively on the step-by-step user guidance through the diagnostic
process.
c) Task 3: Take a test to become an FGS expert: Users
wanted an educational area where they could practice for the
test they would take. There was also a desire to link the
information area of the AINA application to this new area. The
color scheme was described as not particularly appealing for
a medical application. The newly introduced error messages
were perceived as consistently positive. However, users wished
that error messages should be actively conﬁrmed and not
disappear on their own after a short time.
d) Task 4: Label a FGS picture: Two-thirds of users
commented positively on the new minimum bounding box
controls for marking FGS symptoms, whereas one-third per-
ceived no change from the previous state. Overall, all users
described the layout in this speciﬁc step as cluttered. The size
of the image to be labeled was perceived as disadvantageous.
All users wished for more intuitive control of the minimum
bounding boxes for labeling FGS symptoms.
4) Findings of Evaluation using Action Analysis: The Ac-
tion Analysis was performed in parallel with the Thinking-
aloud method of the second iteration and is therefore based
on the same set of tasks. It measured the number of clicks

437

Fig. 8. Excerpt of third design based on results of second iteration.

users need to complete one of the following tasks compared
to the optimal number of clicks.
a) Task 1: Find and read information about FGS: Two-
thirds of users averaged a negative deviation of about 30%,
and one-third averaged a negative deviation of about 45% in
terms of the optimal number of clicks needed to complete the
tasks.
b) Task 2: Take a picture, let AINA diagnose it, and then
upload it to improve AINA’s diagnostic quality: Two-thirds of
users averaged a negative deviation of about 35%, and one-
third averaged a negative deviation of about 50% in terms of
the optimal number of clicks needed to complete the tasks.
c) Task 3: Take a test to become an FGS expert: Two-
thirds of users averaged a negative deviation of about 20%,
and one-third averaged a negative deviation of about 25% in
terms of the optimal number of clicks needed to complete the
tasks.
d) Task 4: Label an FGS picture: The ﬁrst half of the
users have on average a negative deviation of about 30%,
and the second half of the users have, on average, a negative
deviation of about 75% in terms of the optimal number of
clicks needed to complete the tasks.

C. Third Iteration of Design Evaluation

1) Findings of Heuristic Evaluation: The application uses
clear headings, breadcrumbs, and highlightings in the navi-
gation bar to show users where they are currently located in
the application. All terms across the application have been
adapted to the users’ language, and inconsistent naming is
avoided. Users can exit dialogues at any time and switch to
other actions without losing their work, as the application
stores intermediate results. All error messages were understood
by the users and resulted in the users behaving adequately in
case of an error. Users are also helped to handle the appli-
cation appropriately by clear paths in the interaction design.
To address aesthetic design and minimalism, the decision
was made to develop and use a corporate design across the
application. Unnecessary information is completely removed
from the application. Finally, the application’s documentation
was further adapted to the needs and language of the users,
based on the ﬁndings of the second iteration.

Fig. 9. Developed corporate design of the AINA application.

2) Findings of Leveling with Material Design: As a follow-
up to the third design iteration and the heuristic evaluation, a
complete corporate design, as illustrated in Figure 9, for the
AINA application, i.e., the mobile application and the Web
service, was created. The design includes a color scheme that
uses #5D7398 as the primary color, #BBDD4F as the sec-
ondary color, and #018786 as the tertiary color. Furthermore,
a logo for the AINA application was developed that stylizes
the affected organs of FGS, and a set of consistent icons was
deﬁned across the different parts of the application.
3) Findings of Thinking-aloud Evaluation: The users re-
ceived a set of tasks that they had to solve independently with-
out help using the AINA application. They were continuously
asked to express their thoughts and feelings.
a) Task 1: Find and Read Information about FGS: All
users commented positively on the optimized navigation and
the simpliﬁcation of the language used. No user expressed
frustration. Two-thirds commented positively on the ﬁnal nav-
igation design. The use of templates for consistent presentation
of information was particularly praised and perceived as
intuitive by users. The redesign of the language selection was
also perceived as positive.
b) Task 2: Take a picture, let AINA diagnose it, and then
upload it to improve AINA’s diagnostic quality: All users were
generally positive about the newly developed step-by-step
navigation through the diagnostic process. The visualization
of the process steps was perceived particularly positively. The
users would like to see a percentage probability display for the
individual FGS symptoms on the results screen of the photo
analysis to feel more conﬁdent about ambiguous results.
c) Task 3: Take a test to become a FGS expert:
Users commented positively on the consistent design and
standardized buttons and knobs with consistent functions.
The color differentiation of control and action elements was
also perceived positively. Font sizes and contrasts were rated
positively.
d) Task 4: Label a FGS picture: All users described the
newly introduced control of the minimum bounding boxes by
clicking and dragging while resizing and selecting the shape
of the minimum bounding box as intuitive. Users also wanted
clear step-by-step instructions for the labeling process with the
minimum bounding box to make this step, in particular, even
more straightforward.
4) Findings of Evaluation using Action Analysis: The ac-
tion analysis was performed in parallel with the Thinking-

438

Fig. 10. Architecture of the AINA application.

aloud method of the third iteration and is therefore based on
the same set of tasks. It measured the number of clicks users
need to complete one of the following tasks compared to the
optimal number of clicks.
a) Task 1: Find and Read Information about FGS: All
users averaged a negative deviation of about 15% regarding
the optimal number of clicks needed to complete the tasks.
b) Task 2: Take a picture, let AINA diagnose it, and then
upload it to improve AINA’s diagnostic quality: Two-thirds of
users averaged a negative deviation of about 20%, and one-
third averaged a negative deviation of about 25% in terms of
the optimal number of clicks needed to complete the tasks.
c) Task 3: Take a test to become an FGS expert: All
users averaged a negative deviation of about 10% regarding
the optimal number of clicks needed to complete the tasks.
d) Task 4: Label an FGS picture: Two-thirds of users
averaged a negative deviation of about 20%, and one-third
averaged a negative deviation of about 35% in terms of the
optimal number of clicks needed to complete the tasks.

VI. HIGH-FIDELITY PROTOTYPE

A. System Architecture

Figure 10 illustrates the system architecture of the AINA
application. It consist of a backend that includes a component
for the training of the AI algorithms for the classiﬁcation of
FGS pictures and RESTful APIs for the labeling Web service
and the mobile application. The mobile application is designed
to work as a stand-alone solution as long as no updates for
the AI-based classiﬁcation algorithm are needed. For model
updates, the mobile application needs an Internet connection
to connect to the AINA backend server.

B. Mobile Application

Excerpts of the mobile application interface design are
illustrated in Figure 11,

Fig. 11. AINA mobile application (in French).

C. Web Service

Excerpts of the Web service interface design are illustrated
in Figure 12, Figure 13, and Figure 14.

Fig. 12. AINA Web service - Excerpt of information page (in French).

VII. CONCLUSION

A. Discussion of Results

We developed the application AINA in a human-centered
approach to support physicians, nurses, midwives, and medical
health workers in diagnosing FGS in rural areas of Africa,
particularly in Madagascar.
In a three-month analysis phase, a process model was
ﬁrst created to describe the mental model of the developers,
which was then continuously compared and adapted to the

439

Fig. 13. AINA Web service - Excerpt of test page (in French).

Fig. 14. AINA Web service - Excerpt of labeling service.

mental model of the target groups of the AINA application.
From the interviews conducted with the identiﬁed users, we
learned important information about the socio-cultural living
conditions and the local environment in which the AINA
application is to be used. We ﬁrst had to learn, with the
help of resident physicians, that certain interview settings
did not produce the needed outcome because, due to socio-
cultural differences, certain groups of people did not express
themselves freely or at all in some settings, which is a major
problem for participatory design methods. However, with the
help of locally resident physicians, we successfully adapted
our interview settings over time. Despite the large number
of users involved in the AINA application, we derived two
relevant target groups that differed primarily in their level of
knowledge regarding FGS. For each of these target groups, we
developed a complete set of user stories and a summarizing
scenario for each, which, besides the use cases, also considers
regional characteristics and socio-cultural differences. We ﬁrst
generated individual task ﬂow charts from the scenarios, which
we then merged into a ﬁnal and consistent task ﬂow chart.
Subsequently, we developed a prototype of the AINA
application in three design and evaluation iterations, which
was ﬁnally described and evaluated as positive by all user
groups involved and no longer contained any identiﬁable
design problems. The evaluation strategy was based on an
alternation of non-participatory methods, which served as a

ﬁltering technique for major design ﬂaws, and participatory
methods, which enabled radical design for the users.
We are conﬁdent that based on our successful design study,
the development of the AINA application as a medical device,
for which this design study was conducted as preliminary
work, can be started in a short time.

B. Limitations

Intercultural differences have the most substantial impact in
all settings where participatory methods are used. Since these
methods, in particular, powerfully drove this design study, and
we had to learn to adapt in practice in a suitable way, we
cannot eliminate the possibility of bias in the users’ responses
and thus bias in the ﬁnal design. However, we tried to the
best of our knowledge and belief to create interference-free
interview and evaluation settings as far as this was possible
with the technologies used.
Since user behavior plays a crucial role in any technology,
we wished to conduct additional on-site observations during
the analysis and evaluation phases. Unfortunately, this was not
possible due to the global COVID-19 pandemic.

C. Future Work

In the near future, the AINA application is to be developed
as a medical device in cooperation with Charit´e - Univer-
sit¨atsmedizin Berlin. The AI-based algorithms have already
been developed and tested by a second team of developers.
By implementing a human-machine-feedback loop (Reinforce-
ment Learning), which enables the AINA application to learn
independently and thus improve itself, we hope that the AINA
application can solidly contribute to the ﬁght against the ﬁght
FGS.
In our vision, the techniques of the AINA application can
be easily adapted to diagnose other NTDs as long as they can
be diagnosed by medical image analysis.