Human-centered design as a guide to
intervention planning for non-
communicable diseases: the BIGPIC study
from Western Kenya

Claudia L. Leung1, Mackenzie Naert2, Benjamin Andama3, Rae Dong2, David Edelman1, Carol Horowitz2,
Peninah Kiptoo3, Simon Manyara3, Winnie Matelong3, Esther Matini3, Violet Naanyu4, Sarah Nyariki3,
Sonak Pastakia5, Thomas Valente6, Valentin Fuster2, Gerald S. Bloomfield1, Jemima Kamano4 and
Rajesh Vedanthan7*

Methods
Setting
The Academic Model Providing Access to Healthcare
(AMPATH), initiated in 2001, is a partnership between
Moi
University
College
of
Health
Sciences,
Moi

Teaching and Referral Hospital, and a consortium of
North
American
academic
medical
centers
[23].
AMPATH established a system of HIV care in western
Kenya and has since expanded its clinical scope to in-
clude population health and NCDs [24]. At the time that
this study was conducted, the Chronic Disease Manage-
ment program at AMPATH had enrolled over 2000
patients with diabetes and 40,000 patients with hyper-
tension, who were being cared for at nine rural health
centers and 30 rural dispensaries. The program dis-
patches clinicians to rural clinics monthly, which are
otherwise staffed by nurses. This study was conducted as
part of the Bridging Income Generation and Group Inte-
grated Care (BIGPIC) study which aims to evaluate the
combination of microfinance and group medical visits
for cardiovascular risk reduction in the AMPATH catch-
ment area across four counties in western Kenya [25].

Intervention design
In this project, we adapted a pilot BIGPIC model that
consisted of microfinance coupled with monthly group
medical care visits with a rural clinician [26]. In this
pilot model, participants with diabetes or hypertension
are recruited to join the group and consist of at least
50% of group members. Group medical visits with a
clinician occur immediately after each microfinance
meeting. In order to further refine and adapt this ap-
proach to the local context, we utilized a HCD frame-
work consisting of four steps – Discover, Design, Test,
and Refine – with an emphasis on community and end-
user engagement at each stage (Fig. 1). As HCD is an
iterative process, the steps are described in sequence in
the Methods and Results sections.

Step 1. DISCOVER: understanding the community
The first step in refining the BIGPIC model was to
understand the strengths and needs of the local commu-
nity. We utilized a combination of qualitative research
methodologies to explore community and individual
perspectives. The primary goals were to identify existing
barriers to NCD care, and to identify contextual factors,
barriers, and facilitators that could impact intervention
design, implementation, and sustainability. We held
mabaraza, traditional East African community gather-
ings, to discuss community perspectives in an open for-
mat. We also hosted focus group discussions (FGDs)
consisting of 10–15 individuals with common character-
istics (rural clinicians, community health workers, pa-
tients with NCDs, and microfinance group members) to
explore individual perspectives. All qualitative studies
were led by local team members utilizing a semi-
structured guided interview in local languages.

Step 2. DESIGN: designing the intervention

Design team formation A transdisciplinary team of re-
searchers and community stakeholders led the interven-
tion design, implementation planning, and evaluation
process (Fig. 2). The goals of the Design Team were to
define the challenges to NCD care based on community
input and design an intervention model to meet the
needs and challenges of the end-users. Potential partici-
pants were identified through snowball sampling and
local connections and invited to participate based on
personal or professional experiences with NCDs or
microfinance. All Design Team members represented
end-users,
those
who
may
deliver
or
receive
the
intervention.

Design team meetings Design Team meetings were
conducted in a series of weekly three-hour meetings
over 6 weeks, following objectives and activities adapted
from HCD methodology [21]. An initial agenda was de-
veloped, however, timing for each step was flexible.
The specific objectives and activities utilized in the De-
sign Team meetings are described in Fig. 3. The forum
and structure of the meetings were intentionally collab-
orative and interactive to encourage discussion and cre-
ativity. In Synthesis meetings, Design Team members
reviewed qualitative data gathered in Step 1 and shared
their insights, experiences, and questions to help engen-
der a deep understanding of the strengths and barriers
related to NCD care in western Kenya. Insights were
posted visually and reorganized into broad themes which
represented potential intervention barriers, facilitators,
or unmet needs (Fig. 4, Table 1). Within each theme,
questions were developed to facilitate brainstorming in
Ideate meetings. For example, for the theme “Informa-
tion/Engagement,” we asked, “how might we incorporate
health education into patient care?” We learned in Step
1 that microfinance is generally considered a women’s
activity which may preclude male participation, so for
the theme, “Gender,” we asked, “how might we create a
model that is responsive to the needs of men?” Each
question was formed to catalyze group discussion to ad-
dress important and nuanced aspects of the intervention
that would ultimately impact intervention acceptability
and sustainability.
All ideas were noted and subsequently evaluated in
group discussion for pros, cons, and feasibility in Proto-
type meetings. In the latter example above, we consid-
ered gender-specific groups, targeted screening locations
when men tend to congregate, and community educa-
tion, particularly through male leadership involvement.
Synthesis,
brainstorming,
and
prototyping
were
cyclical and iterative steps that raised new questions in-
fluencing idea generation. In Create meetings, an initial

Page 3 of 13

Fig. 1 (See legend on next page.)

Page 4 of 13

prototype model was developed that combined group
medical care and microfinance. Elements crucial to test-
ing the prototype were developed in this step, including
participant education materials, healthcare worker train-
ing curricula, and screening and evaluation protocols.

Step 3. TEST: assess community acceptance and pilot study

Acceptability studies Qualitative feedback was gathered
to assess community receptiveness to the proposed
prototype model. FGDs of 10–15 individuals were con-
ducted with groups of rural clinicians, microfinance
group members, patients with NCDs, and CHWs. A
question guide was used to steer the discussion in a
semi-structured format. We performed a thematic ana-
lysis of the qualitative feedback utilizing NVivo.

Feasibility pilot study Implementation strategies and
the prototype, as defined in Step 2 Results, were piloted
in one rural community in western Kenya. Adults who
screened “positive” were those with elevated blood pres-
sure or elevated fasting blood glucose. Inclusion criteria
of those who screened positive were newly screened
adults, previously screened adults who had never linked
to care, or existing patients who had linked to care in
the last 6 months. Those with diabetes or hypertension
who did not meet the inclusion criteria were able to join
the group as non-study participants to a maximum
group size of 30 members. Participants and local CHWs
subsequently received training in microfinance, hyper-
tension, and diabetes. Qualitative feedback was elicited
from the participating rural clinician, CHWs, and group
participants at one, three, and 6 months using guided in-
terviews and FGDs.

Fig. 2 BIGPIC design team members

(See figure on previous page.)
Fig. 1 Human-centered design stages and activities in the BIGPIC design process. Steps 1–4 describe each stage of our project in the context of the
HCD steps (Discover, Design, Test, and Refine). As HCD is an iterative process, the arrows describe how the results of each step impact the next

Page 5 of 13

Step 4. REFINE: intervention refinement
The Design Team subsequently reconvened to evaluate
the results of the acceptability studies and feasibility
pilot study. In addition to the original team, representa-
tives from among the pilot study participants were
elected by their peers to take part in the reevaluation
process. In a series of meetings, the Design Team
reviewed the feedback and developed a final BIGPIC
model.

Results
Step 1. DISCOVER: understanding the community
Five mabaraza and 16 focus group discussions were
conducted across 11 sub-counties in western Kenya.

Results from these qualitative studies indicated that cost,
lack of medication availability, distance to health facil-
ities, earned skepticism of the health system, socio-
economic fragility, and stigma were significant barriers
to accessing and maintaining NCD care [27].

Step 2. DESIGN: designing the intervention
Our iterative design process resulted in an initial proto-
type model combining microfinance with monthly group
medical care visits with a rural clinician. Compared to
the original BIGPIC pilot model, this prototype engaged
community health workers (CHWs) as group liaisons,
included a CHW-led health education didactic at every
meeting, and emphasized community-based recruitment
approaches.

Fig. 4 Key themes were organized together to stimulate idea generation

Fig. 3 Format of BIGPIC design team meetings

Page 6 of 13

Step 3. TEST: assess community acceptance and pilot
study
Approximately 90 individuals in the community were
screened, and 31 participants (12 male, 19 female) were
enrolled to form the pilot study group. The group in-
cluded a mix of different ethnic tribes and participants
ranged in age from 36 to 75. In total, 17 FGDs and
guided interviews were conducted (N = 110) at which
point we achieved content saturation.
In general, the initial BIGPIC prototype model was
found to be acceptable, with multiple perceived and an-
ticipated benefits at the individual, family, and commu-
nity levels (Fig. 5). Participants reported improved access
to medical services by mitigating the need to travel, de-
creased cost of medications, peer support, and medica-
tion reliability as important benefits. Community level
feedback provided additional insight to alleviate preexist-
ing concerns regarding the prototype model, highlight
persisting concerns, or raised new concerns not previ-
ously identified.

For example, one concern alleviated by the initial
prototype regarded gender and group dynamics. In
qualitative studies in Step 1 and Step 3, some commu-
nity members expressed concern that differences in age
and gender could affect group participation, given a
strong culture of both gender and age-based hierarchy.
Unintentionally, our pilot testing group was mixed not
only in gender but also age and ethnic tribe. Yet, partici-
pants stated they found diversity in age, gender, and
background to be a strength of the group, providing a
sense of healthy competition between old and young,
and allowing the younger members to take leadership
roles and provide translation to their local language for
the older members. Elected leaders in the group were
both male and female, and gender differences did not
negatively impact group dynamics.
New concerns elicited through this process included
maximum group size and concern that this could lead to
clinician burn out. Additionally, participants requested
increased flexibility in scheduling monthly meetings so
as not to interfere with their annual harvest schedule,
and to expanded availability of commonly used medica-
tions. Researchers and CHWs noted low interest and en-
gagement in the health education didactic sessions
provided by the CHWs.
Persisting
concerns
shared
by
pilot
participants
included apprehension that participation would be
limited by stigma associated with illness such as HIV.
Participants emphasized the importance of anticipa-
tory community education to enhance community
receptiveness, and suggested strategies to facilitate
this. Based on their prior experiences with brief life-
cycles of programs due to limitations in funding and
service delivery, participants and local leaders also

Fig. 5 Benefits and Concerns related to the BIGPIC model

Table 1 Key themes identified in Step 2, Synthesis meetings

Key Themes

Information/engagement

Gender

Finance/Cost

Attitude/Commitment

Time

Confidentiality

Knowledge

Preliminary results from Step 1 presented to the Design Team were organized into
Themes, along with member contributions of personal insights and experiences

Page 7 of 13

expressed concern regarding the sustainability of the
program,
and
noted
these
prior
experiences
may
discourage some from joining. They also reported that
income generally is low among their community and
requested seed money or incentives to jump start
their savings.

Step 4. REFINE: intervention refinement
The final BIGPIC model consists of an integrated group
care and microfinance model, with specific changes to
the prototype model described in Table 3. These include
expanded access to common medications, a reduction in
maximum group size, and clarification of protocols with
CHWs to coordinate changes in meeting times during
the harvest season.
In response to the low interest in health education
didactic sessions, our final model included a rede-
signed education curriculum, which shifted the focus
from didactic sessions on NCD topics to strategies
of shared learning. This included a group facilitation
curriculum to help CHWs facilitate and guide dis-
cussions. For example, the CHW may choose a topic
such as medication adherence, and guide a discus-
sion of challenges to medication adherence, encour-
aging participants to share potential strategies to
improve. Examples of other suggested topics include
diet, exercise, oral hygiene, alcohol use, and stress
management.
As suggested by local leaders and community mem-
bers, our final implementation strategy included in-
creased efforts towards community sensitization of
our intervention and NCDs. We placed an increased
emphasis
on
partnership
with
local
community
leaders, and provided reassurance that our BIGPIC
model remains under Chronic Disease Management
Team purview, a known and trusted presence in the
community.
Finally, an extensive discussion took place regarding
potential program incentives and seed money. Given
community concerns for sustainability, the Design Team
felt strongly that providing seed money for each newly
formed group would be counterproductive as it would
be dependent on grant funding. An intentional decision
was made not to provide monetary incentives, but to
instead scale up training in money management and
agribusiness.

Discussion
The refined BIGPIC model was developed using a four-
step HCD framework, resulting in the development of a
health care delivery model targeting health behaviors,
medication adherence, and financial barriers to accessing
healthcare in rural Kenya. We gathered insights and opin-
ions from the community and formed a transdisciplinary

Design Team of health professionals and community
members to evaluate our data and create an initial proto-
type. This prototype was tested over six months and fine-
tuned through community feedback to enhance accept-
ability and sustainability. The resulting BIGPIC model
combines the benefits of microfinance with the peer sup-
port available through group medical care to enhance
management of hypertension and diabetes. Key insights
that developed through the HCD process informed both
prototype features and implementation strategies and can
be mapped directly to the strengths, needs, and concerns
elicited from the community (Fig. 6, Tables 2-3). Cur-
rently, this product is the primary intervention of a four-
arm randomized control trial to fully evaluate its impact
[25]. Pending the final results of the randomized control
trial, we are committed to working with stakeholders to
scale up the model if it is found effective.
While the potential to leverage HCD for NCD care
has been previously described [28], our study is one of
the first to our knowledge to use HCD for a complex
NCD intervention of this scale [12] . As described by the
recent Lancet Taskforce on NCDs, poverty stems from
and is exacerbated by the global burden of NCDs, and
innovative means are needed to address the household
economic burden of care in order to alleviate global pov-
erty, decrease premature deaths, and progress towards
the United Nations’ Sustainable Develop Goals in Kenya
and other low- and middle-income countries [3, 29, 30].
Empathy-driven HCD at its core strives to understand
the key drivers of human behavior and can be leveraged
to help bridge the “knowing doing gap” that frequently
characterizes
poor adherence
to prescribed lifestyle
changes for NCD management such as dietary changes,
weight management, and tobacco use [28, 31]. In limited
resource settings, HCD is a process that can comple-
ment and support existing approaches to shaping NCD
control such as the World Health Organization STEP-
wise approach [32]. HCD is one approach to optimize
stakeholder engagement, and as in the example of BIG-
PIC, it can propel an understanding of local factors into
the development of a contextualized intervention. In this
study, our approach utilizing HCD for complex interven-
tion design aligns with the Medical Research Council
guidelines for developing complex interventions, utiliz-
ing a systematic approach to a development-evaluation-
implementation process that is tailored to local circum-
stances [33]. Similar approaches to design-thinking have
been described with other disease processes in low-
resource settings [34–36].
Health inequities including those experienced by our
catchment communities in Kenya are deeply rooted in
complex social determinants, and increasingly need to
be addressed in cross-sector and transdisciplinary part-
nerships [37]. Our HCD process provided a means to

Page 8 of 13

gather data and interact with the community to under-
stand strengths and barriers to care, while also inviting
community members to participate in innovation to en-
act changes in priority areas [38]. Through early in-
volvement of stakeholders, we were able to not only
address critical concerns early in the intervention design
process, but also build partnerships with local stake-
holders that would later be critical to the success of
intervention implementation. Many components of our
intervention and implementation strategies were illumi-
nated through critical insights from end users through-
out
our
HCD
process.
For
example,
multiple
community members voiced concern for a sustainable
intervention that would engage with local leaders and
not be dependent on external funding. The use of an
economic-based intervention as well as many of the fea-
tures of this microfinance and group care model are in
response to these lessons learned.

Facilitators of success
Our intervention development operated on the backdrop
of AMPATH’s existing partnerships with communities
in its catchment areas. Its existing programs in NCD
management and microfinance, network, and presence
in rural communities helped to facilitate participant re-
cruitment as well as engage with local leadership.
AMPATH’s existing Chronic Disease Management pro-
gram and resources including rural clinicians, clinical li-
aisons, and knowledge of the local communities allowed
us to scale up our prototype more quickly and effect-
ively. Increased availability of cellular service in rural
areas made it possible for us to access patient records
even in remote areas for continuity of care.
Notably, the Kenyan National Hospital Insurance Fund
(NHIF) has recently extended its benefits to include
NCD care in its benefits package. Our HCD process can
provide insight as to the development and type of

Fig. 6 The BIGPIC model. The final BIGPIC intervention consists of an integrated group care and microfinance model. In this figure, the
surrounding circles represent the unique milieu that has informed BIGPIC’s development. These include community strengths (green text),
barriers to care (red text), and concerns regarding the BIGPIC model (blue text) elicited from community and pilot participant feedback, as
described in Fig. 1 (Steps 1, 3, and 4). The surrounding descriptors in black text are key features and implementation strategies of the BIGPIC
model. Each can be mapped to a community-driven strength, barrier, or concern. The text highlighted in yellow represents changes that were
made during the Design Team Re-evaluation (Fig. 1, Step 4) in response to participant feedback

Page 9 of 13

intervention that can be successfully incorporated under
the benefits offered by NHIF.

Limitations
Perhaps one of the greatest strengths of HCD and a
vital lesson-learned in our design process is the im-
portance of listening to and collaborating with our
participants, which helped us to better understand
their challenges and priorities. However, HCD can be
a time-consuming process that may not be feasible
for all project timelines and resources. Stakeholder
buy-in and active engagement throughout the HCD
cycle is essential, both at the personnel, institutional,
and governmental level. This may be difficult to gar-
ner in some circumstances whether through lack of

availability or lack of familiarity with this specific ap-
proach to intervention development.
Additionally, as use of HCD is still fairly novel in
resource-limited settings, the presence of a facilitator fa-
miliar with the HCD process and tools is necessary but
may be cost- and time–prohibitive, particularly if inter-
vention development takes place over weeks to months.
Similarly, while the formation of a multidisciplinary de-
sign team is a critical strength of HCD that begets a dee-
per understanding of the local context and paves the
way for future intervention implementation, coordin-
ation of a 10 to 15 person team across diverse educa-
tional, language, and geographical backgrounds may be
challenging. To combat this, HCD practitioners may
consider shorter and faster cycles of prototyping for less

Table 2 Key insights and BIGPIC prototype features

KEY INSIGHTS
PROTOTYPE FEATURES
IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGY

Strength: Community, sense of brotherhood
Group-based care model to provide peer support and
education
Locally-based CHWs facilitate group formation

Community-based health
screening to ensure local group
formation

Strength: Community leadership
Participants elect group leaders and are self-governed by a mu-
tually agreed upon constitution.

Barrier: High cost of care (medications,
transport, cost of services, caregiver burden)
Group care is combined with a microfinance program to
increase individual access to funds for personal or medical use.
Clinician brings basic medication supply box at every visit

Community-based health
screening to ensure local group
formation.
Rural clinician and CHWs travel to
group meetings at local
community centers.

Barrier: Far distance to health facilities and poor
quality roads
Community-based groups are linked with a local CHW.
Community-based health
screening to ensure local group
formation.
Rural clinician and CHWs travel to
group meetings at local
community centers.

Barrier: Poor quality of existing physician-
patient relationships
Same physicians return to the group as much as possible.
Clinicians trained in group care are existing CDM clinicians.

Concern: Variable group dynamics, particularly
between age groups and gender
Participants create and sign a mutually agreed upon
constitution that emphasizes self-governance and conflict
resolution.
Groups have a minimum number of study participants, and
participants can bring additional friends/family to join the
group until the maximum group size is attained.

Concern: Stigma associated with illness or with
AMPATH’s reputation as an organization for
people with HIV.

Increased efforts for community
education and destigmatization.
Remove AMPATH logo from
trucks.

Concern: Confidentiality
Group constitution includes a confidentiality clause that is
created by the group members.
Time is allotted for individual clinician assessment at every
group care meeting.

Concern: High cost of participation (share
value) may prohibit some from joining
Group members agree upon share value at the start of the
group.
Limited number of shares can be bought per meeting.

Concern: Sustainability of new programs
No external funding/seed money is required to start a
microfinance group.
Clinicians trained in group care are existing CDM employees.

Early local and governmental
leadership involvement.
Implementation occurs with
existing CDM teams.

Key insights elicited from the design process can be mapped directly to prototype features and implementation strategies. CDM - Chronic disease management

Page 10 of 13

complex interventions, in order to efficiently evaluate
ideas and integrate lessons-learned for continuous im-
provement and sustainability. Beginning with shorter cy-
cles
may
also
help
gain
stakeholder
support
for
subsequent longer cycles of more complex intervention
development.
We also recognize that HCD is a process that
requires tolerance of ambiguity, pivots, and prototyp-
ing—factors that can seem to be in opposition to
traditional hypothesis-driven research methodologies
[38]. However, we feel that HCD is a process for the
design and development of interventions and imple-
mentation
strategies
that
are
both
desirable
and
feasible in the local context, which can then be eval-
uated
with
traditional
hypothesis-driven
statistical
methodologies. In our study, we have combined HCD
with a more traditional randomized controlled imple-
mentation research trial to evaluate the effectiveness
of the intervention [25].
Finally, there is growing enthusiasm in both aca-
demic medicine and global health spheres for social
innovation and design thinking as tools that are
more capable and responsive to the needs of end
users [38–40]. However, there is still limited evi-
dence regarding the impact of design thinking meth-
odologies and related concepts on health outcomes
[41]. Additional research is needed to evaluate the

impact of participatory methodologies such as design
thinking and social enterprises on health outcomes.

Application to other contexts
The development and implementation of BIGPIC is one
example of how HCD concepts can be used in resource-
limited settings. Of particular relevance was the inclusion
of transdisciplinary community stakeholders on our De-
sign Team, who represented not only healthcare profes-
sionals, but also local community members, leaders, and
microfinance experts. Our HCD process was inherently
inclusive and collaborative, inviting innovation and feed-
back in every stage of development, and thrived through
partnership and collaboration [42]. Its applications can be
imagined broadly in both complex intervention develop-
ment such as ours, or in more simple settings of adapting
a known model or intervention to local context [38].
While it is unlikely that our exact HCD design and group
care and microfinance model will be replicated wholesale
in other contexts, our described process offers relevant
lessons in low-resource settings both in the United States
as well as abroad, in line with a scoping review of design
thinking in global settings [38].
Recognizing that there are universal elements to care
that are common across geopolitical and financial land-
scapes, we advocate for context-specific interventions
that
can
help
to
optimize
care
in
these
settings.

Table 3 BIGPIC Re-evaluation changes

INITIAL PROTOTYPE FEATURE
FEEDBACK/CONCERNS
MODIFICATIONS

Monthly meeting time determined by
clinician availability.
Participant availability may change based on
agricultural season.
CHWs function as primary liaison with medical team
to coordinate best meeting time before the end of
each month.

Group education on NCDs at the time of
group formation and before every monthly
meeting.

There is low interest in group education.
Health education time is modified from didactic
teaching to facilitated group discussions on self-
management and problem solving.
CHWs receive training in group facilitation.

Maximum group size of ~ 30 participants.
Large groups may overburden clinicians.
Maximum group size is decreased to ~ 20
participants.

Village-based health screenings to recruit
intervention participants.
Concern for disease stigma may preclude
willingness to join groups
Renew efforts to increase community health and
intervention awareness.
Remove AMPATH logo from clinician vehicles.

Clinician brings a toolkit of common
medications for chronic disease
management.

Availability of other commonly used
medications (i.e., ibuprofen, antibiotics).
Toolkit of medications needed communicated to
AMPATH pharmacy.

Community entry focused on local
leadership.
Concerns regarding program sustainability.
Community entry and scale up includes multiple
levels of leadership.
Given CDM program is well known, emphasize roll
out is in partnership with the existing CDM program.
No seed money provided, but increased agribusiness
and financial trainings.

Microfinance training during group
enrollment, and CHW-led health education
didactic sessions every month.

There is low income generation among
community members, particularly elderly and
those with low education levels.

Agribusiness and financial trainings are incorporated.
Health education time is modified as above.

Feedback and concerns elicited from pilot participant feedback informed key intervention modifications

Page 11 of 13

Conclusions
In this study, we describe how a four-step HCD frame-
work was used to tailor NCD service delivery to address
multiple barriers to care for patients with hypertension
and diabetes in western Kenya. HCD provided a means
to engage early with local stakeholders, and the process
of iteration and feedback was critical to address stake-
holder concerns and optimize intervention design and
implementation. While this approach to NCD interven-
tion planning may be time-intensive, it resulted in an
intervention package that is tailored to the local context
and well-received by stakeholders. Future initiatives can
use HCD to partner with local stakeholders to find in-
novative ways to address complex health problems in
resource-constrained settings.