Exploring the Needs and Preferences of Autistic
Users in Extended Reality: A Participatory
and Human-Centered Approach

Jie Lu(B)
and Matthew Schmidt

University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32601, USA

3
Project Description

Project PHoENIX (Participatory, Human-centered, Equitable, Neurodiverse, Inclusive,
eXtended Reality) was initiated to solicit voices of the autistic community in terms of
needs and preferences regarding the use of VR, with a focus on autistic adolescents
who are transitioning from secondary education into adult life. In particular, we were
interested in the types of reality that autistic people have used or plan to use, the reasons
for their use, and how they wish to use it more. The project was conducted in a developed
VR environment by inviting the target population, as well as other stakeholders such
as their parents and caregivers, to experience this desktop-based VR and participate in
designed activities. The VR environment was designed with user-centered methods (i.e.,
empathy interview, empathy mapping, personas).
Project PHoENIX consists of three individual spaces, namely, the Training Space,
Gallery 1 VR for Autism, and Gallery 2 Social VR Tools. Each space has its unique
features and objectives and is designed with a number of interactive activities. For
example, the Training Space is designed to train users in navigating a desktop-based
virtual environment. A variety of activities were designed to teach and reinforce the skills
needed in the rest of the spaces. Gallery 1 is designed as a virtual museum addressing
multiple aspects of VR, from its general use to speciﬁc use (for autistic people), from
lab to the real world, and from the past to the future. It also includes a 360-degree video
that demonstrates how to navigate to a bus stop from a speciﬁc location on a university
campus. In Gallery 2, we present users with a variety of social VR software developed
by different companies. Participants are able to learn about features and affordances of
each social VR tool and then rate them on a scale of one star to three stars, designed as a
drag-and-drop activity. Both gallery spaces have a designated area for group discussion.

4
Methods

4.1
Design Approach

Co-design and participatory design are a widely applied user-centered innovation
methodologies that values the involvement of end users and associated stakeholders
in the design process [27]. In Project PHoENIX, a range of user experience design
methods such as design thinking methods were used to ensure the participation of end
users as well as stakeholders, and to gather information about participants’ prior experi-
ences in research studies and with VR technology. In the following, we provide a brief
introduction to the design thinking methods and discuss their beneﬁts.

Design Thinking Methods. User experience design research and methodologies high-
light the users. To approach potential target users, we applied widely used design thinking

methods, including a three-stage process of empathy interviews, empathy mapping, and
persona development. Empathy interviews [28] are one-on-one conversations that help
designers understand how potential users feel about the central problem and how they
might perceive designed solutions. Unlike other types of interviews, empathy interviews
aim to promote empathy and require interviewers to immerse, observe, and engage dur-
ing the interviews [28]. To systematically extract information from empathy interviews,
we generate empathy maps by categorizing interview notes based on what interviewees
say, do, think, and feel. Empathy maps help designers understand the interviewee’s
emotions and experiences, which are priorities of Project PHoENIX. Empathy maps
are particularly informative in creating user personas, which are ﬁctional archetypes of
users who might use the designed technology within their speciﬁc usage context. Each
persona represents a ﬁctional user who shares the same or similar characteristics as a
group of learners. Personas guide and inform design decisions and help examine them.
To this end, personas should be updated if learner needs and challenges change. Taken
together, we used empathy methods to learn what is important to autistic people, to
reveal emotional and perhaps tacit insights, to explore behaviors, needs, and challenges,
and ultimately to develop a deep understanding of their daily lived experiences [29, 30].

Four autistic participants were invited to participate in the empathy interviews, result-
ing in the development of four user personas. These participants were invited back to
review the personas and to share their thoughts and opinions on colors, themes, objects,
etc. of the design of any VR space. Information collected from the second round of
interviews resulted in the development of two gallery spaces (Fig. 1). Additionally, a
Training Space (Fig. 2) was developed to help participants navigate the VR space and
complete interactive tasks.

Fig. 1. An overview of the initial design of Gallery 1.

142
J. Lu and M. Schmidt

Fig. 2. An overview of the Training Space.

4.2
Phase I Usability Testing

To assess the usability and user experience of the spaces, we recruited ﬁve autistic people
who had not participated in previous studies. Each participant completed two usability
sessions on different days. In Session 1, each participant evaluated the Training Space
and Gallery 1, while only Gallery 2 was evaluated on the second session. Each session
was facilitated by a trained researcher under the supervision of a university professor
and lasted about an hour. The facilitator adhered to a pre-developed protocol throughout
each session, and at least two observers were present to take ﬁeld notes. Participants
were asked to think out loud in all testing sessions, which were recorded with video and
audio with their consent.
Instruments used in this phase include the Computer System Usability Question-
naire (CSUQ) [31], a self-developed social validity questionnaire, and four open-ended
questions. The CSUQ is a standardized self-reported questionnaire designed to assess
the perceived usability of a given software, project, or application [31]. Speciﬁcally,
it evaluates a given technology along four factors, namely, overall, system usefulness,
informationquality,andinterfacequality.Thesocialvalidityquestionnairewasinternally
developed by the lead researcher and reviewed by experts for content validity, aiming to
assess the research procedures, goals, and participants’ experience. As a critical concept
in the ﬁeld of applied behavior analysis [32], social validity tends to be overlooked in
research that involved autistic people. This could potentially affect the effectiveness of
evidence-based intervention [33], including applications used for autism research.
The three instruments were input in a Qualtrics survey distributed to participants at
the end of Session 2. Participants’ responses were exported from Qualtrics and imported
into spreadsheet software for analysis. Following guidelines by [34], CSUQ data were
analyzed by ﬁrst calculating individual scores and then averaging them across all items.
Additionally, data were analyzed along the reported factor structure [34]. Data from the
social validity questionnaire were quantitatively analyzed by computing the mean score
of all individuals across all items. Video recordings from each session were processed

143

(Fig. 3) and analyzed using a coding scheme adapted from [35]. Finally, content analysis
was conducted on responses from the four open-ended questions.

Fig. 3. A screenshot that illustrates how videos were combined, synchronized, and closed-
captioned for video analysis.

4.3
Phase II Pilot Testing

In order to assess the feasibility of conducting research studies within Project PHoENIX
the VR environments, a pilot testing was carried out with a focus group of four autistic
participants. All participants were invited to campus. Upon arrival, they were ﬁrst greeted
by the research team in the research lab, and then placed in four different rooms. Note that
all participants had completed the training prior to the pilot testing session. Participants
completed Gallery 1 and Gallery 2 as a group within one day with multiple breaks.
Research procedures, instruments, and data analysis techniques used in this phase were
identical to those used in Phase I.

5
Results

5.1
Design Revisions

Design revisions were iteratively and instantly implemented between sessions in the
two phases. The most salient change was the structure of Gallery 1 and Gallery 2.
Initially, an open-space structure with an un-curated experience was employed, allowing
participants to visit any station in any order at any time before being called to gather
in the gathering area. However, after the ﬁrst two usability testing sessions in Phase I,
participants experienced technical issues, such as slow loading speed, blurry graphics,

144
J. Lu and M. Schmidt

and delayed motion responses. After an investigation into such issues, it was discovered
that these issues could be due to the participants’ internet, device models, and the fact
that our designed spaces contained too many three-dimensional objects. Given the lack
of control over participants’ devices or internet, the design team opted to reduce the size
of each gallery by breaking the entire space with four stations into smaller spaces, all of
which were still connected to the gallery using a directory map (Fig. 4).

Fig. 4. An overview of the ﬁnal design of Gallery 1 (left) and Gallery 2 (right).

5.2
Qualitative Results of Phase I and Phase II

In Phase I, a spreadsheet was used to record usability issues identiﬁed by observers or
directly captured by participants during the testing sessions, with severity levels noted
[37]. A total of 58 usability problems were identiﬁed, of which 52 were resolved (Fig. 5).
Of the remaining six unresolved issues, three were not considered usability issues and
the rest were related to cosmetic preferences, which varied by participant. In Phase II,
no usability issues were identiﬁed by observers or participants.
The four open-ended questions asked participants to provide feedback on what they
liked the best, what they liked the least, what they would change, and any additional com-
ments (optional). Participants generally appreciated the atmosphere in all three spaces
and described it as “nice and calming”. Acknowledgement of the contents presented
in the stations was observed, as multiple participants indicated they enjoyed “learning
about different VR technologies and how they might be applied to autism research”, and
“seeing the different programs”. Such perspectives aligned exceptionally well with our
design intentions, which were drawn from the empathy interviews and personas in terms
of autistic users’ preferences and needs.
In this phase, participants’ responses to the question regarding what they liked the
least and what they would change emphasized technical difﬁculties encountered during
the testing sessions, such as “The volume needs a toggle”, “The rating system was a bit
difﬁcult to use”, and “Improve the drag and drop of the rating system”. All of these issues
were addressed by the research team before Phase II. Responses to these two questions
after Phase II Pilot Testing were far less critical, with some participants indicating that

145

Fig. 5. Total number of usability issues identiﬁed and resolved, stratiﬁed by priority.

they were “not sure” or providing comments unrelated to the VR environment or research
procedures, such as a lunch order.
Results from the video analysis in both phases support the quantitative ﬁndings
and were consistent with responses from the open-ended questions. In Phase I, fewer
usability problems and more recognition of the design were identiﬁed by participants
as the study progressed. In Phase II, the primary focus was on examining the feasibility
of Project PHoENIX and its potential to scale for use in an authentic research context.
The nature of the user experience was broadly exposed as participants initiated and
engaged in a variety of conversations around VR for autistic people (“It’s nice to know
we’re being thought of”). The usefulness and relevance of the program were highlighted
throughout both phases. For instance, three participants took turns sharing their personal
experiences on social anxiety at a station in Gallery 1, “What VR helps with is that it’s
not a place where people would be watching you speciﬁcally, because you can mess up
all you want in VR”, “There won’t be consequences if they mess up in VR”, “It would
have really helped me out”, etc.

5.3
Quantitative Results of Phase I and Phase II

In Phase I, the mean CSUQ score for overall performance of PHoENIX was 1.98 (sd =
0.53), indicating an above average performance according to the benchmarks established
by [31]. It is important to note that the CSUQ scale was designed using a 7-point Likert
scale ranging from strongly agree to strongly disagree, where a smaller rating repre-
sents better performance. To obtain a more concrete understanding of how PHoENIX
performed, we converted the traditional score from the historical 7-point scale to a 0–
100-point scale to use the Curved Grading Scale (CGS) [31], which has been shown as
valid and reliable convention method [31]. A mean score of 81.79 was obtained, falling
within the 90–95 percentile range on the CGS, indicating acceptable usability between

146
J. Lu and M. Schmidt

“Good” and “Excellent” [31]. The analysis of the usability of PHoENIX’s VR envi-
ronments along the reported factor structure showed that Project PHoENIX performed
above average on every factor. Additionally, the mean score across all eight items in the
social validity questionnaire was 5.88 (sd = 0.98), indicating acceptable and appropriate
research goals and procedures perceived by autistic users.
In Phase II, the mean CSUQ score of PHoENIX was 1.45 (sd = 0.57), demonstrating
an above average performance. Moreover, the usability of PHoENIX’s VR environments
improved on every factor, with scores lower than those obtained in Phase I and below the
benchmarks. The mean social validity score was 6.94 (sd = 0.13), which also improved
compared to the average score of social validity in Phase I. To assess the continuous
improvement of the overall usability and social validity of PHoENIX, we compared
results across two phases in Table 1. The iterations of PHoENIX resulted in an increase
over 10 points (normalized scores) in CSUQ from Phase I to Phase II, resulting in “best
imaginable” usability [31]. The social validity score increased by over 1 point, indicating
an improvement in research procedures and more positive perceptions of the research
goals [36] by autistic participants.

Table 1. Comparison of results from two stages of usability testing.

6
Discussion

The present study aimed to solicit voices of the autistic community in terms of needs
and preferences regarding the use of VR. To achieve this goal, we utilized a participa-
tory design approach along with a range of user-centered learning experience design
methods (e.g., empathy interviews, personas) to co-develop an inclusive VR technology
with autistic participants that caters to their needs and preferences. Participation of autis-
tic people throughout the entire process of design, development, implementation, and
evaluation was integral to ensuring that project PHoENIX fulﬁlled its intended purpose.
Speciﬁcally, the design decisions, including colors, themes, and objects used in the ﬁnal
version, were directly informed by participants’ inputs. Furthermore, the speciﬁc content
of the VR application was developed by considering the features that autistic users were
seeking to help them with autism.
A formative evaluation of the project was performed across two phases in multi-
ple sessions, with ﬁndings from such sessions being used to iteratively improve the
overall design of the VR environments. Speciﬁcally, the use of multiple usability eval-
uation methods, such as think-aloud protocol and self-reported questionnaires, resulted
in multiple sources of qualitative and quantitative data, ensuring the validity and reli-
ability of the ﬁndings. In this study, data sources include video recordings of each

147

testing session, individual responses to open-ended questions, and individual responses
to questionnaires.
Taken together, our qualitative and quantitative ﬁndings suggest that Project
PHoENIX achieves high system usability, fulﬁlls satisfactory user experience, and is
relevant for autistic stakeholders. The rigorous formative evaluation demonstrates an
example of how researchers and practitioners can assess educational technologies to
ensure stakeholders’ voices are heard. Our approach to co-design and participatory
design underscores the mission of Project PHoENIX and takes the initiative towards
promoting a more inclusive future for research in this area.