Delivering a Drug Information App to Underserved Communities: A 
User-Centered Design Approach

Vusumuzi Maphosa

Methodology

The current study adopted DSRM, which uses pragmatism as a research philosophy to evaluate the 
interaction between knowledge and action (Goldkuhl, 2012; Hevner, March, & Park, 2004; Iivari,  
2007; March & Smith, 1995; Vaishnavi & Kuechler, 2015). DSRM is suited for interventionist 
research that provides a solution to address an identified problem. DSRM creates and evaluates 
artifacts to address existing organizational problems (Hevner et al., 2004; Peffers, Tuunanen, 
Rothenberger, & Chatterjee, 2007). The DSRM produces naturalistic and artificial artifacts. In 
naturalistic, the utility of the developed artifact is evaluated in a natural environment, while the 
artificial aims at theory building (Vaishnavi & Kuechler, 2015; Venable, Pries-Heje, & Baskerville,  
2012). The output of a DSRM study can be a model, construct, method, or implementation (March 
& Smith, 1995), and this study adopted a naturalistic implementation. Peffers et al. (2007) submit 
that the research contribution of a DSRM study is embedded in the designed artifact. The 
methodology helps the researcher empathize with and understand the contextual and environmental 
circumstances of the participants.

The study utilized a three-cycle Design Science Research Methodology (DSRM) as the conceptual 
framework (Hevner, 2007), as shown in Figure 1. DSRM was developed for producing and presenting 
DS research (Peffers et al., 2007). DSRM seeks to create artifacts that solve real-world problems and 
evaluate DS research. The artifact can be a socio-technical system, a model, or an instantiation 
(Hevner, 2007). The first stage of the DSRM is problem identification or specification, where the 
artifact’s purpose is defined. The next phase involves building the artifact by transforming the problem 
into a tentative design. The last stage of the DSRM is evaluating the artifact through observations and 
testing to show its functionality, efficacy, and usability. The DSRM process is highly repetitive, time- 
consuming, and costly as several repetitive steps are undertaken to improve the previous steps. The 
artifact was evaluated as a prototype to demonstrate its mutability in this research.

Figure 1. A three-phase DSRM adapted from (Hevner, A Three Cycle View of Design Science Research, 2007).

The Relevance Cycle

This cycle involves identifying the problem and presenting potential solutions for the stated problem 
to improve practice and the application domain (Hevner, 2007; Vaishnavi & Kuechler, 2015). The 
introduction and literature review situated the problem and other solutions in use. Ten participants 
were randomly selected from the community to participate in problem identification and refine the 
artifacts’ requirements based on their needs and perception of the existing problem. The DSRM allows 
the researcher to empathize with the participants, consider their contextual and environmental 
circumstances and better understand their needs. Participants owned a smartphone and had an app 
installed. These included five community members, two community health workers, two nurses, and 
a pharmacist. A focus group discussion (FGD) held in May 2020 gathered the participants’ views. The 
participants agreed that access to healthcare and medical information was challenging in their 
community because of very few healthcare facilities. Participants also highlighted the high doctor-to- 
patient ratio. Ogunkola et al. (2020) and Maphosa (2020b) noted that most communities in Africa 
have poor access to socio-economic information such as healthcare and news. The participants 
highlighted the unavailability of traditional means of information access, such as radio, and television, 
poor roads, unreliable transportation systems, and high data costs. Participants emphasized that the 
solution should be easy to use with no cognitive burden or effort.

Rigor Cycle

The cycle involves identifying different ideas that could address the problem identified in the relevance 
cycle (Peffers et al., 2007). Previous interventions involve the use of radio, SMS, and mobile apps. The 
participants recruited for the relevance cycle selected the mobile app as the most appropriate solution. 
The researcher analyzed some literature for existing artifacts that could meet the requirements 
specified in the relevance cycle. The literature review found no apps developed in Zimbabwe to 
improve vulnerable communities’ access to medical health information. Some SMS-based interven­
tions were found in gray literature. A few drug information apps have been deployed in developing 
countries, as most evaluated apps were deployed in developed countries. The apps offered drug 
information, photos of the drugs, effects, contradictions, and self-care treatment, among other 
functions.

Develop/Build Phase

This phase describes the development and evaluation of the proposed artifact to help the target 
community (Venable et al., 2012). The prototype was developed after considering the functionality 
of related drug information apps. The app’s development was highly iterative and incremental, with 
each following design session incorporating user feedback from the previous session. Hevner (2007) 
highlighted that artifacts should be evaluated through multiple design sessions before being released 
for field testing. Users contributed ideas on the graphics, the layout of the screens, and the content.

Design Iterations

Participants were recruited from the community to design the drug information app prototype. 
Participation was voluntary, the participants’ identities were kept anonymous, and their views were 
only used in this study. The researcher paid for the transport costs and an honorarium of USD10 per 
participant. Kellerman and Jones (2013) argued that if a system is difficult to operate, it is likely to have 
low uptake, and therefore systems being developed should consider the technological capabilities of 
the targeted users. Each design iteration resulted in significant changes recommended by the potential 
users, which improved the prototype’s development (Vaishnavi & Kuechler, 2015). User suggestions 
were vetted to ensure they were feasible and resulted in a better app prototype.

First Design Iteration
Participants who did not participate in the relevance and rigor cycles were recruited for the partici­
patory design cycle. The participants included a pharmacist, a nurse, two community health workers, 
and four community members aged 19–45. The FGD session took place during the first week of 
July 2020. This session aimed to elicit information to inform the app’s design to increase its accept­
ability. The recommendations from the relevance cycle formed the basis of the first design iteration. 
Participants were shown some designs of existing apps and their functionality. These helped partici­
pants understand how other apps operated as they proposed the app’s functionality and the content to 
be included. Participants suggested that the app provide a list of drugs by their common and scientific 
names, uses, and dosage levels. The app should also indicate what the drug can cure, adverse effects, 
and the organs affected by the drugs. The participants selected a grid layout in terms of design, where 
objects are displayed in a vertical or horizontal scrollable grid, with the content dynamically inserted 
on the user interface. Participants recommended the inclusion of colorful graphics. The researcher 
then used paper-based low-fidelity prototypes to represent these recommendations for presentation in 
the next iteration phase.

Second Design Iteration
The participants who participated in the first design session were invited to the second design session 
at the end of July 2020. The researcher incorporated the participants’ views from the first design 
iteration and presented the sketches. Low-fidelity paper-based app sketches were presented to the 
group, as shown in Figure 2, and the participants agreed that the prototype depicted their preferred 
app features and functionality. The pharmacist suggested that the app provide more detailed informa­
tion on drug use and side effects for medical personnel. Participants also suggested that the app should 
work in environments with intermittent connectivity as low bandwidth connections characterized 
many rural areas. Participants were presented with the main screens of existing apps to select app 
features such as navigation and color scheme. Participants suggested that the app prototype should 
have a search function and colorful graphics. The views of the participants were taken into considera­
tion in the next design.

Figure 2. The low-fidelity prototypes.

Third Design Iteration
The third design iteration was held at the end of August 2020. The suggestions made in the second 
design iteration were used to develop high-fidelity prototypes, whose screenshots are presented in 
Figure 3. Six participants were recruited for this iteration, a pharmacist, nurse, community health 
worker, and three members of the public. Participants were presented with a high-fidelity prototype 
that resembled the actual app during the design iteration. They were satisfied with the incorporation of 
their feedback into the design. However, some participants suggested that the app should have local 
language translation; this was not feasible as most drug names and terminology were unavailable in the 
local language. Participants suggested that the app should provide images of the drugs; this recom­
mendation was not considered as it would make the app data-intensive, use more bandwidth, and may 
fail to load when the network is erratic.

App Description

The mobile app prototype was developed for the Android app, the most common mobile phone 
operating system in the developing world. The app’s purpose is to improve access to reliable drug 
information. The app provides two interfaces, one for the health expert and the general public, as 
shown in Figure 3. The app allows users to access drug information by browsing through 
a comprehensive list of drugs ordered alphabetically from A-Z. Drugs are ordered by their generic 
and brand names, as partly shown in Figure 4 and Figure 5. Users can search for information by typing 
two or more letters or keywords to locate the drug information. Once the user has located the drug 
they want, the app provides all its known uses. Each drug has corresponding side effects and the organs 
or the human system it affects.

App Evaluation by Community Members

The purpose of evaluating the app is to demonstrate its usability, mutability, and how it meets the 
needs of the targeted users, which is a critical phase of the DSRM that provides a proof-of-concept 
(Peffers et al., 2007). In September 2020, twenty potential users from the community who were not 
part of the design group were recruited to evaluate the prototype to determine how the app met the 
target population’s needs. Most (65%) of the participants were female; 45% were less than 30 years old, 
55% had 3–5 years of experience using apps, and included diverse community members, as shown in 
Table 1. The participants agreed that the app helped bridge challenges with access to drug information. 
All the participants agreed that the app was well-designed and easy to use. The majority (75%) of the 

Figure 3. The app’s home page and other screens.

participants found the app memorable as they could remember navigating across the different menus. 
All the participants did not find usability errors during interaction with the app. All the participants 
agreed that the app has good graphics and design and would recommend it to their friends. As part of 
the DSRM, the final evaluation was a field study that targeted university students.

App Evaluation by University Students
University students performed the final evaluation of the app during the first two weeks of their 2022 
academic year. A 21-item electronic questionnaire was created in Google forms and shared with students 
via mailing lists and WhatsApp groups. Only students with an Android smartphone who consented 
qualified for the survey. They downloaded the app and performed simple tasks. After using the app for 
two weeks, 206 participants evaluated the app. The participants’ demographics are presented in Table 2. 
Most (57.28%) participants were female; almost half (45.15%) were aged between 18 and 24. About 
three-quarters were undergraduate students, while 61.65% had over five years of experience using apps.

Procedures

The usability evaluation was based on usefulness, efficiency, error, memorability, learnability, and 
design criteria identified by Preece et al. (2002) and Hussain, Mkpojiogu, Jamaludin, and Moh (2017) 

Figure 4. A list of drugs, amoxicillin uses, side effects, and organs affected.

Figure 5. A list of drugs, Magnesium chloride uses, its side effects, and organs affected.

and in line with the Technology Acceptance Model (Maphosa, 2020a). A recent study by Farao et al. 
(2020) used a usability questionnaire. A five-point Likert scale where “1” represented Strongly 
Disagree, “2” denoted Disagree, “3” represented Neutral, “4” denoted Agree, and “5” represented 
Strongly Agree was used. The first part of the questionnaire included four questions for collecting 
demographic data. The remaining section contains 17 questions to collect usability data, such as 
design, efficiency, learnability, and ease of use, as shown in Table 3. The questionnaire’s internal 
reliability was validated using Cronbach’s alpha, and a value of 0.78 was observed. The value reflects 
that the questionnaire was reliable, as Leech, Barrett, and Morgan (2005) posited that the minimum 
threshold was 0.7. The participants were informed of their rights and that participation was voluntary.

Results and Discussion

Underserved communities experience difficulties accessing health information as health centers are 
sparsely distributed with limited access to traditional sources of information such as radio and 
television. Usability and user experience results show that the app provided a more feasible and 
valuable way to access drug information. Systems designed for communities with low digital skills 
must be easy to learn to ensure high adoption. Using iterative design principles and involving targeted 
users from inception to evaluation can enhance adoption. The study’s objective was to develop 

Table 1. Demographics of the participants.

Demographic variables
Demographic variables values
Frequency
Percentage
Gender
Male
7
35%
Female
13
65%
Age
20–30 years
9
45%
31–40 years
5
25%
41–50 years 
Over 50 years

4 
2

20% 
10%
Qualification
High school
14
70%
Undergraduate
6
30%
Experience in using 

mobile apps

1–2 years 
3–5 years

3 
11

15% 
55%
Over 5 years
6
30%
Occupation
Community Health officer
3
15%
Members of the public 
Farmer 
Pharmacist

6 
3 
2

30% 
15% 
10%
Teacher
3
15%
Nurse
3
15%

Table 2. Demographics of university students.

Demographic variables
Demographic variables values
Frequency
Percentage
Gender
Male
88
42.72%
Female
118
57.28%
Age
18–24 years
93
45.15%
25–30 years
73
35.43%
Over 30 years
40
19.42%
Qualification
Undergraduate
153
74.27%
Postgraduate
53
25.73%
Experience in using 

mobile apps

1–2 years 
3–5 years

17 
62

08.25% 
30.10%
Over 5 years
127
61.65%
Have you used 

a mHealth app 
before?

Yes
31
15%
No
175
85%

a mHealth app prototype to improve access to drug information by underserved communities in 
Zimbabwe. All the participants could download the app prototype, install it on their smartphones and 
navigate the app to access drug information. In a similar study, the Med Assist drug app was found 
usable and enhanced drug adherence (Chew, Lai, & Ng, 2020). Over 60% of the participants had more 
than 5 years of experience in using apps; surprisingly, only 15% of the participants had a health 
information app. This shows that using apps is a new phenomenon that must be supported to improve 
access to healthcare.

Eighty per cent of the participants agreed that the app was easy to learn, and Cronbach’s alpha 
coefficient was 0.75, as shown in Table 4. Thus users could easily navigate the prototype without 
assistance. These findings are similar to Alloghani et al. (2015); their mobile app had high adoption 
rates as patients perceived that it was easy to use and learn through a rating of 75%. In a related study, 
Hussain et al. (2017) reported that 90.6% of participants found the Shazam app very easy to use. About 
three-quarters (78%) of the participants believed that the prototype provided an efficient tool for 
accessing drug information quickly, with a Cronbach’s alpha coefficient of 0.85. The results are in line 
with Alturki and Gay’s (2017) work, who observed a score of 75% when they evaluated the efficiency of 
an obesity app. In a usability study of a mHealth app, Nasir and Yurder (2015) concluded that patients 
and the general public had a positive attitude toward the app as they considered it helpful in improving 
their healthcare. Participants reviewed the prototype’s design by evaluating the screen layout and 

Table 3. Usability evaluation responses by university students.

Variables
Alpha
N
Mean
Standard Deviation
Learnability
0.75
4.0
In general, the app was easy to use
206
4.0
0.42
I easily learned how to navigate 

through the app

206
3.9
0.45

It was easy to complete the tasks
206
4.1
0.50
Design
0.77
3.93
I found the app responsive
206
4.3
0.38
The apps’ menus are appropriate 

and easy to follow

206
4.0
0.40

The app design is excellent, with 

appropriate icons

206
3.5
0.55

Efficiency
0.85
3.73
I found the app efficient in 

accessing drug information

206
3.9
0.48

The information provided by the 

app is relevant

206
3.5
0.50

Searching using the first two letters 

and keywords makes it easy to 
locate drugs

206
3.8
0.35

Error
0.78
4.25
I did not encounter bugs/errors 

during usage

4.4
0.42

During my use, the app responded 

quickly and did not crash

4.1
0.39

Usefulness
0.83
4.07
I found the app usable
4.0
0.30
I will strongly recommend the app 

to my friends

4.0
0.52

The app has the potential to 

improve access to drug 
information

4.2
0.35

Memorability
0.78
3.7
I could easily remember how to use 

the app after stopping using it 
for a while.

3.9
0.35

I could recall my last page after 

using the app

3.5
0.45

arrangement of the icons and content with a score of 78.6% and a Cronbach’s alpha coefficient of 0.77; 
thus, participants were satisfied with the design and content provided by the prototype. Thus, in line 
with Farao et al. (2020), whose study established that three-quarters of the participants agreed that the 
design elements of a TB information app developed in Cape Town were flawless.

Regarding the prototype’s memorability, 74% of the participants agreed that the mHealth app was 
easy to remember, with a Cronbach’s alpha coefficient of 0.78. Hussain et al. (2017) had 
a memorability score of 80% during the evaluation of a mobile app called Mudah.my. Schnall et al. 
(2016) concluded that all the participants who viewed their medication adherence app found it very 
usable in transmitting HIV information. Participants found the drug information provided by the 
prototype useful and would recommend it to their friends, as highlighted by a score of 81.4% and 
a Cronbach’s alpha coefficient of 0.83. Another drug information app developed in Malaysia was rated 
useful (Chew et al., 2020). The TB app developed by Farao et al. (2020) was rated highly in terms of 
usability. In terms of being free from errors, the app was highly rated (85%) as it did not crash or have 
apparent bugs and had a Cronbach’s alpha value of 0.78. The results are similar to a study by Maphosa 
and Dube (2021), where 76% of the participants revealed that the learning app was free of errors.

However, 35% of the participants suggested that the Medicine Council of Zimbabwe endorse the 
app before deployment to ensure that the information provided is accurate and trustworthy. The users’ 
high usability rating implies they applied minimal effort to find their way around the app to access 
information. The positive test results show that the prototype can increase healthcare specialists and 
the general public access to drug information. The deployment of this prototype in rural or urban 
areas could provide a rich source of drug information for health professionals, patients, and the 
general public. The results show that the prototype’s visual designs were appealing, and users are most 
likely to use the prototype in the future. The evaluation scores are acceptable as another study 
recommended a system’s minimum usability threshold of 68% (Karahoca, Karahoca, Ozdemir, & 
Karaosmanoğlu, 2017). The app’s evaluation results are similar to reviews of other mHealth apps. The 
ex-ante evaluation and the prototype design process contribute to the knowledge base, providing 
a reference point for future developers.

Recommendation and Limitations

mHealth apps should be integrated with the broader eHealth systems to offer more convenience and 
efficiency to medical staff, patients, and the general public. Participants raised usability concerns 
during iterative development and evaluation, such as providing images of the drugs and having local 
language content; these are worth pursuing. Further collaborative development and maintenance of 
the app with healthcare professionals can minimize exposure to inaccurate information by the public 
and increase the app’s reliability and adoption. Health policies should raise more public awareness of 
the potential of mHealth apps and influence the development of a robust network, lower data tariffs, 
and promote investment in solar power to support digital solutions in underserved communities. 
Furthermore, researchers could also evaluate how knowledge levels of mHealth apps affect the 
adoption of mHealth apps. Mobile app developers should design apps that can serve rural and 
underserved communities in developing countries. The unavailability of specialized laboratories 
limited the evaluation to a field type. For convenience, the final evaluation targeted university students, 
and a more inclusive population should be used in the future to validate the prototype’s utility and 
improve its design by incorporating user feedback. Once deployed on the Google store, future work 
could also analyze usage data and user reviews to further improve functionality and user experience.

Conclusion

The study’s objective was to develop and evaluate a mHealth app that improves access to drug 
information in underserved communities. Overall, the result of this study can assist app developers 
in building better mHealth apps that capture the needs of potential users. The app underwent several 

feedback cycles with various individuals during development and testing. The iterative development of 
the app is novel, and the evaluation results contribute to new knowledge. Little evidence and data show 
how digital solutions impact the lives of rural and underserved communities. The study contributes to 
the literature on app development in developing countries and exposes the contextual issues affecting 
underserved communities. Using DSRM facilitated interactions with the target community from 
ideation to testing, and this provides evidence that the app has the potential to improve access to 
drug information. The use of DSRM supported a user-centered design approach that involved targeted 
users, incorporating their feedback through iterative design sessions. Evaluation results revealed that 
the app was usable and could provide a more feasible way for the public can access drug information in 
communities with limited sources of information. The results revealed that the app prototype was 
memorable and easy to use and learn. Participants had a positive disposition and liked the concept of 
improving access to drug information through the app prototype.

Access to reliable drug information minimizes drug abuse and misuse, improving health outcomes 
and reducing the digital divide. The generalizability of the results can be enhanced through a multi- 
university evaluation. The app operates in environments with low Internet connectivity, a huge 
advantage for remote communities. Participants suggested accrediting the app with the Medicines 
Control Authority of Zimbabwe. The app’s successful deployment has a few limitations, such as 
unreliable network infrastructure, high data tariffs, and unavailability of electricity. There is a need to 
raise public knowledge and awareness of the benefits of mHealth apps in supporting weak health 
systems in developing countries. Future studies should focus on integrating mHealth with the 
country’s healthcare delivery system and reviewing the potential threats and privacy breaches. The 
prospects for this app are high, but the Zimbabwean government should improve access to healthcare 
facilities and lower data costs. This prototype’s development provides a baseline for the successful 
development of apps for underserved communities by healthcare providers and app developers. 
Policymakers and researchers may find the results beneficial as they attempt to introduce mHealth 
apps as they grapple with the challenges of limited access to healthcare by underserved communities.