Original Paper

A Tailored mHealth App for Improving Health and Well-Being
Behavioral Transformation in UK Police Workers: Usability Testing
via a Mixed Methods Study

Richa Mehra1, BPT, PGDHHM, MSc; Andy Pulman2, MA, PhD; Huseyin Dogan1, BSc (Hons), PG Cert, EngD, MSc;
Jane Murphy2, BSc (Hons), PhD; Fiona Bitters3, BSc (Hons), MSt

1Bournemouth University, Faculty of Science and Technology, Bournemouth, United Kingdom
2Bournemouth University, Faculty of Health and Social Sciences, Bournemouth, United Kingdom
3Hampshire Constabulary, Southampton, United Kingdom

Andy Pulman, MA, PhD
Bournemouth University, Faculty of Health and Social Sciences
Bournemouth Gateway Building
Lansdowne Campus, St. Pauls Lane, Bournemouth
Bournemouth, BH8 8GP
United Kingdom
Phone: 44 1202 961047

Abstract

Background: When considering the policing environment of 2022, many roles previously in the domain of warranted officers
(police officer) are now performed by nonwarranted police staff equivalents. These police staff roles have expanded rapidly into
other areas such as investigations, custody, and contact management, which were traditionally seen as police officer functions
and put staff under some of the same stresses as police officers. A UK police force requested help in investigating technologies
that could be used to improve health and well-being for both officers and staff.
Objective: The aim of this study was to create a health and well-being app for police officers and staff, which considered the
unique requirements of the users throughout the designing, building, prototyping, and testing stages.
Methods: This study involved quantitative approaches (demographic web-based survey questions and the System Usability
Scale) and qualitative approaches (open web-based survey questions and semistructured interviews). Unsupervised usability
testing of a prototype app was undertaken by members (N=48) of the commissioning client using their smartphones. After
completing a preregistration application for screening purposes, participants downloaded a trial version of the app. Then, they
completed a web-based questionnaire after testing the app for 10 days. A subsample of participants (9/48, 19%) was interviewed.
Deductive thematic analysis was undertaken to identify key themes and subthemes.
Results: Data collected during usability testing concerned the 6 domains of the app—food and diet, activity, fluid intake, sleep,
good mental health, and financial well-being—and informed the creation of improved design during prototyping. Some usability
and design issues and suggestions for improvements were also addressed and implemented—including shift management and
catch-up cards—during this cycle of development.
Conclusions: This study highlights the importance of coparticipation with officers and staff across the entire development cycle,
to coproduce a human-centered design methodology to enable the development of a considered and user-centered solution. It
demonstrates the need for producing a multifunctional tool rather than focusing purely on an individual element for this user
group. It also highlights how linking and being able to track optional, personalized elements of health data against one another,
cross-referenced to individual shift patterns, might help to inform and provide users with a chance for reflection and therefore
influence behavior change.

(JMIR Hum Factors 2023;10:e42912) doi: 10.2196/42912

JMIR Hum Factors 2023 | vol. 10 | e42912 | p. 1

KEYWORDS
nutrition; activity; behavior change; telemedicine; mobile health; police; lifestyle management; management; usability testing;
design; build; prototype; testing; survey; interview; development; user center; officer; law enforcement; cop; detective; policeman;
policing; mobile phone

Introduction

Police officers can experience difficulties when managing health
and well-being as a result of working long, unsocial hours in a
highly pressurized environment [1,2]. Those working in the
police face different health challenges from those in the general
population, as their job might feature unusual working hours
and alternating shift patterns [3]. Police officers have a great
chance of being overweight and obese and are at risk of
long-term conditions such as cardiovascular disease [4] and
cancer [5] compared with the average population. Risk factors
are heightened by working in a highly stressful environment,
increasing the likelihood or the severity of these issues [6,7].
Compared with the average person, an officer is more likely to
experience stress owing to exposure to dangerous situations and
traumatic events [8]. Stress can have multiple knock-on effects
including insomnia, fatigue, and poor concentration—all of
which make performing the job harder than it already is and
add to the original problem [9].

When considering the policing environment of 2022, many roles
previously in the domain of warranted officers are now
performed by nonwarranted police staff equivalents. These
police staff roles have expanded rapidly into other areas such
as investigations, custody, and contact management, which were
traditionally seen as police officer functions and put staff under
some of the same stresses as police officers. Officers and staff
can also be affected by mental health conditions such as
posttraumatic stress disorder, depression, and alcohol abuse
[10]. Physical risks are also an issue with increased danger of
long-term health problems such as back pain [11,12]. Studies
during the COVID-19 pandemic also suggest that stress levels
of policing have increased during this period and have affected
officer resiliency [13,14].

Although some risk factors relating to health and an individual’s
risk of certain health issues are nonmodifiable such as age and
genetics, modifiable lifestyle factors can be self-managed by
individuals to reduce the risk. Currently, there is a large number
of health and fitness solutions available on multiple platforms,
but none are tailored to specific issues that the police force face
or are configurable for the types of routines and working patterns
they regularly encounter [15]. Behavior change is made more
difficult given the variable working environments that officers
and staff can encounter [1,2].

A UK police force approached the project team and requested
help in investigating new technologies that could be used to
improve health and well-being.

Methods

Preliminary Design Cycle

Preparatory work coincided with the first period of the UK
lockdown for COVID-19. Web-based surveys were used to

gather feedback and information from the user base. Survey
data were gathered from 213 participants of the UK
commissioning 
force 
[15]. 
Data 
highlighted 
that 
a
multifunctional tool would be more beneficial than focusing on
a single element. Key features and 4 domains were identified
for initial app coverage. In order of importance—prioritized by
participant response—these were: food and diet (76/213, 35.6%),
activity (68/213, 31.9%), sleep (27/213, 12.6%), and fluid intake
(27/213, 12.6%). Participants also identified a need for the new
app to consider that a user was on shift—this is important
because many issues and problems with elements of their health
and well-being involved shift work. For example, shift work
and fatigue have been shown to interfere with sleep and impair
cognitive function [16,17].

Secondary Design Cycle

Initial requirements were categorized using the MoSCoW (Must
Have, Should Have, Could Have, Won’t Have) framework [18],
with findings from the web-based questionnaire and client
meetings informing initial draft requirements. Paper designs
were sketched leading to the creation of low-fidelity wireframes
[15]. These were shown to the client for feedback before
high-fidelity designs were created. These were then shown to
interviewees during semistructured interviews (n=10), to gather
feedback about requirements and preferences for the app. On
the basis of their feedback, the second set of design prototypes
was created. A good mental health section was added as the
fifth domain, including the ability to complete an optional mood
diary and track and set alcohol goals. Given the emerging
evidence about the impacts of COVID-19 on police staff’s
mental well-being before [10,19] and during the pandemic
[13,14], the suggested expansion to incorporate a section
regarding mental health and well-being seemed to be a valuable
addition, especially in light of potential challenges broaching
these topics within a culture where discussing mental health
difficulties have sometimes been viewed as an undesirable
discussion topic [20]. Considerations and concerns of financial
nature [21-23] inspired the inclusion of the sixth domain, to
cover holistic wellness. It was highlighted that information
regarding financial planning, pension policies, and budget and
saving advice would be helpful and give control to those who
were nearing retirement. Overall wellness is something achieved
by taking care of mental, physical, and financial well-being.
The suggestion to include financial well-being was incorporated
late into the second development cycle.

Testing Version

Further development using the revised high-fidelity designs as
an initial foundation was undertaken with an external developer
to produce a prototype for pilot testing. The app—created in
Android and Apple iPhone Operating System—was developed
using an agile approach. Coding was conducted between October
2021 and April 2022. Several revised versions were developed
to include all MoSCoW requirements identified as “must” and

JMIR Hum Factors 2023 | vol. 10 | e42912 | p. 2

“should” have [18]. The process of developing the app to this
point was highly iterative and agile.

Study Design

The purpose of this study was to create a health and well-being
app for police officers and staff, which considered the unique
requirements of the users throughout the designing, building,
prototyping, and testing stages and helped the researchers
understand the users and their requirements. The study involved
quantitative approaches (demographic web-based survey
questions and the System Usability Scale [SUS] [24]) and
qualitative approaches (open web-based survey questions and
semistructured interviews). We used a human-centered approach
to optimize the understanding and accommodate the perspectives
of potential users [25]. The methods chosen were considered
with the participants in mind—those that could be completed
in 1 session, where time could be set aside when they were free.
The methods used in this study acknowledged and catered to
the logistical and operational pressures that the participants
might be under, while allowing them to provide the project team
with detailed feedback.

Participants, Recruitment, and Consent

Participants were recruited via a gatekeeper from the
commissioning client. The gatekeeper’s role was to initiate

communication between the researcher and police officers and
staff who wished to participate—via distribution of study
literature—without compromising anonymity or affecting the
veracity of web-based responses. Participation was voluntary,
and participants remained anonymous to both the gatekeeper
and the organization. Consent for completing the web-based
survey was requested before allowing participants to proceed.
Before each interview began, the researcher answered any
questions they had, checked if they were willing to be audio
recorded, and explained the consent process before recording
began.

Procedures and Measures

This study involved unsupervised usability testing of a prototype
app by members of the commissioning client using their
smartphones. The version of the app supplied for testing
contained draft versions of all 6 sectional domains previously
identified—food and diet, activity, sleep, fluid intake, good
mental health, and financial well-being—accessible from the
home screen (Figure 1). An additional feature provided the
opportunity to add forthcoming shift pattern details to the app,
which could then be cross-referenced with other parts of the
app. The testing version concentrated on implementing basic
operational functionality, which could then be expanded or
altered as required based on user feedback.

Figure 1. Screenshot of home screen.

JMIR Hum Factors 2023 | vol. 10 | e42912 | p. 3

Initially, an email was sent to police officers and staff describing
the study and asking about their interest. After completing a
preregistration application for screening purposes, participants
were emailed a link to allow them to download the trial app. A
task guide was also sent, giving them 10 days of time for testing.
The guide suggested task scenarios of different complexity
levels and covered the core functionalities of the app: shift
manager, fluid intake, sleep, mood diary, alcohol consumption
tracker, financial well-being, and activity. Participants were
then asked to complete a web-based questionnaire after 10 days
of testing. Demographic details, information about use of the
app, likes and dislikes, and feedback about specific features
were collected through open-ended questions. The questionnaire
was completed by 48 participants.

A subsample of participants (9/48, 19%) who provided consent
to a follow-up telephone interview via a questionnaire subsection
were interviewed after they had completed the given tasks.
Topic guides were used for the semistructured interviews, to
ensure that areas of interest (such as aspects related to delivery
mode and format) were covered, while still allowing flexibility.
Participants were asked several follow-up questions about the
content, design, and functionalities of the app and to rate their
experience. Throughout the session, the interviewer encouraged
the participants to speak aloud about their actions, which helped
to understand the emotions of the user while using the
functionalities of the app. They were encouraged to share the
issues faced while performing a task or give suggestions for
improving the design. Interviews were audio recorded and
transcribed verbatim. Notetaking was also used to collect data
during the usability sessions.

Sample Size

As the intended audience for the final product was a UK police
force, the work force value supplied by the client organization
was rounded to the nearest 1000 and used to calculate an ideal
sample size. The value used for the work force was 5000 [26].
The actual number of participants was 48, which was above the
lower threshold for an acceptable number for the sample size.
With this number of participants and the estimated population
size, there is a 95% confidence level, with a final margin of
error of 14%. This sample size was considered to be adequate
because of restrictions in accessing participants—for
downloading and testing the app, completing the survey, and
possibly participating in an interview—owing to logistical and
operational pressures.

Analysis

Recordings were transcribed and thematically analyzed using
a deductive approach that focused on the domains covered in
the topic guide (focusing on design, functionalities, and content).
A generic qualitative approach to thematic analysis was used
[27], with interresearcher interpretation.

Ethics Approval

Ethics approval was obtained from Bournemouth University
(39100).

Results

Participant Characteristics

We recruited 33% (16/48) male and 67% (32/48) female
participants. The “other” or “prefer not to say” option was also
included within the survey question—no responses were
received. (Table 1).

JMIR Hum Factors 2023 | vol. 10 | e42912 | p. 4

Table 1. Self-reported descriptions about participants (N=48).

Participants
Characteristic

Sex, n (%)

16 (33)
Male

32 (67)
Female

Age group (years), n (%)

0 (0)
<18

4 (8)
18-30

20 (42)
31-40

15 (31)
41-50

8 (17)
51-60

1 (2)
61-70

0 (0)
>70

Job role, n (%)

20 (42)
Police officer

28 (58)
Police worker

Shift worker, n (%)

40 (83)
Yes

8 (17)
No

System Usability Scale

73.8 (30-100)
Score, median (range)

70.9 (14.1; 66.9-74.9)
Score, mean (SD; 95% CI)

Adjective rating (Sauro-Lewis), n (%)

11 (23)
A or A+

13 (27)
B

12 (25)
C

5 (10)
D

7 (15)
E

Summary Statistics for the SUS

Summary statistics for the SUS scores are presented in Table
1. Frequencies of ratings for each of the 10 SUS items are shown
in Figure 2. Overall, the median SUS score for the toolkit was
73.8 and the mean was 70.9 (SD 14.1; range 30-100; 95% CI
66.9-74.9). This equates to an adjective rating of “OK” [24] and
a “C” (41st to 59th percentile range) on the Sauro-Lewis curved

grading scale [28]. Most participants (23/48, 48%) thought they
“would like to use this toolkit frequently” (the version of the
prototype they tested; SUS question 1). Most (40/48, 83%)
considered the toolkit “easy to use” (SUS question 3), with 88%
(42/48) believing that most people would “learn to use it
quickly” (SUS question 7). More than half (28/48, 58%)
considered the toolkit’s functionality to be well integrated (SUS
question 5).

JMIR Hum Factors 2023 | vol. 10 | e42912 | p. 5

Figure 2. Frequency of responses for the System Usability Scale items.

App Feedback—Domains

Feedback from survey data and interviews—encompassing
themes of design, functionality, and content—was organized
into the previously mapped areas of the app. Suggestions made
for additional functionality were considered and included any
relevant feedback elicited during interviews.

Food and Diet

Police personnel wanted to have a tracker on the app to monitor
the food that they consumed daily. Most of the users interviewed
(6/9, 67%) found the supporting information under this section
to be quite relevant and informative. During interviews, 22%
(2/9) of the participants mentioned that they liked the detailed
information provided about immunity support:

One really good to see the immunity support page.not a lot of
people know how different foods can affect you and stuff.
[Participant 527]

Additional suggestions were the ability to view a summary of
how changing shifts could affect healthy food consumption.

Activity

The activity section (Figure 3) is currently incomplete without
a fully developed tracker, and information provision is not going

to help in maintaining good fitness levels in isolation. However,
most participants (7/9, 78%) thought that the information
provided was relevant, helpful, and comprehensive. They
especially mentioned that “Cycle2Work”—a UK government
tax exemption scheme, introduced to promote healthy journeys
to work—and other sections were good to have on an app as
they enabled easy access to all the required wellness material
from home. Older participants appreciated the information
displayed on posters and found it easy to read. During
interviews, participants also mentioned that they would like to
track all the physical activities they were doing, including
linking the app to their step counter:

Ability to linking with step counter. Idea is to have
everything at one place. [Participant 517]

Another suggestion was the ability to share information within
teams to act as a motivator:

It definitely doesn’t need to rival Strava or
MyFitnessPal to be useful but in the activity section
a means of tracking exercise [only basic - not pace,
incline etc] to perhaps make teams or share stats
within or across shifts. To set up a Contact
Management leader board of which shift is taking the
most steps for example. [Participant 617]

JMIR Hum Factors 2023 | vol. 10 | e42912 | p. 6

Figure 3. Screenshot of activity section.

Fluid Intake

Feedback regarding the fluid intake section (Figure 4) included
the calendar feature associated with the trackers not working
properly to input fluid and alcohol; it displayed units of fluid
or alcohol drunk on the current day, even if the entry was made
for previous days. Overall, 22% (2/9) of the interviewed
participants did not find the fluid tracker to be user-friendly and
requested a more detailed help section to guide the user through
this section. Participants wanted to have reminders set for fluid
intake and record old entries for those that might have been

missed. However, catch-up cards (refer to the App
Feedback—Other Features section) that give reminders to drink
water should ideally direct users immediately to the fluid intake
tracker for a smooth transition. During interviews, 44% (4/9)
of the participants mentioned the desirability of viewing a
summary:

So you were making entries every day, but if one day
if you would like to see the pattern of your fluid intake,
you should get the kind of graph or some. [Participant
527]

JMIR Hum Factors 2023 | vol. 10 | e42912 | p. 7

Figure 4. Screenshot of fluid intake section.

Sleep

Interviewed participants (8/9, 89%) described the information
provided about sleep as useful and quite vast. There were some
comments about the consistent formatting of the content, and
users gave their preference in the web-based survey to style as
type 1, which was not only easy on the eyes but also more
user-friendly.

During interviews, 56% (5/9) of the participants recommended
having the ability to log sleep:

...Load loads of nice information. Yeah, but it would
have been nice to have been able to have as a log.
[Participant 530]

Good Mental Health

Alcohol tracker, mood diary, employee assistance information,
and recognizing stress were some of the features that the
participants tested. Only some could test all the subsections
during the testing period. Regarding the alcohol tracker, some
participants (2/9, 22%) did not expect this tracker to be located
under this section. For them, it made more sense if it was moved
to the fluid intake section. The tracker offers the ability to track
how many units of alcohol a user has drunk that day, and in
addition to this feature, interviewed participants (4/9, 44%)
wanted to see an overall summary in relation to their shift, to
understand the alcohol consumption and success in meeting the
goal.

The interviewed participants (4/9, 44%) appreciated the National
Health Service (NHS) information on feelings and symptoms
that can be common with mental health concerns, linked from
within the app to recognize the level of stress [29], because for
some job roles that required working on the front line, operating
at unsocial hours and occasionally experiencing traumatic events
increased stress levels. Low mood is an indicator of poor mental
health [30], and it is possible to track and compare with the
previous days using this feature. Participants mentioned that
the mood diary was something they would like to use in the
future, as it helped to track changes in mood daily and compare
them with previous days. It was viewed by some as being
extremely important to keep checking this aspect of their health:

And you can kind of almost pull off reports. Maybe
it’s a PDF report or something that shows that
actually they may be able to identify that on those two
days after a set of three lates. They’re moods quite
low or their fluid intake’s really bad or do you know
what I mean? So that people may utilize the app
more... [Participant 532]
However, there was also some apprehension noted in using the
mood diary. Concerns were whether the data might be monitored
by senior management and that they might be viewed differently
as a result.

JMIR Hum Factors 2023 | vol. 10 | e42912 | p. 8

Financial Well-Being

Participants liked the amount and types of information included
in this section:

I there was some really useful stuff on there that was
sort of flicking through with them, particularly around
sort of the money saving. I read a lot about the police
mutual bit and that was really good. And again gave
me more stuff to think about and it’s got all the links
for stuff that I use anyway, like the HPL bit and the
blue Light card section and all that sort of stuff.
[Participant 517]
Having all the information easily available on the app was
appreciated. Participants wanted to see the search function when
the reading list was long and screen scrolling was required.

App Feedback—Other Features

Dashboard and Visualization

Survey respondents (27/48, 56%) appreciated the clean look of
the app and the fact that the home page was divided into
subheadings, which not only eased navigation but also made it
easy to use:

...Layout was quite visually appealing so the
subheadings. So, you kind of, you knew what you were
gonna get when you went into those subheadings,

they were specific, they weren’t vague. [Participant
523]
They emphasized that they would like to see the summary
dashboard in a graphical form for each domain in correlation
with the shifts attended. It is always helpful to see the progress
made to maintain the motivation levels high, which is crucial
during self-monitoring.

Shift Manager

The shift manager (Figure 5) received positive feedback. A few
different iterations were trialed to make this feature more
user-friendly. The most common officer and staff shifts were
made available to users, so that they could choose the one that
suited their pattern best. In addition, the user can make
modifications and customize the shift patterns if there were any
last-minute changes.

However, there were some challenges. Some participants (18/48,
38%) suggested that the ability to view and edit the entire pattern
of the shift in one go would save them manual input time. They
also suggested replicating the edited pattern for future use:

I couldn’t figure out a way to put in like a six week
shift pattern and then repeat it. I could only figure
out how to do it manually day by day. you could do
like a six week Pan and start it on a specific date and
then it repeats itself, then obviously I could do it that
way and it’ll be a lot easier. [Participant 517]

Figure 5. Screenshot of shift manager section.

JMIR Hum Factors 2023 | vol. 10 | e42912 | p. 9

Goal Setting and Catch-Up Cards

Participants mentioned that the goal-setting feature was useful
when using it within the fluid intake section. There were
suggestions to include this feature in other domains.

In the test version, a new functionality—catch-up cards (Figure
6)—was introduced in association with shift management
improvements. These cards help to remind the users about
certain tasks and popped up based on the shift chosen.

Participants wanted to use catch-up cards as reminders to meet
the set goals. The ability to change the frequency of catch-up
cards on an individual basis was something that participants
wanted to see in a future release. To have prompts to make
increments in their goals was another area identified in which
the app could be improved. In addition, if the cards were linked
to trackers, they could work as reminders to drink more water
or perform some more exercise.

Figure 6. Screenshot of catch-up card - wellbeing walks.

Some would have liked to see the catch-up cards made more
interactive, to increase the usability of the cards. In the survey
data, 33% (16/48) of the participants could not test this
functionality because they were not able to locate it within the
app once these were missed as notifications. Users were not
able to search for them again if the cards for that day had already
been opened and seen once.

Many participants (16/48, 33%) could not understand the timing
pattern of the card—at what time of the day cards
appeared—and were unable to find the cards later in the app.
Notifications were designed to appear 1 hour before the end of
a scheduled shift and at 5 PM on a rest day. Currently, the cards
are populated to enable appropriate notifications for the shift.
For example, during a night shift, it might be focused on sleep,
hydration, and relaxation. On a rest day, it might be focused on
financial savings and family activity ideas.

Discussion

Principal Findings

Overview

As our previous study has highlighted, there are currently a
number of health and fitness solutions available on multiple
platforms in use by police officers and staff [15]. Notably, most
apps focus on a particular element of health and well-being.
They have not been designed to address the specific issues that
police officers and staff face, nor are they configurable for the
types of routines and working patterns that the users regularly
encounter [31]. Recent literature reviews—such as a 2020
review of studies of gamification and mobile health (mHealth)
apps for emergency service personnel (ESP) and police officers
across 6 major databases—have highlighted a lack of literature
in this area for these groups [32].

JMIR Hum Factors 2023 | vol. 10 | e42912 | p. 10

To meet the study objectives, where possible, user suggestions
were implemented for improvements during the development
process. The current app is designed to focus on the individual
domains that comprise overall wellness—physical, mental, and
financial well-being—of police personnel. Consideration of the
shifts undertaken was at its center, as shift work patterns make
tracking more difficult for this profession. Overall, feedback
about the app was positive based on the SUS score received.
Users particularly liked the shift manager, mood diary, trackers
to log fluid intake and alcohol consumption, and the relevant
supporting information made available for easy access.
Approximately half (24/48, 50%) of the users thought that the
app was easy to use, and this was considered to be the main
reason for liking the app. However, there are still various
improvements that need to be actioned. Some of these are
improvements in shift manager, giving the ability to create
bespoke shift patterns, functioning of the calendar feature of
the existing trackers, and display of information to make it easy
on the eye. Moreover, there are additional requests by
participants to add new features to the app such as trackers to
record activity and food intake and reminders to prompt them
regarding fluid intake, sleep, and taking rest breaks.

Food and Diet

Police workers have great risk of being overweight or obese
and risk of developing long-term health conditions [4]. Some
of this risk is attributed to poor-quality diet (high in fat, sugar,
and salt)—owing to the demands of shift work and the additional
occupational stressors associated with police work modifying
their relationship with food and unhealthy diet [33]. Police
workers might not be able to plan where they might be at any
point in a working day owing to the nature of the job, leading
to disparate meals, few or small breakfasts, late mealtimes, and
increased caloric intake at night [34]. This might also encourage
them to make lifestyle choices based on whatever is easiest—for
example, getting fast food on the go—rather than preparing
healthy food in advance. Interestingly, a recent study by
Kosmadopolous et al [34] observed that police officers had great
intake of energy from fat and saturated fat during rest days and
morning shifts than during evening or night shifts. However,
the overall proportions of dietary macronutrients (fat,
carbohydrate, and protein) did not significantly differ each day.
Kosmadopolous et al [34] observed a series of dietary patterns
that implicated the time at which food was consumed, rather
than quantity or composition as the differentiating nutritional
factor, which might affect metabolic health during shifts.

Working in shifts makes it difficult for police officers and staff
to successfully adhere to and sustain healthy lifestyles in the
long term. Participants suggested enhanced functionality
regarding the ability to view a summary of how changing shifts
could have an impact on the consumption of healthy food, and
they were also in favor of using only 1 app to monitor all aspects
of their health rather than many different ones. There are a
number of existing dietary, nutritional, and food information
apps available—such as MyFitnessPal [35]—but none of them
successfully align completely with the lifestyle, fluctuating shift
patterns, and demands of police work [1,2].

Activity

NHS guidelines in the United Kingdom [36] recommend that
people should be performing some type of physical activity
every day. Recent studies in this area involving 2 UK police
forces have included a physical activity study using wearables,
which used a combination of a Fitbit activity monitor and the
“Bupa Boost” smartphone app to promote physical activity and
reduce sedentary behavior in police officers [37,38]. Specifically
targeted apps—focusing on cycling, running, or a combination
of both—are not easily configurable for other activities such as
swimming, owing to their design architecture. Buckingham et
al [37] noted that there were large individual differences in
preferences and perceived impact of the individual and social
components of their intervention. These appeared to be owing
to personal preferences and personality differences, rather than
being associated with any identifiable characteristics, but they
highlight how important personalization and tailoring are when
considering activity and sedentary behaviors. The study [37]
also emphasized that the targeted user group had accepted
mHealth technology and found it extremely useful in improving
physical health.

Notably, other existing technologies available for use, such as
Police Fitness [39], which prepares individuals to pass the initial
job entrance fitness exam or their annual fitness check, only
concentrate on a particular aspect of fitness. Moreover, they do
not naturally integrate with fluctuating shift patterns. The ability
to track any kind of physical activity and to see a summary of
the impact of shifts on activity levels was an aspect that
participants would particularly like to see in a future iteration.
Catch-up cards reminding them to participate in occasional
physical activity (according to the scheduled shift) were
something they considered would make a difference in their
wellness journey.

Sleep

Among a group of US police officers, it was noted by
researchers [40] that sleep disorders were common and
significantly associated with increased risk of self-reported
adverse health, performance, and safety outcomes. In a more
recent study by Fekedulegn et al [41], which examined the
association of shift work with sleep quality in police officers,
the overall prevalence of poor sleep quality was 54%; 44% for
the day shift, 60% for the afternoon shift, and 69% for the night
shift. The study concluded that night and evening work
schedules were associated with elevated prevalence of poor
sleep quality among police officers.

For participants who worked shifts, maintaining regular sleep
patterns was not always possible. Owing to the varied times
they needed to go to bed and wake up, participants wanted an
app that did not rely on standard workdays and the assumption
that they would not be working on weekends and, importantly,
also allowed them to integrate other features, such as similarly
varying mealtimes when on shift and prompting reminders for
relaxation before rest periods [15]. After testing the app, the
participants expressed a desire to see a summary screen to help
with understanding the impact of their shifts upon their sleep
in helping to maintain overall wellness. For example, by logging

JMIR Hum Factors 2023 | vol. 10 | e42912 | p. 11

sleep patterns and then comparing and contrasting the types of
mood after particular shift patterns.

Fluid Intake

Police officers and staff in frontline roles can sometimes find
it difficult to maintain hydration status when on duty.
Consequently, the effects of dehydration—fatigue, headaches,
and irritability—can lead to loss of productivity while working
[42]. This has led to campaigns to raise awareness such as the
Take-a-Sip campaign—launched with funding from Police Care
UK [42]. The NHS guidelines in the United Kingdom [43]
recommend drinking between 6 and 8 glasses of fluid per day.
Water; low-fat milk; and sugar-free drinks, including tea and
coffee, all count toward this total, highlighting that intake does
not necessarily need to be solely focused on water intake, which
some existing apps might choose to focus on.

Participants mentioned that the goal-setting feature was useful
when using it within the fluid intake section. There were
suggestions to include this feature in other domains. In the long
term, it is intended that, as recommended in the initial study
[15], this feature, once finalized programmatically, is replicated
and incorporated into other domains.

Good Mental Health

In terms of mHealth apps already targeting the mental well-being
of police organizations, a UK-based mobile app—Backup
Buddy—allows police officers in participating forces to
informally view static audio and visual information and
signposted support options about common mental health issues
[44]. At the end of 2020, Thrive—a mental health and
well-being app—was made available to 3500 officers and staff
across West Staffordshire, with it also being made available to
friends and family if required [45]. In addition, in the United
Kingdom, the College of Policing recently conducted a
randomized controlled trial, giving 1337 police officers in 5
forces access to either Headspace (a mobile mindfulness app)
or Mindfit Cop (a web-based mindfulness resource). This study
found that both resources improved well-being, life satisfaction,
resilience, and performance compared with the control group.
The authors concluded that the trial was sufficiently robust to
provide evidence of well-being benefits [30]. A research study
is also being conducted by the Police Federation of England
and Wales to better understand police officer experiences of
using the 87% mental well-being app. This app is designed to
support employee well-being strategies [46].

By adding the good mental health section to the designs, a mood
diary and the sleep tracker were made available to users to track
personalized elements of mood. Integration of the mood diary
with the other sections of the app—such as hours of sleep
recorded, exercise performed, skipped or eaten meals, and fluid
intake—cross-referenced to individual shift patterns in the future
would help to inform and provide users with a chance for
reflection and therefore influence behavior change. In the long
term, this component also has the potential to align more closely
with national support services such as the National Police
Wellbeing Service [47,48].

However, positives must be viewed alongside concerns from
participants that were highlighted in this phase of testing

regarding who would be able to access and make assumptions
about the data they added. During testing, we were able to
confirm that the data were confidential and that no one had
access to personal information. This clarification was made to
users to encourage use and allay participant concerns regarding
how their managers might monitor and subsequently view some
of the data entered. It has been noted that individuals in this
profession feel reluctant to ask for help for themselves or to
discuss their mental health with others. Historically, the police
subculture has consisted of values involving masculinity,
independence, and emotional control [20]. Such values may
make it difficult for many police officers and staff to express
emotion or seek mental health treatment, which places them at
a disadvantage because internalizing their feelings might reflect
in work performance [20]. In such a scenario, it becomes more
critical for people in this profession to identify stress early,
before it causes additional damage to their mental and physical
health. The situation has been exacerbated during and after
COVID-19, creating additional uncertainty and increasing the
likelihood of stressful situations occurring [13,14].

Financial Well-Being

A 2006 study of Taiwanese police officers to assess the quality
of life and prevalence of depression in police officers grouped
together economic stressors including loans for a house or car,
insufficient family income, and debt. According to their results,
52.2% (405/776) of male officers had economic stressors,
whereas 30% (17/56) of female officers had economic stressors
[21].

Compared with other professions, police officers and staff have
different retirement policies; this means that they retire at a
younger age than civilians and have more chance of
experiencing negative impacts as they move toward retirement
[22]. An Italian study found that retirees who were financially
well-off were less likely to experience declining health when
compared with those who were not [23]. Participants particularly
welcomed the inclusion of a financial domain alongside the
other aspects of the app, as it gave them good advice and ideas
about the pension scheme offered, approaches to saving, and
budget planning.

Shift Manager

Regarding activity, perceived pressure of work and
organizational culture appear to be sturdy barriers to reducing
sedentary time [49]. Previous studies have highlighted that there
was a sense that high workload had resulted in working through
breaks and during personal time becoming the norm [50]. Police
staff has a mandated lawful requirement to take a break in their
shift for which they are not paid, whereas police officers are
paid for the full shift. This can mean that when operationally
necessary, they work through breaks. Police officers in previous
studies have expressed a need for more opportunities to take
breaks and encouragement from managers or supervisors [37],
as some of our previous participants had also noted [15].

Overall, 25% (12/48) of the users reported challenges in initially
using shift manager. Some responded that they would continue
to use their current apps (eg, Google) for managing their shifts,
because of the additional functionality offered by other apps.

JMIR Hum Factors 2023 | vol. 10 | e42912 | p. 12

The ability to add personal notes to the shift manager and to
share their weekly or monthly shift pattern with family members
was something that users would like to see in an improved
iteration. Having these features would cover users who preferred
to use something different at the moment.

This feature has become the key central cog that other elements
can be integrated with—for example, working in conjunction
with the catch-up card function—therefore, the design and use
of this function must be simple, effective, and easy to visualize
and track. Feedback resulted in the early diary design to input
shift being modified and renamed. Currently, there are 6 core
shift patterns that have been prepopulated in the app, which
users can choose to select. The frequency of catch-up cards was
also set according to the shift chosen and included upon client
feedback. The ability to view the effect of different factors (food,
activity, fluid intake, and sleep) on overall wellness—in
conjunction with shift—will prompt police staff and officers to
make lifestyle modifications to improve health.

Feedback received from users also provided insights to the
developers to improve the shift manager feature and to add a
help section to educate beginners about how to add and edit
their shift patterns.

Goal Setting and Catch-Up Cards

Behavior change is likely to play a large role in making an app
focusing on health and well-being successful, with the
suggestion that increased implementation of behavior change
techniques could improve interventions and achieve high levels
of user engagement [51]. The goal-setting feature was
appreciated by participants when using it within the fluid intake
section, and the intention is, once finalized, to integrate this
functionality within other domains of the app.

Occupational stress is the main contributor to the risk of police
officers and staff developing obesity and increasing the risk of
long-term health conditions such as cardiovascular and
metabolic diseases. To control this, it is very important to
self-manage sleep patterns, take regular breaks, monitor dietary
and food habits, regulate water intake, help with smoking
cessation, and reduce alcohol consumption. Referring to the
study conducted by Voyer [52], nudging offers a choice pattern
to users that can make changes in their behavior and how
decisions are taken at a personal level to improve health.
Therefore, it is considered as a behavioral economic concept in
the new world. The study by Kwan et al [53] highlighted that
reminding the patient to maintain good habits by sending nudges
has the potential to reduce the cost of health care and help
patients take long-term control of their health. Self-management
empowers users to make decisions in favor of their health, and
nudges or reminders keep them more involved and informed in
maintaining their health. Nudge theory is a young behavioral
economic concept that “influences the behaviour and
decision-making of patients through choice architecture” [52].
Nudging is not mandatory; rather, it gives small choices in
behavior, at a level that has the potential to influence.

In the initial research requirement gathering, participants
mentioned that notifications on the app would help them to
perform tasks that they generally forgot, as they did not access

the app many times during the day [15]. Catch-up cards were
introduced and linked to the shift manager in this version of the
app to support and encourage police officers and staff to try and
maintain good habits. Catch-up cards are scheduled differently
for each shift pattern and rest day to prepare the participants for
their next shift. They work as a “nudge” or reminder for the
participants to do breathing exercises, sleep on time, complete
activity steps, and so on.

Supplementary Information and Guidance

Previously, some pilot research work was undertaken with
project team members on an app to centralize evidence-based
nutrition and lifestyle guidance for health care professionals
and people living beyond cancer—enabling them to obtain
guidance and information and create and track nutrition and
activity-related goals [54]. The research work also fed useful
reflections into the design of this project. Each domain in the
app that requires input from the users has an information section
that gives recommendations about how much fluid to take, what
the healthy options are, and so on, according to NHS guidelines.
Participants found this guiding information to be helpful, as it
was easy to refer to in case of query. However, in this study,
there were few suggestions received around improving the
design to draw more attention to these particular sections.

Limitations

Although the authors believe that the results from this study
can be generalized to other police forces across the country, we
acknowledge that there is a limitation of only accessing data
from a subsection of 1 regional UK police force, which might
have inherent organizational biases toward health and
well-being. However, this approach can be expanded to cover
more regions in due course. Regarding bias with purposeful
sampling—where the belief is that qualitative research should
be describing the medium or the norm—the point to underline
is that new phenomena are being described; therefore, we needed
to purposively select the best examples of what we were
interested in. This gave us the clearest cases with the least
“noise” or extraneous errors and allowed for the identification
of characteristics and boundaries [55]. A further limitation of
the study was the greater number of responses from women
(32/48, 67%) than those from men when compared with regional
UK police workforce numbers as of March 2022, which noted
that the gender split was 48% women and 52% men [56].

Future Studies

The wellness app for the commissioning force has now been
subsequently soft launched with funding for the bespoke pattern
design agreed upon. The findings from this study are being
shared with the developers to analyze the possibilities of
implementing them in the next release of the app and have the
improved version of the app trialed before its final launch for
a wide police population.

Organizational Support

In addition to a well-designed mobile app, suitable scaffolded
organizational support implemented alongside the eventual
release of the app, together with an evaluation of how the app
is being used, offers the best chance of producing positive
results. This could include encouraging the use of more

JMIR Hum Factors 2023 | vol. 10 | e42912 | p. 13

health-oriented leadership—a style of leadership associated
with more well-being and low levels of burnout, depression,
and physical complaints among police officers [57].

Voice Integration

Emergent technological enhancements (such as Google Voice
and Google Assistant) offer opportunities for improved
personalized eHealth solutions [58] and increased engagement
[59] and adherence [60]. In the area of nutrition, projects are
already being conducted, such as the design, development, and
evaluation of an Alexa Skill on food and nutrition management
for native American patients with diabetes [61]. Similarly,
regarding fitness, TandemTrack combines a mobile app and an
Alexa skill to support exercise regimens, data capture, feedback,
and reminders [62]. Members of this team have previously
explored the tentative use of voice-activated speakers or
assistants such as Google’s Assistant or Amazon’s Alexa to
enable the input of information via voice rather than keyboard
[63], which might also assist in making this type of innovation
quick to use and therefore more user-friendly.

Investigating Other ESP Pathways

These unique issues, the continuing long-term effects of the
pandemic on employee health and well-being, and the
highlighted gaps in solutions available at present are not only
applicable to police staff and officers but also to other
ESP—such as firefighters [64,65], paramedics [66,67], and
health care professionals [68,69]—and other shift workers.
Therefore, the project team is seeking further funding, to explore
the development and expansion of this approach to health and
well-being issues in other sectors, in addition to the police.

Conclusions

This study highlights the importance of coparticipation with
officers and staff across the entire development cycle, to
coproduce a human-centered design methodology to enable the
development of a considered and user-centered solution. It
demonstrates the need for producing a multifunctional tool
rather than focusing purely on an individual element for this
user group. It also highlights how linking and being able to track
optional, personalized elements of health data against each other,
cross-referenced to individual shift patterns, might help to
inform and provide users with a chance for reflection and
therefore influence behavior change.