Journal of 

Actuator Networks
Sensor and

Article
An Interface for IoT: Feeding Back Health-Related
Data to Parkinson’s Disease Patients

Mevludin Memedi 1,* ID , Gaki Tshering 1, Martin Fogelberg 1, Ilir Jusuﬁ2 ID , Ella Kolkowska 1

and Gunnar Klein 1

1
Informatics, Business School, Örebro University, 70281 Örebro, Sweden;
gaki.tshering@googlemail.com (G.T.); martin.fogelberg@hotmail.se (M.F.);
ella.kolkowska@oru.se (E.K.); gunnar.klein@oru.se (G.K.)
2
Department of Computer Science and Media Technology, Linnaeus University,

*
Correspondence: mevludin.memedi@oru.se; Tel.: +46-19-303-478

Received: 25 January 2018; Accepted: 9 March 2018; Published: 12 March 2018

Abstract: This paper presents a user-centered design (UCD) process of an interface for Parkinson’s
disease (PD) patients for helping them to better manage their symptoms. The interface is designed to
visualize symptom and medication information, collected by an Internet of Things (IoT)-based system,
which will consist of a smartphone, electronic dosing device, wrist sensor and a bed sensor. In our
work, the focus is on measuring data related to some of the main health-related quality of life aspects
such as motor function, sleep, medication compliance, meal intake timing in relation to medication
intake, and physical exercise. A mock-up demonstrator for the interface was developed using UCD
methodology in collaboration with PD patients. The research work was performed as an iterative
design and evaluation process based on interviews and observations with 11 PD patients. Additional
usability evaluations were conducted with three information visualization experts. Contributions
include a list of requirements for the interface, results evaluating the performance of the patients
when using the demonstrator during task-based evaluation sessions as well as opinions of the
experts. The list of requirements included ability of the patients to track an ideal day, so they
could repeat certain activities in the future as well as determine how the scores are related to each
other. The patients found the visualizations as clear and easy to understand and could successfully
perform the tasks. The evaluation with experts showed that the visualizations are in line with the
current standards and guidelines for the intended group of users. In conclusion, the results from
this work indicate that the proposed system can be considered as a tool for assisting patients in
better management of the disease by giving them insights on their own aggregated symptom and
medication information. However, the actual effects of providing such feedback to patients on their
health-related quality of life should be investigated in a clinical trial.

Keywords: information visualization; user-centered design; internet of things; sensor technology;
Parkinson’s disease; patient empowerment; quality of life

1. Introduction

Clinical management of Parkinson’s disease (PD) is traditionally based on clinical visits for a clinical
assessment of the health status of the patients. In order to improve the PD care an alternative is to use
subjective clinical rating scales as well as Internet of Things (IoT)- and sensor-based systems, as suggested
by the International Parkinson and Movement Disorders Society Task Force on Technology [1,2]. This is
essential since the disease state fluctuates and varies from patient to patient as well as reduces the need
for clinician time and patient travels to the clinics.

J. Sens. Actuator Netw. 2018, 7, 14; doi:10.3390/jsan7010014
www.mdpi.com/journal/jsan

2 of 16

Previous research has shown that technology-based measurements provide valid, reliable and
treatment-responsive assessments of PD [3,4]. However, there is a lack of evidence showing that
such measurements have an inﬂuence on health-related quality of life (HRQoL) of the patients [5].
Nevertheless, preliminary results from a study performed by van Uem et al. [6] indicate that providing
personalized information to PD patients on their sensor-based assessments of tremor, dyskinesia and
gait may have a positive effect on mobility changes over a 12-weeks study period, as measured by
a PD Questionnaire-39 (PDQ-39). This shows that there is a potential that HRQoL of PD patients can be
enhanced by providing means to patients to self-monitor and help better in managing their disease [7].
Additionally, the data could be shared between patients and clinicians, which could help in improving
the clinical management of PD as well as in individualizing symptom and treatment evaluation.
Stamford et al. [7] suggested that IoT-based systems could assist PD management in the following
three ways. First, such systems could help patients to monitor their medication by reminding them
to take medicine at the planned times and intervals and to record the actual time and dose when
medication was taken. Second, systems could be used for recording and analyzing movement patterns
and motor function of the patients including bradykinesia (slowness of movements), dyskinesia
(involuntary movements that occur due to excess medication), tremor, gait dysfunctions, etc. Third,
the use of such systems could help in tracking non-motor symptoms including exercise activity, sleep,
and depression, among others. One of the most important aspects when developing IoT-based systems
is their ability to improve HRQoL of PD patients and one way to increase the HRQoL of patients
is through active patient involvement in managing their disease [5]. From the healthcare providers’
perspective, such technology can help clinicians to monitor more efﬁciently their patients and to
increase their patients’ engagement in self-management process in order to improve HRQoL [1].
However, sustainability of such systems can be impacted by the absence of feedback provided to the
patients as users of the monitoring IoT system. Therefore, development of systems that, among other
things, can achieve better engagement and self-management among patients is needed [1]. The systems
should be designed in close collaboration with the end users (patients) to increase their ability to
take an active role during the system development process. Finally, the data should be represented
in a meaningful way to the patients and clinicians. Although some work has been done to visualize
PD-related data [8,9] there have been no efforts to combine measures from different devices in a single
visualization platform.
This study is part of a research project called EMPARK, which aims at developing and evaluating
a system that combines registration of PD symptoms and medication information for enabling patients
to better manage their symptoms by giving them adequate feedback on the state of their disease.
The proposed system will gather objective PD measures (sleep and motor function) by sensors and
medication information by an electronic dosing device and present those data to patients and their
healthcare providers. Besides objective measures, a separate smartphone application will collect input
from patients on their subjective symptoms including mood and register physical exercise and meal
intake times. One of the most important components of the system will be an interface for providing
feedback on aggregated symptom and medication information to patients. Therefore, the aim of this
study is to present the development process of the patient interface, using a user-centered design
(UCD) approach [9–12], which regards the system development with user participation and places
users’ needs in centrum during the development process. Within the scope of the EMPARK another
activity is to develop a system for clinicians to evaluate the complete picture of recorded data over
a period in a dialogue meeting with patients. The results from this work will be reported elsewhere.
The rest of the paper is organized in the following way. Section 2 introduced the system
architecture of the proposed system and the development process of the interface. Descriptions
of the derived visualizations and evaluation results can be found in Section 3 followed by discussion
and conclusions in Section 4.

3 of 16

2. Materials and Methods

The study was conducted according to UCD, with consideration of the PD patients’ needs by
putting a minimum burden on the participants [9–12]. A demonstrator of the user interface was
developed by an iterative design and evaluation process based on interviews and observations with
11 (6 males and 5 females) PD patients. The patients were all above 60 years old and had lived with
PD for more than 5 years. The patients were recruited through the PD patient organization in Örebro,
Sweden. Additionally, a usability evaluation was conducted with 3 information visualization experts
to ensure that the visualizations are in line with the current standards and guidelines for this group
of users.

2.1. Proposed System

The architecture of the proposed system consists of 3 independent layers: devices for data
collection from home environment of patients, database server for data processing and storage,
and applications for data presentation (Figure 1). The integration of the different devices will enable
recording of PD symptoms and feedback to both patients and clinicians.

 

Figure 1. Overall architecture of the proposed system.

2.1.1. Devices

Smartphone application: To collect information on physical exercise and meal intake times,
a smartphone application will be used. Patients will be asked to report meal intake times before they
start eating by pressing a button in the application. Physical activities will be reported by a separate
view on the smartphone where patients can enter the duration and physical exercise mode (e.g., mode 1:
boxing, dancing, running, swimming, mode 2: bicycling, gym, and mode 3: walking).
Wrist sensor: The wrist sensor-based system is a solution developed by Global Kinetics
Corporation [3]. It consists of an accelerometer, which continuously records movement data and
algorithms for producing scores (in percentage) on bradykinesia, dyskinesia, and tremor every 2-min
epoch when the sensor was worn.
Bed sensor: The bed sensor is developed by Cenvigo [13] and continuously captures information
about bed presence. The sensor is placed on the frame of the patient’s bed.

4 of 16

Electronic dosing device: Medication data will be registered by an electronic dosing device,
developed by Sensidose [14] for managing ﬂexible and frequent doses using microtablets [15].
The dosing schedule is programmed by healthcare providers and patients are reminded when
a medication intake is due.

2.1.2. Data Storage and Processing

The devices will communicate with a central server via mobile networks where the raw data will
be stored and summarized into following scores on a daily basis:
Meal timing: For some patients meal intake can interfere with how well medication is absorbed
in the body. For this reason, the patients are usually recommended to take medication either 30 min
before or one to two hours after a meal [16]. Using the reported times and registered times for the
delivered dose intakes from the dosing device, we can calculate a meal timing score by taking the
ratio between the number of occasions when meal intakes were within the interval (30 min before and
60 min after medication intake) and the total number of meal intakes during a day and multiplying
by 100.
Medication compliance: Using the planned and delivered medication intake times a medication
compliance score was calculated as follows. For each recorded delivered medication intake the distance
(in minutes) from the closest planned medication intake was calculated and then normalized by the
following formula ((90 −distance)/90) × 100) where test occasions with a result greater than 90 were
set to 0. This results in a measure on a range from 0 to 100 and for a particular day the mean of all
the values were calculated. Using the dosing device patients can take extra doses to either replace the
missed an intended dose or take another dose. Extra doses within 30 min before or after the intended
dose were considered as replacement and not counted for the compliance whereas for others the value
for compliance was set to 100.
Physical exercise: A physical exercise score per day was calculated by multiplying exercise mode
with duration (in minutes) for each reported exercise occasion and then taking the mean score per day.
Finally, the mean score was normalized by dividing it by an individual patient target ranging from
0 to 100. Resulting scores of greater than 100 were set to 100.
Sleep: The bed sensor records times when a patient is in and outside of a bed. Based on this
information we have calculated a sleep score based on 3 components of the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality
Index (PSQI) and the work performed by Williams and Cook [17] on modelling a sleep score using
information from a smart home system. The ﬁrst component that could be calculated with the bed
sensor data is sleep duration. Since from the bed sensor we will not get sufﬁcient information to
determine the time when an individual has fallen asleep we use the cumulative time recorded by
the sensor when an individual was in the bed. Based on PSQI, a modiﬁed sleep duration score can
be quantiﬁed as following: >7 h, score = 0; 6–7 h, score = 1; 5–6 h, score = 2; and <5 h; score = 3.
The second component that could be calculated is habitual sleep efﬁciency score and based on the
information gathered by the sensor we can calculate it by taking the ratio between total sleep duration
without interruptions and total sleep duration including interruptions and multiplying the result by
100. According to PSQI, the ﬁnal habitual sleep efﬁciency score can be quantiﬁed as following: >85%,
score = 0; 75–84%, score = 1; 65–74%, score = 2; and <65%, score = 3. The third component that could
be calculated is sleep disturbances and was calculated ﬁrst by counting the number of interruptions
recorded by the sensor and assigning scores based on the PSQI as following: 0 interruptions, score = 0;
1 interruption, score = 1; 2 interruptions, score = 2; and 3 or more interruptions, score = 3. The ﬁnal sleep
score per day was then calculated by summing up the component scores (sleep duration, habitual sleep
efﬁciency, and sleep disturbances) and normalizing the score into a scale 0–100 using the following
equation 100 −(100/9 × sleep score).
Motor function: Since the wrist sensor-based system produces scores every 2 min for bradykinesia,
dyskinesia, and tremor initially their means per hour were calculated. Next, the mean of the three

5 of 16

averaged scores was calculated per hour to form a motor function score for a particular hour.
To calculate motor function score per day mean was taken for the whole day.
An overall day score during a day could be calculated by taking the average of the 5 measures [5,7,18].

2.1.3. Data Presentation

The interface for patients, which is the subject of this paper, is planned to be implemented in
a tablet and include easy-to-understand visualizations of the data.

2.2. Development of Patient Interface

2.2.1. Requirement Elicitation

To collect requirements for the interface from patients, a three-hour workshop with 7 PD patients
was organized. The design team consisted of researchers and representatives from the industry as
well as a PD nurse. The protocol followed the usual steps during UCD including presentation of the
research project, its goals and the proposed system architecture followed by interviews and focus
group discussions.
In the ﬁrst part of the workshop, the patients were divided into groups of two and were
interviewed by a researcher to understand their patient proﬁles. The focus of the interviews was
on explaining a typical day with PD, common problems/symptoms patients experience, treatments,
and technical tools (smartphone, tablets, etc.) they use often. The feedback from the patients were
noted down by each of the researchers for further analysis. We included this part to be able to better
understand the patients’ needs without focusing on the technical details of the system. This knowledge
helped us to ask right questions when identifying the requirements and planning evaluations.
In the second part of the workshop, patients and researchers had a group discussion where
patients were asked questions with the aim of gathering information on how the system could help
them to better understand their symptoms and improve their treatment. Some of the questions posed
to patients were: “How the data from the system could be of any help to you?”, “Which information
would you like to see?”, “How the information would be presented/visualized?”, and “What could
motivate you to keep measuring?”. The session was audio recorded, transcribed and analyzed to
identify common themes. The analysis was done by each of the team researchers separately and then
discussed by the team in order to reduce the probability for individual selection bias in terms of data
analysis. This resulted into 19 user stories, which were then transformed into 8 requirements for
the patient interface. Based on the analysis we also identiﬁed the non-motor symptoms that were
important for the patients to better manage their disease. The identiﬁed symptoms included physical
activity, sleep, and time for meal intake, among others.

2.2.2. Development of Mock-Up Demonstrator

After deﬁning the main requirements of the interface with the users, a mock-up demonstrator was
developed to visualize symptom and medication information. The demonstrator was developed based
on a three-tiered level of abstraction i.e., starting from a simple, general overview of the data to a more
detailed data representation. The demonstrator was developed using Adobe Experience Design CC
(Beta, Adobe®, San Jose, CA, USA) for an Android tablet with a 1024 × 768 screen resolution.

2.2.3. Evaluation of the Mock-Up Demonstrator

In total, four evaluations were conducted using the development process. Feedback from these
evaluations lead to re-design and improvement of the demonstrator, as shown in Table 1. The aim with
the user evaluations (UE) was to validate requirements of the user interface as well as the adequacy
of the visualizations. These evaluations drove the design process of the interface functionalities
i.e., what measurements to be collected, and what data to visualize and how. Heuristic and expert
evaluations focused on how the data should be visualized.

6 of 16

The heuristic evaluation was initially conducted by the researchers using the adapted
usability heuristic for elderly from W3C [19] and design recommendations for PD patients [20]
(Appendix A). The evaluation was summarized and the demonstrator was improved according to the
feedback received.
The improved demonstrator was then evaluated during a second two-hour workshop with the
same group of patients who attended the ﬁrst workshop (UE1). There were 6 patients who attended
this workshop since one of the patients was not available. Initially, the patients were introduced
to the main views of the demonstrator and given a walkthrough the structure of the demonstrator
followed by a structured task-based evaluation session where the patients were divided into groups
of two and were asked to perform a set of tasks using the demonstrator, which was implemented in
a tablet (Figure 2). There were 25 tasks the patients were asked to perform (Appendix B). The tasks
were related to the 8 requirements and focused on usability of the demonstrator and clarity of the
visualizations. For instance, the patients were asked to navigate from the main menu by selecting
a variable (e.g., Medicine, Figure 3), to choose a good day from a two-week view (Figure 4), to explain
visualization on a current-day view (Figure 5). The objective was to assess the patients’ understanding
and feedback on adequacy of visualizations. The feedback from the patients were noted down by
the researchers.
In a third workshop, 4 patients that were not involved in the development process during the
ﬁrst two workshops and 1 patient who was involved before participated (UE2). Similarly, as in the
previous workshops, patients were given a walkthrough the demonstrator followed by a task-based
evaluation. During this workshop the patients were asked to perform in total 30 tasks. In addition to
the 25 tasks (Appendix B) the patients did 5 more as shown in Appendix C. The feedback from the
patients were noted down by the researchers and analyzed later.

Table 1. Four-stage evaluation of the mock-up demonstrator.

Evaluation Type
Participants
Focus
Test

Heuristic evaluation
Research team
Usability
Usability heuristic adapted from W3C [17] (Appendix A)

User evaluation 1 (UE1)
6 PD patients
(Workshop 2)

Validate requirements and user
interface Validate adequacy
of visualizations

Requirements were met through a set of tasks, interaction
and navigation. Understanding and adequacy of
visualizations was evaluated through series of tasks
(Appendix B)

User evaluation 2 (UE2)
4 PD patients
(Workshop 3)

Validate requirements and user
interface Validate adequacy
of visualizations

Requirements were met through a set of tasks, interaction
and navigation. Understanding and adequacy of
visualizations was evaluated through series of tasks
(Appendix C)

Expert evaluation
3 visualization
experts
Validate interface Validate
adequacy of visualizations

Requirements were met through a set of tasks, interaction
and navigation. Understanding and adequacy of
visualizations was evaluated through series of tasks
(Appendix D)

Finally, an evaluation of the demonstrator was performed with 3 experts in the ﬁeld of information
visualization. Similarly, as with patients, experts were given a walkthrough the main functionalities of
the demonstrator followed by task-based evaluation and a semi-structured interview (Appendix D).
The feedback from the experts was audio recorded, transcribed and analyzed by two of the researchers.

Figure 2. Testing of the mock-up demonstrator by the patients.

7 of 16

3. Results

3.1. User Stories and Requirements of the Interface

During the interview session with the patients, 19 user stories were deﬁned, each of which focused
on different components of the proposed system including social aspects such as symptom information
sharing with peers and caregivers. One of the patients told us: “I think it will be helpful for my closest
relatives to see it (interface) also. Usually they notice the changes, but they do not understand the reasons for
the changes, so they get stressed and worried. The system will help them to understand better our condition.”
The patients also emphasized the need for measuring more symptoms that were not captured by
the system. They argued that in this way they could have a clearer and more holistic picture of the
symptoms. Finally, the patients emphasized that the system should be able to individualize their
preferences and needs. One of the patients explained: “It is difﬁcult for outsiders to understand how
different our symptoms and our needs are. We can only hope that it will be possible to ﬁnd optimal solutions for
each of us . . . I want to know when I am supposed to take my medication in relation to meals and how much am
I supposed to exercise and sleep in order to feel as good as possible.” In total 8 requirements were identiﬁed
that related to the patient interface, as following:

•
Track the routine of an ideal day so they could repeat such behavior in the future
•
Analyze the effect of meal timing on medication
•
Analyze the status during a single day based on sleep, medication intake, physical exercise,
motor function, and meal intake
•
Analyze the effect of motor function in relation to overall day score
•
Analyze the effect of motor function in relation to medicine compliance
•
Analyze the effect of motor function in relation to physical exercise
•
Analyze the effect of motor function in relation to sleep
•
Analyze the effect of motor function in relation to meal intake timing

3.2. Visualizations

3.2.1. Show Overall Status

The home screen of the demonstrator is shown in Figure 3. In this view a representation of the six
scores: (i) medication compliance, (ii) motor function, (iii) derived overall day, (iv) physical exercise,
(v) sleep, and (vi) meal intake for the last 2-week period is shown. The scores are depicted in tiled
layout with each having an icon. The icons are placed on a colored ring, which can have one of the
three colors (green meaning good, gray meaning neutral, and orange meaning not good). The color
gives an insight into the current state of the patient with regard to the corresponding score. The three
categories are formed after applying the following rules for each of the six scores:

•
IF Score ≤30 THEN Category = Bad
•
IF Score > 30 AND Score ≤70 THEN Category = Neutral
•
IF Score > 70 THEN Category = Good

3.2.2. Comparisons over 2-Week Period

Figure 4 depicts a calendar-based visualization for showing a value of a single score over two
weeks. Each box represents a day where the values for the day are the derived scores as described
in Section 2.2.2. The users can either see further details for each week separately by taping the
corresponding week label or each day by tapping the corresponding day tile.

8 of 16

3.2.3. Comparisons for a Single Day

For this purpose, a view as shown in Figure 5 is proposed where the timeline approach uses the
horizontal space to show time. The time of the day starts from the moment the patient went to bed the
night before, as it is important to analyze the complete night sleep pattern and not just the calendar
day data. The time is divided into hour slots as seen from the scale on top. The blue rectangles show
the time of bed occupancy as recorded by the bed sensor. The vertical purple lines show the planned
dose intakes as pre-programmed in the dosing device while the capsule icon shows the time when the
medication was actually delivered. The timing for the reported meal intakes is shown with the red
meal intake icon. The brown icon shows the reported times of physical exercise. The motor function
score is shown in forms of green, gray, or orange boxes for each hour. The user can add or remove
different components into the graph by selecting components using the radio buttons at the bottom
of the screen. This allows the user to ﬁlter out uninteresting components if the view becomes too
cluttered and allow for investigating patterns of selected variables separately. The vertical green bar at
the rightest part of the visualization represents the overall day score. The patients can also see a textual
log of these data by tapping the button “View details”.

 

Figure 3. Home screen of the mock-up demonstrator visualizing results for each of the six scores
calculated by the system during the last 2 weeks. Green colored rings show the optimal status,
grey shows neutral while orange represents imperfect status.

 

Figure 4. Calendar-based representation of medicine compliance.

3.2.4. Comparisons for a 1-Week Period

From the view in Figure 4 the users can click on a certain week to see 1-week data as shown in
Figure 6. In this view the users can identify trends on their data over a week. For instance, at what
time of the day, on average their motor function was optimal or worse.

9 of 16

 

Figure 5. Time-line based visualization of different scores for the “current day”. At the bottom of the
view buttons enable/disable display of certain data.

3.2.5. Relationships between Scores

Using a scatterplot metaphor, a correlation view between the scores is shown as in Figure 7.
This view was added based on the feedback from the patients during the ﬁrst two workshops and
experts in the ﬁeld of information visualization. It was further evaluated during the third workshop
with the patients. The users can select one of the given scores against the motor function score.
Each circle represents a day and is colored with the same metaphor as described in other examples.
The color map can be seen in the lower left side of the view. Additionally, the scatterplot is divided
into quadrants where the days that positioned in the green quadrant represent a group of relatively
good/bad days with respect to the selected scores. The radio buttons on the right side allow selection
of one of the attributes to compare against the motor function score. Each circle represents a day.
Clicking on a circle would redirect the user to the view shown in Figure 5.

3.3. Evaluation

3.3.1. Heuristic Evaluation

The heuristic evaluation resulted in several improvements of the demonstrator. The evaluation
showed that the demonstrator should incorporate a possibility to magnify text size, the colors used
should be neutral to improve contrast, and the links should be more obvious and clearly labelled.
Moreover, the consistency of navigation and placement of the icons should be improved. Finally,
the pages should be in a landscape format and text should be better coupled with the visualizations.
The demonstrator was improved according to the received feedback.

3.3.2. Evaluation with Patients

In general, the majority of the patients during UE1 and UE2 could successfully perform the
tasks using the demonstrator. Patients did not have problems with navigation and stated that the
demonstrator was clear, intuitive and easy to use. The summary of the two user evaluations was
categorized into three areas, as described below.
Feedback on visualizations: Patients generally found the visualizations clear and easy to
understand. Nevertheless, they suggested some improvements in order to make the visualizations
even clearer. One of the patients had red-green color blindness and therefore faced difﬁculties in
understanding the visualizations and carrying out most of the tasks outlined in visualizations.

10 of 16

Except for icons visualizing medicine intake compliance and overall day score, which were experienced
as unclear, the rest of the icons were found to be easy to understand. Therefore, the visualizations will
be changed to satisfy the users’ needs. The color palette will also be changed to adjust the interface
for color-blinded users. The scatterplot metaphor that shows relationship view between the scores
(Figure 7) was added to the demonstrator after the ﬁrst two evaluations with the users and based
on the suggestions of experts. Since, according to UCD, users’ opinions are the driving force for the
development, the new part of the visualization was evaluated during the third workshop with the PD
patients (UE2, see Section 2.2.3). The patients generally had difﬁculties to understand if the scores were
related or not, but they could understand if the relationship was good or bad, based on the color coding.
They did not either have any problem with selection of the scores using the radio buttons or viewing
details for the chosen day by clicking on the data points on the graph. In general, the visualizations
will undergo one more round of adjustments before the system will be tested in a clinical trial.
Use of the demonstrator: One major problem detected with the demonstrator was due to
an implementation error where smaller bounding boxes for tapping were deﬁned for the interactive
screen elements although the elements were larger. This problem led to unresponsive tapping on
buttons that created insecurity among the patients testing the demonstrator. The demonstrator has been
improved regarding this aspect after the second workshop (UE1) and the patients did not experience
this problem during the third workshop (UE2, see Section 2.2.3). Another problem was the tremor of
the patients when touching the screen making the navigation difﬁcult. This means that the sensitivity
of the screen needs to be adjusted to the individual patients’ needs, as suggested by Nunes et al. [20].
This will be improved in the next version of the working prototype. Besides these two problems the
patients did not experience any other problem with navigation. On the contrary, they experienced the
navigation as clear, intuitive and easy to use.

Figure 6. Visualization of sleep duration, meal intake times, and timing for planned and delivered
doses, and motor function score over a 1-week period. A single rectangle at the end of each day
represents the overall day score for a given day.

Changes of the requirements: A few new requirements and suggestions to improvement were
also identiﬁed during the evaluation process. The patients would like to have possibility to measure
other factors such as stress, depression, and indicators of social activity. The research team discussed
this issue and it was decided to not meet this requirement, at least during the scope of this project.
The rationale for this decision was based on the results from the ﬁrst workshop with the patients
where they emphasized the importance of not being overwhelmed with measurement devices. As
one of the participants during the workshop stated “our life should not only be about Parkinson. We

11 of 16

cannot take measures and answer questions about our disease too often. We want to have a normal life also”.
Going further, the patients would also like to see a visualization of a suggested interval (30 min before
and 60 min after meal intake) for medicine intake in Figure 5. Some of the patients suggested that
the interface should suggest them web links to relevant material about PD in general, new research,
and to pharmacies where they could login with their electronic identiﬁcation. This requirement will be
met in the ﬁnal working prototype of the interface and the choice of material to be displayed will be
discussed with clinical domain experts.
The research team carefully discussed the need of adjustment of the system to patients’ individual
needs since this was speciﬁcally emphasized by the patients. As one of the patients stressed “You can
only hope that this system could help you to ﬁnd what the optimal solution is for yourself since nothing works
the same for everyone. Some people exercise a lot and that works for them but for others exercise just makes
them feel worse. It would be nice to get reminders when you should take your medication, when you should eat
and how much exercise and sleep are the best for you, as an individual.” The patients stressed that lack of
understanding of their needs is a serious problem. In relation to this issue one of the patients said
“They (caregivers) often group our needs and generalize our treatments but we have very different needs.” In the
system, the interface retrieves subjective and objective symptom information from the central database
where sensor and dosage data are stored. This enables individualized evaluation of symptoms. So far,
the system does not provide adjustment of subjective measurements. This feature needs to be included
during the trial when data from each individual patient will be available.

 

Figure 7. A scatterplot view for exploring relationships between the six scores during the last week.

3.3.3. Evaluation with Experts

An expert evaluation was employed using the approach as suggested by Tory and Moller [21],
based on comments from two visualization experts and a user experience designer from industry.
Overall, the experts were satisﬁed with the design choices of the visualizations. One of them noted the
following: “Overall I think it seems to be well designed for this audience”. Another expert added that he
could accomplish the tasks related to Figure 4 “very easily”. There were suggestions for improvements
such as the use of the pushbuttons instead of radio buttons by two of the experts for the visualization
presented in Figure 5. Most of these comments were minor and the experts were very positive in
their assessment.

12 of 16

4. Discussion and Conclusions

This paper presented an IoT-based concept for addressing the needs for better management of PD
by giving patients insights into symptom and medication information. The proposed system consists of
a range of measurement devices, which will be used in home environments of patients, and interfaces
for patients and clinicians. The main focus of this paper was to present the development process
of a mock-up for the patient interface, using an UCD approach. The contributions of the paper are
two-fold. First, the lessons learned from applying an UCD approach with PD patients and secondly the
interface design together with a list of requirements for the interface. Moreover, the paper summarizes
results evaluating the performance of the patients when using the demonstrator during task-based
evaluation sessions as well as opinions of the experts.
Our experiences with applying UCD together with PD patients are similar to ﬁndings in
earlier studies [9]. We found this approach very useful for identifying the requirements and engage
the users in the design process of the system, which is in line with the European Commission’s
recommendations [22] for involving the end-users in the design process. During the process we learned
it is important to consider special, individual characteristics of this user group. PD patients experience
motor and non-motor symptoms that may impact their interaction with the system and devices such
as smartphones and tablets. Therefore, testing the system may be stressful and exhausting for them.
Additionally, the group usually consists of elderly users, who may not be familiar with modern
technology. For these reasons, the evaluations need to be prepared in a way so that to not put extensive
burden on the participants. The patients in our study recognized the need for objective measurement
of symptoms and infrequent registration of symptoms using IoT-based systems. In contrast to a similar
system presented by Baros et al. [9], our proposed system measures multiple symptom information
and automatically records medication information, which are then visually presented to patients via
an interface. Existing systems (e.g., [9]) often focus on visualizing correlations between medication and
motor functions. In our work, we found that medication is only one of the many aspects inﬂuencing
the patients’ HRQoL thus focusing solely on medication may be misleading. Using the mock-up
demonstrator, it was found that the patients could successfully perform the tasks and found the
visualizations clear and easy to understand. Similarly, the experts gave a largely positive feedback for
the overall approach of the mock-up. As found from the user stories, patients had different symptom
proﬁles and their symptoms varied over time, which calls for individualized visualization of data
depending on the needs of the patients [20]. One of the patients experienced tremors during the
task-based evaluation and this impacted the interaction with the demonstrator.
PD is a complex neurological disorder that signiﬁcantly affects the HRQoL of patients.
Since patients have different symptom proﬁles and their symptoms vary from day to day or even
hour to hour there is a need for a multimodal data collection scheme that would enable individualized
symptom evaluation and assessment of relations between different symptoms [1]. In our work we
focus on measuring some of the main HRQoL aspects [7] such as sleep, motor function, physical
exercise, medication compliance, and meal intake timing in relation to medication intake, using
an IoT-based system consisting of a smartphone, wrist sensor, bed sensor and an electronic dosing
device. The proposed system addresses two of the three areas where IoT-based systems could provide
assistance in managing HRQoL problems of PD patients which are medication monitoring and
symptom logging [7]. In our case, physical exercise score will be calculated based on the self-reported
data. One alternative could be to employ sensor technology to quantify physical activity intensity and
frequency and these data could be used for calculating the physical exercise score, which could be fed
back to patients and clinicians [23]. Using the sleep score derived from the timestamp measurements
of the bed sensor it would be interesting to investigate the “sleep beneﬁt” among the PD patients i.e.,
whether the restful sleep improves symptoms next day. This analysis could be possible by applying
time series and machine learning methods on the data and determining the population and individual
patterns as well as relationships between sleep and other scores. The derived overall day score could
be further optimized to an individual level using data-driven modelling approaches given the fact that

13 of 16

there is an inter- and intra-patient variation in symptoms. Results from a separate study aiming to
determine factors that inﬂuence the acceptance of the application by PD patients indicate that 70%
of the patients (out of total of 50) would use the application if offered in the future. The two factors
that predicted intention to use the application were performance expectancy and social inﬂuence.
These results indicate that the application would be beneﬁcial to them and their use and acceptance
of the application can be inﬂuenced by important people in their social circles. These results will be
published in a separate publication elsewhere.
Future versions of the interface could include following improvements. Including audio
augmentation techniques for improving navigation and to tackle the problem with the inability of
color-blinded patients to understand the visualizations. More speciﬁcally, selecting color blind-friendly
palettes could further improve the interpretation of the information in visualizations and tackle
the multiple varieties of colorblindness. It would be interesting to investigate differences in design
requirements of the interface among patients on normal functioning (On phase) and severely impaired
(Off phase) states. The work of the project continues with reﬁnement of the subjective symptom
recording, which will also include mood and overall assessment of HRQoL. The ultimate goal of our
research is to investigate effects of the system’s feedback to HRQoL and empowerment of the patients.
In addition to patient interface the plan is to develop an interface for clinicians, which will use the same
data but with more specialized and detailed views such as the association between motor function
and physical exercise and other scores as well as analysis of physical exercise in relation to disease
progression to improve HRQoL outcomes of patients. When all the software for the interfaces and
server-side functions are ready, there will be a clinical trial and evaluation that will be reported.

Acknowledgments: This research was supported by Swedish Knowledge Foundation (grant number: 20160176),
Sensidose AB, Cenvigo AB, and Nethouse Sverige AB. We would like to thank the patients at Parkinson Örebro
and experts for their constructive involvement in the study. Swedish Institute is acknowledged for funding
Gaki Tshering for her involvement in the study as part of her master education.

performed the experiments; all authors analyzed the data; and Mevludin Memedi wrote the paper that was
reviewed by all the authors.

Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.

Appendix A

Table A1. Adapted usability heuristics for elderly adapted from W3C [19] conducted by the researchers.

Usability Heuristics
Deﬁnition

Text size
Text style and its visual presentation impacts how hard or easy it is for people
to read, especially older people with declining vision.

Color and contrast
Most older people’s color perception changes and they loose contrast sensitivity.

Links
Many older people need links to be particularly clear and identiﬁable due to
declining vision and cognition.

Navigation and location
Many older people need navigation to be particularly clear due to declining
cognitivie abilities.

Mouse use
It is difﬁcult for some older people to use a mouse due to declining vision
or dexterity.

Distractions
Some older people are particularly distracted by any movement and sound.

Page organisation
Many older people are inexperienced users and therefore read the whole page,
so good page organization is important.

Language
Many older people ﬁnd it particularly difﬁcult to understand complex
sentences, unusal words, and technical jargon.

14 of 16

Appendix B

Table A2.
Tasks that patients were asked to perform using the demonstrator during the
second workshop.

Task #
Description

1

Use the main menu to go to the page for Medicine. (Figure 4)
Please note that:

-
Here is shown a two-weeks summary of medication compliance.
-
Remember the description of the colors: green, gray and orange.

2
According to this summary, which week shows the best medicine compliance? Which week shows
the worst medicine compliance?
3
Click on the good week and see what has happened during that week. (Figure 6)
4
Which scores are selected and shown on the graph?
5
What time during the 5th day the patient had low motor function score?
6
Navigate back to the main menu.
7
Click on a day when medicine compliance is good. (Figure 5)

8
Can you see why the day is highlighted as good? Click on the “View details” to see detailed
text description.
9
Navigate back to the main menu.
10
Click on a day when medicine compliance is bad.

11
Can you see why the day is highlighted as bad? Click on the “View details” to see detailed
text description.
12
Which scores are selected and shown on the graph?
13
Navigate back to the view for medicine compliance. (Figure 4)
14
Click on info.
15
Is there any speciﬁc information that you would like to see here?
16
Navigate back to the main menu.
17
Click on the sliding sidebar. Here there is a quick menu.
18
Click on Today. Is there anything you would like to add here?
19
Navigate back to the main menu.
20
Click on the sliding sidebar and select 1-Week. Is there anything you would like to add here?
21
Navigate back to the main menu.
22
Click on the sliding sidebar and select 2-Weeks. Is there anything you would like to add here?
23
Are the icons relevant and descriptive?
24
What do you think about the navigation?
25
Do you think the application is easy to use?

Appendix C

Table A3. The additional tasks that patients were asked to perform using the demonstrator during the
third workshop.

Task #
Description

1
On the view showing 1-Week data click “Relationship” button. (Figure 5)

2

This view shows relationship between different scores and motor function score for every
day during the last week. The horizontal axis shows the chosen score and the vertical axis
shows the motor function score. Every day is represented as a data point in the
graph. (Figure 7)
3
Explore the relationships between the scores through the radio buttons on the right.
4
Which scores are related?

5

Choose Sleep Score

-
Is there any relationship between sleep and motor function?
-
How many days in the week the patient had good sleep and good motor function?
-
Click on the day with the bad sleep and bad motor function.

15 of 16

Appendix D

Table A4. Task-based evaluation with experts.

Task #
Description

1
Please specify how the patient was doing today with regard to medicine compliance and
motor function.
Do you understand the color-coding of the rings in the main menu?
2
Tap on the Sleep tile. Identify one day/night where the patient did not get enough sleep.
3
Continue the exploration of one “bad” day.
4
Please identify when was the sleeping pattern bad.
5
How did the patient perform with regard to medicine compliance and meal timing compliance?
6
Can you identify any pattern that is reﬂected to the overall day score?
7
Navigate back to the home screen. Select the sliding sidebar and select 1-Week.
8
Can you identify good, neutral and bad days? Please explain which are those.
9
Please identify the days where the patient performed bad with regard to medicine compliance.

10
Please identify if there is a daily pattern for motor function. If yes, can you please specify at
what time of the day is the patient feeling best and worst?

Table A5. Questions used during the semi-structured interview with the experts.

Question #
Description

1
What are your comments about the general design of the app? Is there anything else that
you would like to add?

2
Could you identify and answer all the tasks regarding the visualization (Figure 4)? Is there
anything else that you would like to add?

3
Could you identify and answer all the tasks regarding the visualization (Figure 5)? Is there
anything else that you would like to add?

4
Could you identify and answer all the tasks regarding the visualization (Figure 6)? Is there
anything else that you would like to add?
5
Any other comment?