User-Centered Design and Evaluation of ARTTS: an Augmented Reality
Triage Tool Suite for Mass Casualty Incidents
Cassidy R. Nelson’
Virginia Tech
Joseph L. Gabbard?
Virginia Tech
ApsTRACT
In this work we present ARTS: a head-worn Augmented Reality
(AR) Triage Tool Suite containing an initial sorting tool, virtual as-
sessment tool, and virtual triage tag to assist emergency responders
in mass casualty incidents. The initial sorting tool can prompt nov-
ice responders through first-wave tasks to aid recalibration from
shock to triage. The virtual assessment tool provides novice re-
a
Jason B. Moats*
Texas A&M
Ranjana K. Mehta*
Texas A&M
(AR) is a novel technology that affords mobile, bare-handed, head-
up interaction with information superimposed atop the real, physi-
cal world [7], we posit AR can provide the additional, extraordinary
assistance necessary to enhance the triage component of MCI re-
sponse. To that end, we present ARTTS, a head-worn Augmented
Reality Triage Tool Suite containing an initial sorting tool, virtual
assessment tool, and virtual triage tag to assist emergency respond-
ers (ERs) in mass casualty incidents (described in more detail in
.6654-5325-7/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEE
@
a
ced and Augmented Reali
the SALT triage flowchart. Finally, current emergency medical tri-
age processes leverage static paper tags susceptible to loss or illeg-
ible damage. ARTS’ virtual triage tags are dynamic, can be up-
dated through responder interaction, and employ user interface
emergent features based on individual patient conditions. This pa-
per describes ARTTS’ capabilities, as well as the applied user-cen-
tered design process including review of existing triage material,
subject-matter expert interview transcripts, wireframing, applica-
tion of usability and user-centered design principles, as well as it-
erative usability subject-matter expert assessments and design
walkthroughs. The ARTTS user experience aims to enhance, not
upend, existing triage processes. Finally, this paper provides a usa-
bility evaluation comparing ARTTS” virtual triage tag to a physical
paper triage tag. Our tag achieved requisite System Usability Scale
(SUS) scores and showed negligible differences to the paper triage
tag on usability and mental workload.
Keywords: Augmented reality, triage, first responders, emergency
response, mass casualty incident.
Index Terms: H5.2.2 [User Interfaces], H.1.2 [User/Machine Sys-
tems]: Human Factors; H.5.1 [Multimedia Information Systems}
Artificial, augmented and virtual realities.
4 INTRODUCTION
Section 4).
To create ARTTS, our design team coordinated with an emer-
geney response subject matter expert (SME, specifically hereafter
referred to as our primary SME) wielding nearly 30 years of expe-
rience in not only emergency services but also emergency response
training, Further, we leveraged additional subject-matter expert in-
terviews from ten ERs after each had exposure to select AR expe-
riences designed to illustrate relevant AR capabilities (e.g., anno-
tating a scene to mark hazards, viewing head-up data, interacting
with hand-based menus, ete.). We then identified several broad ar-
eas where AR could enhance emergency response as well as spe-
cifically improve triage processes. From these areas, we ascertained
requirements and developed ARTTS. Then, we conducted a user
evaluation of the triage tag’s user interface and usability with
eleven ERs.
Initial sorting acts as a simple series of scteen prompts to kick
start triage activities by reminding novice ERs of the very first step
of triage. These tasks are currently held only in ERs* memory,
therefore relying on ERs’ ability to recall process details and expe-
riences/training while under duress. The virtual assessment tool
(VAT) is more involved, housing the entire first wave triage deci-
sion tree that is also currently held only within a trained ERs’
memory. ARTTS’ VAT provides a “click-through” presentation of
the Sort, Assess, Lifesaving Interventions, and Treat
‘ment/Transport (SALT) framework [8]. Virtual triage tags replace
state-of-the-art physical, paper tags currently employed by ERs
which are filled out with hand-written information by responders
ee nN iN OID SS SILOS
cidents (MCIs) as “... an event which generates more patients at
one time than locally available resources can manage using routine
procedures. .. requitfing] exceptional emergency arrangements and
additional or extraordinary assistance,” [1]. A critical component in
MCI response is that of triage, or the assessment of treatment and
evacuation priority of injured persons [2], with poor coordination
leading to increased mortality [3] via delayed triage [4]. Delaying
triage is detrimental as there’s a ‘golden hour’ of trauma where
treatment efficacy greatly impacts outcomes [5], where effective
triage processes are needed to increase survival chances for all in-
jured parties by assuring highest priority injuries are assessed first
[6], and resources are managed effectively. As augmented reality
‘email: mehlag@tamu.ecu
DOI 10.1 109/SMAR55827.2023,00049
and attached to MCI patients to track recovery, treatment, evacua-
tion, and triage efforts during MCIs. ARTTS’ virtual triage tags de-
note personal patient information, injury type and severity, pro-
vided treatments, patient ID, patient triage order. and generally aim
to overcome shortcomings of physical triage tags. For example, pa-
per triage tags can become lost or illegibly damaged due to weather,
feature a finite and small area in which to write, only allow unidi-
rectional changes (worsening), [9] are static, and are difficult to see
in the dark. Static refers to the paper tag’s inability to automatically
update themselves — they require constant manual responder in-
put. Paper triage tags also do not provide a capability to prioritize
patients within the same category [10] since the data contained on
cach tag cannot currently be aggregated or “rolled up” to a central
server (for comparative analyses and summarized data views of the
overall response), nor provide a physical space to manually denote
additional prioritization. Finally, paper triage tags alone do not al-
low for advanced notice to hospitals. In our vision, ARTTS virtual
triage tags will provide hospitals advanced notice of patient injuries
prior to their arrival, thus permitting enhanced, adaptive, special-
ized preparation.

This work contributes to the evolving body of knowledge related
to using AR for emergency response by providing ARTTS, a list of
general AR requirements and use cases for emergency response,
specific AR-based triage requirements, a use case describing appli-
cation of user-centered design and evaluation processes when inte-
grating AR tools into existing occupational workflows, design prin-
ciples for AR systems to support MCls, and lessons learned from
the evaluation that benefit other AR practitioners interested in field-
ing AR to non-technical user communities.
In the remainder of this paper, we first provide the limited
amount of related work we found on using AR to support emer-
gency response and specifically triage. Section 3 describes our
user-centered design methods, development process, and the ER
standards anchoring ARTTS. Section 4 illustrates the proposed
ARTTS interfaces with additional discussion. In Section 5, we out-
line the results of our usability evaluation conducted with actual ER
personnel as well as design principles for AR systems. Lastly, sec~
tion 6 delivers a conclusion encapsulating limitations and future
work for ARTTS, as well as for AR in triage generally.
drastically limited version containing only five information catego-
ries, all of them providing quantitative data (ie., heart rate, respira-
tion, etc.). This approach arguably results in a loss of all qualitative
data and in turn provides much less information than the traditional
paper tag affords.
Uchiyama et. AL. [13], designed a different type of AR marker
leveraging blinking LEDs, affording a greater allowable distance
between responders and patients while still allowing access to pa-
tient data tags. Again, the triage tag was completely replaced with
a digital tag containing only quantitative data, which could be
viewed as resulting in drastically diminish informational capacity
in comparison to paper triage tags. Additionally, this system lever-
ages a mobile device and thus requires at least one responder hand
to hold and use the system.
Other work with AR and triage focus on areas such as augment-
ing real-time data movement between incident commanders and re-
sponders [14], an AR training environment for MCIs in virtual haz~
ards [15], providing advance status information enroute to MCI
sites [16] or to hospitals [5], or supporting more limited triage as-
sociated with profoundly austere conditions and non-medically
2 RELATED Work
As alluded to above, our review of the literature revealed opportu-
nities to build upon the limited prior art, particularly in relation to
AR support for initial sorting, SALT processes, and virtual triage
tags. We did however find a few inspiring works of interest
Feméndez, Bernabe, & Rodriguez’s [6] application leveraged
Google Glass to provide decision support to first line responders
through icon prompts for each step of the triage process. As a re-
sponder moves through the flowchart, a different icon glows, even-
tually leading to a category assignment. However, as the icons have
no written prompts and novice responders may still struggle, par-
ticularly if the responders are not familiar with the symbology. This
is compounded by the entire triage process, represented by icon:
being always present. Sometimes the process requires that respond-
ers skip steps but this may be confusing for novice responders.
Vassell et. AL., [4], also leveraged Google Glass to capture triage
tag identifiers, (they used QR codes instead of bar codes) and gen-
erate an incident commander view of patient locations and severity.
However, their QR code identifiers completely replaced the entire
physical tag, not just the bar codes. While incident command infor-
‘mation is enhanced and the system allows responders to select a QR
‘marker printed in a color associated to the patient’s triage category,
all other tag information is lost to first-wave responders. Moreover,
the limited field of view and monocular viewing limitations of
google glass suggest there is opportunity to explore AR interfaces
that leverage current state-of-the art binocular displays with wider
trained ‘responders’ or laymen [17].
3. USER-CENTERED METHODOLOGY
In designing ARTTS, we first assembled a design team that fea-
tured several disciplines, including: human factors engineering, us
ability/user experience engineering, computer science, visual arts,
and emergency response. We employed a UX design cycle [18]
(also outlined in figure 1) and embraced a human-centered design
[19] philosophy for all ARTTS framework elements. In summary,
wwe first sought to understand users and their work needs, then cre-
ated candidate design solutions, and then iteratively prototyped and
evaluated these solutions; at each step putting human needs, behav-
ior, and capabilities first [19]
Our primary SME provided insight via interviews as well as ref
erence materials for training in triage [20], and for existing identi-
fied areas for AR support in policing (a first-responder occupation
with overlap to emergency response) [21]. From these resources
and a literature review of related work, we extracted a categorized
list of ways in which AR could support emergency response (see
list in Section 4). Our primary SME then reviewed the categorized
list and helped us prioritize AR tools for triage according to impact,
feasibility, and likelihood of adoption. We were careful to consider
where and how AR could complement existing triage processes in-
stead of upending them as SMEs indicated technology acceptance
as a consistent hurdle in emergency response. Our remining user-
centered design activities for this phase of work centered specifi-
(Herds OF VIEW.
Nestler, Huber, & Klinker [11] propose a radio-frequency ID
(RFID) enhancement to traditional triage tags but this primarily
aids incident commanders in assessing general ground status (num-
ber of patients and their rough locations) and does not directly aid
first-line responders.
Killeen et. AL, [9], proposed an addition to the physical tag via a
digital version displayed on personal digital assistants (PDA's).
Scanning the physical tag barcode pulls up the digital version. The
digital tag also provides decision support by leveraging the Simple
Triage and Rapid Treatment (START) triage protocol [12]. How-
ever, PDAs require both hands of the responder to hold the device
and the stylus needed to interact with the device. Further, START
is no longer the standard of practice protocol for triage [8]
Mizumoto et. AL, [10] created and leveraged a bio-sensor to af-
ford dynamic data collection for triage-tag information population
that can be viewed with video-passthrough AR via a tablet. Again,
the device requires one or both responders’ hands and leverages the
START protocol. Moreover, the triage tag was replaced with a
cally on triage for MCIs. Wielding this adjusted list, we conducted
a set of subsequent interviews with ten other SMEs asking about
triage pinch points, how AR could alleviate them, and the require-
‘ments of any new system for adoption.
We then conducted a thematic content analysis using the qualita-
tive transcript data and notes taken from the interviews with the ten
additional SMEs. Consistently identified attributes were grouped
and synthesized into work activity notes that we then organized into
a work activity affinity diagram (WAAD). From the WAAD, we
distilled user and flow data models [18] as well as personas in
which to drive subsequent user interface design decisions. We lev-
eraged the data models to capture system requirements for ARTTS
We further anchored our requirements and emerging conceptual
designs with established national emergency response standards [8]
and work artifacts [22]. For example, ARTTS” conceptual founda-
tion is heavily informed by the Model Uniform Core Criteria
(MUCC) for Mass Casualty Incident Training [23], further ensur-
ing that ARTTS could be integrated in and potentially even used
for training in the future.

ARTTS User Experience Process and Products
Materials and
Analysis and
Understanding Users’ Needs
Feguremente
Design Solutions
+ Design suggestions + Uxsnortcomings or
ARTTS designe
reanorth & Mel
Evaluate UX
Figure 1: We employed a user-centered design and evaluation process to increase likelihood of ARTTS' adoption.
Wireframes (figure 2) helped quickly identify visual clutter and
accidental emergent features for removal, as well as pinpoint areas
for improvement for the transition from physical tag to virtual tag.
Finally, ARTTS has come to prototype fruition several times,
with expert insight for each iteration evaluated via design
walkthroughs with our primary SME for changes. In sum, the ver-
oe ON nd tn en de ae
Aid in scene | When device is being Always integrated
processing | held up graphics in real
Visualization | Viewed indirectly via Viewed directly with
ofrealtime | video pass-through _via optical see-
data AR through AR
ations,
3.1. AR Display Hardware
While mobile devices are smaller, cheaper, and more ubiquitous,
SMEs identified it mis
sion critical that ERs
have their hands free to
give medical interven-
tions necessary for sur-
vival. In this vein,
Coskun et. AL, [24]
found that holding a de-
vice with one hand and
using the other to interact,
with the device reduces
device acceptance. Addi-
tionally, handheld tools
can be easily lost as med-
ical care requires the de-
vice to be pocketed or
mes $+ 4
= tome bl
Figure 2: A comparison of an earlier it-
eration, lower fidelity wireframe (left)
and a later, higher fidelity wireframe
(right).
placed nearby and can also be dropped between patients.
MCl events are typically chaotic, and potentially dangerous, until
ERs have established an evacuation plan and the threat has ceased,
which sometimes does not occur until after evacuations have been
completed. As such, we chose a binocular optical see-through AR
dienlav ta cammart ctereneconic viewine af near field chiecte (ene.
Facilitation of
data collection
relevant to
search and
also future
training
Facilitation of
‘communica-
tion between
response
teams
Suitable for
use in chaotic
environments
Provide situa-
tional aware-
ness (SA)
support
‘Support haz-
ard avoidance
Can leverage inte-
grated GPS, eye
tracking not available
without additional
hardware
May not perform well
under loud conditions
andlor limited privacy
without use of add?
tional hardware
(which can be lost, re-
Quire charging, etc.)
Handheld size has ad-
vantages, but can be
easily dropped and
misplaced
Must first alert users
via vibration or tone
before AR visual SA
support can be pro-
vided
Requires looking
through handheld as a
Can leverage inte-
grated eye tracking,
GPS often missing
Can employ inte-
rated microphone
and speakers proxi-
mal to users’ mouth
and ears for better
channel quality and
privacy
Headword size has
disadvantages, but is
less likely to be mis-
placed
Is already on’ head,
ssuch that visual noti
cations and alerts
can be attended
toinstantly
Provides a natural
first-person point-of-
cifically the user interfaces associated with ARTS’ tools) and as-
sist in preserving situation awareness as replacing or diminishing
reality was not identified as a requirement [25]. With these require-
‘ments in mind, we chose to leverage the HoloLens 2 as the medium.
for ARTTS current delivery, and provide a sample of AR display
tradeoff considerations in Table |
Table 1: Sample of AR Display Tradeoff Considerations
Requirement Handheld AR Headworn AR
Hands-free to
give medical
interventions
One hand required to
hold display and see
information; second
hand required to inter-
act; potential issues
with arm fatigue
Hands required for
gesture-based inter-
action only, otherwise
hands are open and
free.
a
ee ind AD nul
wayfinding | as well as spatial integrated AR and
mapping between real-world
phone view and real-
world view
4 Inmat Desion ResuLts & Discussion
4.1 ER Use Cases that can Benefit from AR
By reviewing the literature and engaging emergency response
SMEs we identified the following emergency response dependent
needs/uses. Use cases identified in the supplementary materials
and/or in our literature review are noted with citations, all others
were derived from primary SME discussions and SME interviews.
Setting the stage (first waves of response. Establishing crisis ex-
tent, setting up evacuation points, finding patients)
© Facilitation of quick data collection and effort-free use

© Aids in scene processing
© Can implement a specific decision tree system for reporting
Communication
© Recording patient status
© Updating patient status
© Visualization and real-time editing of real-time data [26]
© Facilitation of interdisciplinary communication between spe-
cialists [26]
Able to identify areas already searched [26]
Facilitation of data collection relevant to search and also fu-
ture training [26]
© Tracking of location, activity, and status of other responders
221)
Integration of civilian data [27]
Triage support [3], [5]
© Facilitation of communication between response teams
across multiple disaster events [3]
4.2 General System and User Interface Requirements
‘Through work activity notes we identified three primary user types:
novice responder, expert responder, and incident commander. Nov-
ice responders are ERs with limited experience, particularly in re-
lation to MCI’s. This limited experience renders novice responders
‘more vulnerable to becoming stunned. Comparatively, expert re-
sponders define ERs with moderate to extensive experience, again
particularly in relation to MCI’s. This relation to MCI is critical as
the sheer scale of MCls make these incidents profoundly different
from typical, small patient pool response. Finally, incident com-
‘manders ate responsible for higher-order aspects of emergency re-
sponse including managing operations, resource allocation, and
making decisions regarding risk/reward for search and rescue of
hazardous environments. Incident commanders are not on the front
lines and are instead typically located in a communication hub
overseeing all incoming streams of data to inform decision making
and using the afforded communication channels to communicate
those decisions quickly to front line responders.
Current pinch points are mostly associated with evacuation status
Survivor treatment support [3], [5]
Streaming of patient information (video and audio) to be
viewed by hospital responders [5]
© Advanced hospital notice
Decision making
© Evacuation progress summary
Resource inventory
Resource allocation tracking
Jolting stunned responders back to triage
Lessen cognitive load for novice responders in remembering
triage process
© Visualize non-physically visible structures (pipes under-
ground, ete.) [26]
© Lessening of cognitive load associated with personal infor-
mation tracking [26]
© Support via third party with more complicated data that’s
been synthesized to provide guidance [26]
Situational awareness support [26]
Expert advice in real time from expert not physically re-
sponding [5]
Navigation/wayfinding
© Hazard avoidance
© Direct to points of interest [26]
© Further information about points of interest (type of point,
and consistent communication regarding patient status. It can be
difficult for responders to quickly determine evacuation status due
to the sometimes staggered physical placement of patients across
an MCIs geographic area, particularly if those patients are not mo-
bile and need ER support to move. Furthermore, as triage happens
in waves with patients exchanging hands rapidly and often, con-
sistent communication is difficult regarding concerns like adminis-
tered care and last checked status. Each successive wave of triage
builds upon previous iterations. Later waves also allow responders
to spend more time with patients, gather more detailed information,
and provide more definitive care. More specifically, first-wave re-
sponders spend around less than two minutes with each patient to
ascertain rough estimates of patient status. ERs then attend to pa-
tients in triage order to provide care beyond basic life-saving inter-
ventions and gather further information. Thus, continuity of care is
the primary concem in relation to consistent communication actoss
triage waves,
Though current paper triage tags are immensely helpful, we de-
duced that AR could amplify their effectiveness by recording, com-
‘municating, and updating patient status (automatically and via re-
sponder interactions), supporting stunned responders limited ability
to recall triage process details, decision support via data aggrega-
tion across multiple patients, demarcating and avoiding hazards,
providing evacuation progress summaries, furnishing resource al-
location status, and for training,
There are nuanced interactions between responder types and AR
needs. For example, incident commanders need a more holistic un-
distance, direction relative to user) [26]
Map displays to support navigation [21]
‘Thermal/Infrared [21]
Advanced optics for zoom [21]
Threat detection
Quick sharing of dangerous
sponders during response [26]
Real-time intelligence about crimes/criminals in an area [21]
Integration of substance sensors to notify of contamination
21)
Friend identification worn by responders and picked up by
helmet [21]
ing
High training transfer ratio between device and actual use
Quickly instituted
Easy to train in-house (within a station. No third-party insti-
tutions needed)
damaged areas to fellow re-
derstanding of triage efforts than novice and expert responders on
the front lines. Our initial version of ARTTS centers on aiding
front-line responders, particularly novices. However, expert re-
sponders also stand to benefit from ARTTS through its support of
consistent communication and enhanced capacity to track evacua-
tion and triage status. Finally, as SMEs identified novice respond-
ers as susceptible to becoming stunned, novice responders require
‘more molecular, specific AR support.
SMEs indicated that any AR system will need to be at least bare-
handed (with hands-free options preferred), usable in day or night
conditions, easy to use, reliable, and create a shared digital envi-
ronment for all responders. Bare-handed means that responders do
not need to physically hold a tool to use the interface.
A shared digital environment means that responder A should be
able to see and update a triage tag created by responder B, and that
an incident commander can view a summary of triage information
generated by responder A and B (and more). Additionally, AR-
based triage must afford enhanced informational continuity across
triage waves,

A triage category refers to both an assessment of the patient's,
current medical condition and delineates the order in which patients
‘must be attended to and evacuated. Best practice standards utilize
the Sort, Assess, Lifesaving Interventions, and Treat-
‘ment/Transport (SALT) framework [8], so ARTTS does as well
Black refers to deceased patients, grey is for patients identified as
expected to expire, red for patients who are in critical condition that
can potentially be saved but need medical intervention in a hospital,
yellow for patients who can receive stabilizing care in the field but
Will need hospital follow up, and green for patients experiencing
‘minimal injuries (if any),
Visual elements leverage the Mixed-Reality Took Kit’s (MRTK)
standard dark blue backgrounds and white text seeking to mitigate
limitations of the AR display’s additive light model [28] and afford
visibility in brighter conditions, as well as aesthetic consistency
across tools. We used Nielsen's heuristics [29] to anchor our inter-
face design efforts to ensure that ARTTS has an aesthetic and min-
imalist design, flexibility of use, employs recognition over recall,
prevents errors, and exhibits intemal consistency [29]. We also
‘used gestalt principles to chunk information eroupines within the
potentially unable to retrieve critical process details quickly and ac-
curately as the only real mediator for this effect is previous exper
ence.
Stakes are high in MCI response with each second being critical
Thus, to improve response efficiency and support novice respond-
ers we created an on-
demand AR-based ini-
tial sorting prompt
(figure 3). This prompt,
is uncomplicated and
only utilizes the very
first step of the SALT
triage process. The in-
structional language is,
simple, and a check list
is used to track pro-
gress. Initial sorting Teen
can be an initial kick to
reorient responders
hack ta the triace nro.
virtual tag to ease visual search [30]. Moreover, we greatly ex-
panded the salience of the assigned triage category by highlighting
the entire informational box containing patient name, thus creating
an emergent feature and supporting parallel search [30]. Flexibility
of use was further attained via multiple interaction types, basing the
virtual triage tag on the physical tag, and by providing access to
process flow charts.
Our design efforts resulted in three main (but four total possible)
interaction techniques: poke, ray-cast, and voice, with touch-pinch
used for special interaction (¢.g., grabbing the side of an interface
window to “physically move’ the window location). These give re-
sponders flexibility of use redundancies and afford bare-handed
use. Interactions can be used to select items and toggle between the
triage tag and the SALT walkthrough interfaces. As ray-casting and
poke interactions will still require responders’ hands, voice pro-
vides a truly hands-free interaction option where possible. The
range of interactions also ensures ARTTS elements can be utilized
in near menu—within arm’s reach—and distant menu contexts
when necessary. Gaze was considered for this purpose as well, but
carly pilot testing revealed inconsistent effectiveness, thus violating,
the requirement that the system be reliable.
AILARTTS elements can all be easily moved and resized, which
is the only way the touch-pinch interaction is currently utilized.
ARTTS elements can “follow” responders or be pinned to the phy’
ical world. Follow refers to a body-relative AR user interface ele-
‘ment, meaning that the tag is anchored to the responder’s body.
Pinning the tag toggles ARTTS into a world-relative AR user inter-
ces. The intrie is
deliberately simple Figure 3: Initial sorting prompts. The first
with outlines around prompt (top image) is used upon arrival to
each selection option the scene, while the bottom image acts as
to aid visual scanning 4 Prompt and progress checklist
[30].
The initial sorting tool employs poke, ray-casting, and pinch in-
teractions. To ensure consistency, it uses the same aesthetic as all
ARTTS elements.
44. Virtual Assessment Tool and ARTTS Tool Selection
and Management
Sometimes a simple early kick is not enough. Should an ER need
more aid they can leverage additional support via the Virtual As-
sessment Tool, or VAT.
VAT serves as an interactive alternative to the current static
SALT flow chart and provides an AR-based “click through” expe-
rience to yield a decision tree that would otherwise need to be in-
temalized (and recalled) by responders under duress. By design, the
VAT complements the Initial Sorting Tool, by supporting the
“ALT” processes defined by SALT (with the Sorting Prompt Tool
supporting the “S” in SALT).
‘As responders select items in response to VAT's interface
prompts (see figure 4,
top image, where top
two prompts are
face element, anchoring ARTTS into a physical world location
[31]. To summon any ARTTS tool responders need only hold up
their palm with fingers closed in a flat position (leveraging
MTRK’s hand menu features).
In the following sections we present ARTTS’ three main AR
tools in the order we would expect them to be used in the field. All
tools can be accessed via the ‘toolbox’ featured in figure 4.
4.3. Initial Sorting Prompt
‘SMEs indicated that arrival to an MCI scene can be overwhelming.
Moreover, the sheer scale of the chaotic scenes can stun responders
into inaction, as stressful events can potentially alter memory re-
trieval [32] and result in cognitive impairment [33]. From our dis-
cussions with our SME and the literature in training, we know that
repeated study of materials mitigates retrieval inhibition the least,
with repeated retrieval practice resulting in more enduring memo-
ries and enhanced retrieval [32]. Meaning, novice responders are
fected), te system
tracks the appropriate
paths through the SALT
flowchart, eventually
resulting in a final tri-
age assessment. The
sessment outcome then
automatically populates
a new virtual triage tag
for the relevant patient
with the appropriate
data (leaving other ar-
eas like allergies blank
for the time being). We designed this experience to minimize the
number of interactions necessary. Though we could eliminate all
interactions through a show/hide interaction by simply presenting
the entire SALT flowchart as a static image, we felt this would i
crease mental workload and visual search time resulting in non-
Figure 4: VAT prompts and tool man-
ager. Top and bottom images are sample
prompts provided by VAT. The right im-
age is the overarching tool manager.

adoption of the tool. Addition-
ally, we felt this was another
opportunity to leverage gestalt
principles as well as AR’ vis-
ualization and interaction capa-
bilities to improve existing = = =
processes and artifacts,
4.5 Virtual Triage Tag
We designed ARTTS" virtual
triage tag using a physical tag
‘work artifact (figure 3) created Figure §: Current state of the art,
by Evacu-Aid [34] thus ensur- Physical triage tag [22]
ing user familiarity by migrating design elements to minimize up-
ending of current processes. Further, the virtual triage tag adheres
to current best standards of practice (SALT). The virtual tag (figure
6) is chunked to minimize visual search time [30] into three major
sections found in the left column: general information, physical
‘condition, and additional information
Figure 6: ARTTS' fully expanded AR-based virtual triage tag
Instead of using a pen or pencil to mark physical areas of concern
and injuries, responders can use ray-cast or poke interaction tech-
niques to mark up the virtual triage tag’s body chart. When marking
General information provides characteristics of the patient such
as name, height, weight, as well as overall triage status and time of
last assessment. Overall status follows traditional naming and color
coding to allow ERs to quickly identify patient condition (once
specified by previous waves).
Physical condition data is gathered on responders’ first inspec-
tion of patients. The triage tag supports collection of pulse, blood
pressure (BP), respiration, cognitive status, as well as injury type
and location if applicable as these areas are core to triage category
delineation, We used insights from our expert interviews to define
the specific quantitative values employed for status delineation,
Lastly, additional information, allows responders to elucidate
qualitative details on patient injury severity that cannot be easily
quantitatively captured such as critical information needed for ef-
fective medical intervention including major injuries, allergies, and
other notes. Allergies creates a quick check for critical allergies
identified by SMEs such as latex, penicillin, and sulfa. The major
injuries and notes sections host voice recordings created by first
wave responders completing early assessments. These voice re-
cordings are available for aural playback and can also be displayed
as text through voice-to-text. Each entry in the tag is timestamped,
while voice-to-text entries are additionally stamped with responder
identity (responders log in to each headset, thus allowing for their
entries to be coded with their information).
In the virtual triage tag, triage category is presented in the first
chunk (instead of at the bottom like the physical tag), and the triage
category color coding fully surrounds critical demographic infor-
the body chart, responders can toggle between a circle and eraser
tool. The circle tool allows ERs to place a circle (allowing for cus-
tomized placement) onto any part of the body chart. Early designs
included an eraser tool to remove any circles with one poke action,
however the modal interface was found to be more cumbersome
than simply allowing users to simply reselect existing circles to re-
‘move them.
Pulse, blood pressure, respiration, and cognitive data can be en-
tered with voice or via poke and ray-cast interaction with a virtual
keyboard. Future iterations will limit the numeric data areas to a
numeric key pad. Finally, the digital nature of the triage tag allows
for bidirectional patient status changes. The traditional paper tag
only affords category changes if the patient worsens, while the vir-
tual tag allows for patient status improvements to be documented
as well without losing the patient’s category assignment history.
5 TRIAGE TAG EVALUATION RESULTS & DISCUSSION
Eleven emergency responders (3 female, 8 male; Age range 20 —
67, avg. 43.8) participated in a usability evaluation of the triage tag,
the most complicated element of ARTTS, so that we could ascer-
tain the virtual tag’s usability and associated mental workload.
None of the responders had any experience in AR and ten had ex-
perience with physical triage tags. UX studies have been found to
not need large sample
sizes, with Rex &
eS
Pyla describing that
mation for patients. Responders can quickly delineate the assigned
triage category by the color saliency, but status has also been re-
dundantly encoded with explicit status labeling in the same visual
area. As black appears transparent in optical see-through AR, we
used two distinct shades of grey to represent the printed tags black
and gray colors. Any potential problems perceiving differences be-
tween the two shades of gray is minimized by the aforementioned
capacity to complete parallel search due to dual encoding [30]
Figure 6 features ARTTS’ fully expanded virtual triage tag. The
items in the right column, the body chart and voice-to-text boxes,
can be separately toggled open or closed by selecting the small per
son-silhouette and major injury ellipses respectively shown in the
‘main tag (or by saying “show/hide body chart” and “show/hide ma-
jor injuries/notes”). When opened, the right-side panels slide open
to the side of the main tag instead of replacing the main tag. This
was an indicated preference found through design walk-throughs
with our primary SME that affords all data is visible when desired,
and collapsible when not.
empirical evaluations
with at least three to
five users can often
identify 80% of usa-
bility issues within an
system [18]
Equipped with this,
we feel that eleven
participants are suffi-
cient for our initial
purposes.
Participants were first given AR user interaction familiarization
tasks designed to train participants on poking, ray-casting, scroll-
ing, and moving the tag. Participants were trained in poke interac-
tions by being asked to poke a random layout of ten virtual boxes
labeled 1-10 in ascending order. This was done 8 times, yielding 80
pokes. This process was repeated for ray-casting. For scrolling, par-
ticipants were asked to scroll through a list (in near range, so like a
“poke touch’ interaction) to find a specific fruit and then click on it
Figure 7: Participant using the virtual triage
tag,

when they saw it, yielding 8 scroll tasks. Finally, participants were
asked to ray-cast a cube from one location to another within a des-
ignated cube (far field), yielding 8 object movement tasks,
Upon completion of familiarization, participants are then given
either a paper or AR triage tag (order of which was counterbalanced
across participants) and walked through a set of benchmark tasks
built such that all interactions are completed more than once and to
give participants a good overview of tag usage. Example tasks in-
cluded “add latex to the allergy list”, “record a pulse of 120”, “up-
date the patient status”, etc. These benchmark tasks varied only in
the specifically requested interaction styles to achieve the task
After completing the benchmark tasks, participants were asked
to fill out a System Usability Scale (SUS) survey [35] and a Raw
Task Load Index (RTLX [36]—NASA TLX [37] without pairwise
comparisons to mitigate survey fatigue) [36]. Then participants
were given a new set of benchmark tasks, comparable in difficulty,
on the remaining tag modality, with the same surveys completed
afterwards. The AR triage tag did have some unique questions as-
sociated with it. The first was the short form version of the User
Engagement Scale [38] used for application assessment. The sec-
In summation, the virtual triage tag has held its own as compared
to a physical, paper version of the triage tag in terms of user per-
ception in the context of our study. Le., the virtual tag did not sig-
nificantly negatively diverge from the paper tag as indicated by our
SUS comparisons. Though any change inherently yields a degree
of process upending, these non-significant differences in SUS
scores speaks to a degree of success in our goal to minimize upend-
ing existing triage processes. However, future iteration is warranted
to maximize the tag’s effectiveness and to minimize any negative
tradeoffs with the paper tag. The core areas for future focus will be
on the physical fatigue facet and in helping provide user feedback
to indicate success in tag interaction.
5.1 Design Principles
From a qualitative perspective, we noted several design principles
for AR in MCls, as well as UX findings that may be of interest to
other AR practitioners
Responders are sifting through several information streams and
have to move quickly at first, eventually slowing in subsequent
‘ond was a self-reported assessment of their comfort in their AR in-
teraction skills (1-10, 10 being the most comfortable.), as well as
whether they felt their AR interaction skills improved with time
(yes or no)
An initial assessment of data normality showed some concerns
for overall SUS scores. A continuous fit evaluation displayed a
right skewed (-2.21) curve with a leptokurtic kurtosis (6.077).
These scores are both well outside what is considered a normal
range of +1 for each [39], indicating non-normality. Interquartile
range (IQR) evaluation showed one score well below the QI cutoff
of 65. Huber M-Estimation was also used to estimate center and
spread of this data with a default K Sigma of 4, ensuring an appro-
priately conservative evaluation of the data. Huber’s evaluation
also pinpointed the same datapoint as an outlier. Thus, this outlier
was excluded from our analysis. This exclusion yielded a new
skewness (.13) and kurtosis (48) which is centered within that
aforementioned +1 normality range.
Overall, ARTTS’ virtual triage tag received an average SUS
score of 74.5. This is above the recommended average of 68 [40],
thus simultaneously assuaging any immediate major concerns with
the interface while also revealing there is room for improvement.
‘The paper tag had a higher SUS score, but a matched pairs evalua-
tion found this difference to be statistically insignificant.
Regarding mental workload as measured by the RTLX (out of,
21): mental demand (9.8), physical demand (4.7), temporal demand
(8.2), and frustration (5.5) were all below 11 (or moderate) for the
virtual tag. Physical demand was the least concerning with a low
‘Waves, PUriLer, EXS are Likely In CANQCTOUS CHVIFONMCHIS WHEN AC-
tively responding to an MCI. This means that AR applications
should minimize visual search, afford different response strategies
[41], and not subtract from ER situation awareness. These can be
achieved using gestalt principles like common region, ensuring ap-
plications allow for a range of fidelity in each use, and by minimiz~
ing the graphical footprint while providing quick toggle on/off of
said graphics. Our triage tag uses common region to chunk similar
information and input types. Further, the tag has some quick re-
sponse data (simple numbers) and longer response data (verbal
notes) to support shifting ER strategies.
Graphics and applications should leverage Nielsen's heuristies
[29] to further facilitate efficient and pleasant use, while critically
ensuring reliability of the system through error prevention and eas-
ing recovery from errors. Designers should further consider the se~
lected hardware’s pros and cons carefully. We chose a HWD based
on ER feedback and what we felt were worthy trade-off for a fea-
sible future of AR. Hardware should be reconsidered on a case-by-
case basis for the intended use case. Finally, graphical elements
should be robust enough to handle as wide a range of bright envi-
ronments as possible, with visual redundancies for any colors that
‘may be washed out on either end of the light spectrum.
More specifically, participants found poking much easier than
ray casting, suggesting that user interfaces should be placed closer
to users for easy access. Our triage tag is representative of likely
the largest single UI that can be effectively used quickly via touch
without more detailed practice and training and given today’s AR
average score of 4.7 (out of 21). Conversely, the biggest concern is
that participants reported an average score of 15.5 (out of 21) for
their perceived failure in accomplishing the task using the virtual
tag. The paper tag had non-significantly lower results for the over-
all TLX score and across all dimensions except physical demand (p
> 01), which is not surprising given that our tested tag required
hands interaction.
Finally, we administered a short form version of the User En-
gagement Scale [38] to provide a deeper evaluation of the virtual
tag and overall experience with AR. With 1 being strongly disagree
and 5 being strongly agree, the subscale of perceived usability has
a mildly positively leaning average of 3.67, further supporting the
SUS result that the virtual tag has average usability while still hav-
ing room for improvement. Focused attention had a similarly mid-
dling score of 3.33. More positively, aesthetic appeal of the tag
yielded an average score of 4, with a perceived reward factor of
interacting with the tag receiving a 4.67. All participants reported
feeling highly confident in their AR skills and like their ability to
interact in AR got better over time.
en en ea
Second, we noticed that scrolling through menus and large fields
of vertical text (e.g. notes) proved to be difficult for some partici-
pants. We observed that some participants engaged in an “exagger-
ated scroll motion”, that is, physically lifting their arm above the
head in to accomplish an effective vertical scrolling. ERs need re-
liable and fast interactions. Further, we observed that during scroll-
ing or selection at distance, both of which used a pinch, participants
sometimes did not separate their fingers enough and would lower
their hand before the “pinch release” was recognized by the system
(resulting in undesired continued scrolling or an untended non-re-
lease of a UI selection, respectively). Thus, practitioners may con-
sider a “paging” mechanisms instead (e.g., buttons with “next” and
“prev”) to poke through subsets of lists or text entries instead of
scrolling a continuous list.
Participants also found numerical data entry on the standard Ho-
lolensyMRTK keyboard tedious, which suggests that a numpad
(and redundant voice capability) may be a more effective input
‘mechanism when there is a need to specify numerals. In a similar

fashion, we also noticed that for entering blood pressure, we needed
an input mechanism that matched the domain-specific ecological
mental model [42] for blood pressure readings. So, for example,
instead of entering systolic blood pressure and diastolic blood pres-
sure as separate fields, we simply added a “/” to the numpad to al-
low for blood pressure to be entered as “120 / 80”. Participants also
did not reposition the virtual tag as much as we thought they might
(ie., in order to see the virtual tag better or to poke interact) and
instead moved their body to more convenient viewing loca-
tions. Lastly, the HoloLens would often lose tracking when partic~
pants placed their head down low to the ground and tured their
head to the side in order to listen to a supine patient breathing.
Upon returning their head to a normal position, tracking would re-
sume however the ARTS” Uls would sometimes shift to a slightly
different position. Practitioners should be wary and careful about
ensuring tracking is consistent and reliable.
6 ConcLUsION
Our review of literature, training materials, and expert interviews
develop, we foresee them quickly surpassing mobile devices in
contexts where users need their hands free.
This work includes a small sample size of only eleven. While we
feel eleven was sufficient for our purposes, more is preferrable.
Further, participants were limited to one session of using the triage
tag. As all participants indicated that interactions got easier with
time, some perceived usability issues may be a result of not having
enough familiarity with the tag itself because while it is heavily in-
spited by the original paper tags, there are still some changes that
would require re-training if used in the field. Further, while our vir-
tual tag did not negatively diverge from the paper tag, we concede
this also means that these comparisons do not make clear any obvi-
ous ‘gains’ to be had from implementing AR in the field as the
scores for the virtual tag were not significantly more positive.
Simply replacing the paper tag with an AR version does not inher-
ently yield meaningful change. We believe, however, that the gains
of our tools are more likely to be realized elsewhere. Namely, in
the field vis-A-vis additional and dynamic systems support offered
by our virtual tag that are not available via paper medium. Our vir-
tual tag could vield improved evacuation efficiency. more effective
Wentiled Several Opportunites FOr AK Suppor In cmergency Te
sponse. SME priority rankings for MCI triage guided our team to
focus on recording, communicating, and updating patient status,
supporting stunned ERs, and decision support.
‘Our analysis of interview transcripts suggests that AR systems
for ERs need to support bare-handed interaction when possible,
minimize the need to use hands in general, be visible in day and
night conditions, are easy to use, are reliable, and create a shared
digital environment to support multiple user roles (ERS, incident
commanders, and in the future healthcare professionals receiving
patients at hospital facilities). The team identified optical see~
through AR as ideal to ensure reality is truly augmented (not re-
placed) and situation awareness is preserved.
Our current triage tag received middling to good scores on most
tested facets. Though the paper tag trended more positively across
these dimensions, these differences between the tags were not sig-
nificant except for in relation to physical demand.
ARTTS supports standard recording of patient status similarly to
the original physical tag. However, ARTTS data recording is aug-
mented by the ability to update the tag and track provenance of up-
dates, and the ability of the virtual triage tag to be accessed by any
ER at any time and location. Moreover, the option to send data to
hospitals in advance is an additional promising improvement that
we hope to explore in future work. ARTTS global sorting and VAT
interfaces further augment the ER experience by providing prompts
to guide early triage requirements,
patient triaging, better resource management, and many other
higher order benefits not evaluated by this study.
6.2 Future Directions
Moving forward, we envision ARTTS being integrated with ER-
based system architectures such as Panacea’s Cloud [3] or a Cloud-
Fog [17] to support possible functions like the provision of ad-
vanced hospital notice. More work is needed in terms of in-situ us-
ability evaluation strengthened via formative user evaluations in re-
alistic MCI triage settings to obtain quantitative measures of effec~
tiveness relative to the traditional paper triage tag and mental recall
required for initial sorting and SALT. Studies regarding technology
acceptance, VAT access versus strictly recall during response, and
the effectiveness of initial sorting in reorienting stunned ERs
should also be completed,
Future work in the AR triage space should not only build upon
the areas focused on by ARTTS, but also consider possible solu-
tions for the other identified use case areas not touched on by
ARTTS such as wayfinding, hazard avoidance, evacuation progress
summaries, resource allocation areas, and training.
Further, future work should endeavor to include more partici-
pants to ensure normality can be better assessed. Any future studies
should include more training on the triage tag itself (not just on AR
interactions) to ensure there is not a confounding effect with learn-
ing the new orientation of tag elements. The AR triage tag appears
to need further iteration to bring the usability from ‘average’ to ‘ex-
6.1 Limitations
Regarding interactions, ARTT’S uses speech-to-text which has its
own limitations, especially in the context of loud environments like
what might be found in MCI’s, The HoloLens 2 allows for shifting
of the sound sensitivities to afford better speech command intelli-
ibility, but these may still be overwhelmed depending on the MCL
Additionally, standard problems with AR in bright, sunlit outdoor
settings are still present. ARTTS does not currently provide a fully
hands-free alternative to move the interfaces panels in space (one
must touch-pinch), thus requiring the system be in the near field
and only moved within the near field. Further, our current study
focused on physical interactions and did not include voice com-
mands, which may have been a mitigation strategy for fatigue.
We concede that there are limitations to HWDs in relation to their
feasibility due to limited battery life, network connection, and lim-
ited effectiveness in outdoor and bright settings. However, mobile
devices have long been available to responders and are outlined as
not feasible via SME interviews. As HMD technology continues to
cellent’ and to improve users perceived perlormance. Finally, it 1s.
critical to assess whether these non-statistically significant differ-
ences have large practical implications, particularly in the context
of actual field work. Future evaluation should consider ARTTS in
at least a more intensive training scenario. This is particularly true
as some of the core benefits of ARTTS that might make it favorable
to a paper tag despite increases in some facets of mental workload
were not well displayed in a controlled evaluation setting (like how
paper tags are damaged by rain and mud, etc.). In short, as with
‘many emerging applied AR endeavors, the ARTTS UX and asso-
ciated hardware need to be stress tested in more field-like scenarios
to better prepare it for adoption by ERs. Finally, we intend to eval-
uate the higher order gains of ARTTS like improved evacuation
times and more efficient triage processes.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This material is based upon work supported by the National Science
Foundation under Grant No. 2033592