Research Article

User-Innovated eHealth Solutions for
Service Delivery to Older Persons
With Hearing Impairment

Annette Cleveland Nielsen,a Sergi Rotger-Griful,a

Anne Marie Kanstrup,b and Ariane Laplante-Lévesquec,d

Purpose: The successful design and innovation of eHealth
solutions directly involve end users in the process to
seek a better understanding of their needs. This article
presents user-innovated eHealth solutions targeting
older persons with hearing impairment. Our research
question was: What are the key users’ needs, expectations,
and visions within future hearing rehabilitation service
delivery?
Method: We applied a participatory design approach to
facilitate the design of future eHealth solutions via focus
groups. We involved older persons with hearing impairment
(n = 36), significant others (n = 10), and audiologists
(n = 8) following 2 methods: (a) human-centered design for
interactive systems and (b) user innovation management.
Through 3 rounds of focus groups, we facilitated a process
progressing from insights and visions for requirements
(Phase 1), to app such as paper version wireframes (Phase 2),
and to digital prototypes envisioning future eHealth solutions
(Phase 3). Each focus group was video-recorded and

photographed, resulting in a rich data set that was analyzed
through inductive thematic analysis.
Results: The results are presented via (a) a storyboard
envisioning future client journeys, (b) 3 key themes for
future eHealth solutions, (c) 4 levels of interest and
willingness to invest time and effort in digital solutions,
and (d) 2 technical savviness types and their different
preferences for rehabilitation strategies.
Conclusions: Future eHealth solutions must offer
personalized rehabilitation strategies that are appropriate
for every person with hearing impairment and their level
of technical savviness. Thus, a central requirement is
anchoring of digital support in the clients’ everyday life
situations by facilitating easy access to personalized
information, communication, and learning milieus. Moreover,
the participants’ visions for eHealth solutions call for
providing both traditional analogue and digital services.
Supplemental Material: https://doi.org/10.23641/asha.
7310729
H

earing impairment (HI) is a chronic health condi-
tion, such as diabetes or arthritis, requiring on-
going rehabilitation and daily self-management.
The service delivery for hearing rehabilitation is currently

under pressure. First, there is a short supply of audiologists
(AUDs) worldwide (Mulwafu, Ensink, Kuper, & Fagan,
2017; Windmill & Freeman, 2013) and limited AUD’s
time available per person with hearing impairment (PHI).
Second, the population worldwide is aging, and thus,
the prevalence of chronic health conditions such as HI is
increasing (Vos et al., 2015). This results in rising hear-
ing care costs and threatens future availability of hearing
rehabilitation (Vos et al., 2015). Third, there is increasing
demand for health care services that support the “4 Ps”:
(a) personalized on-demand service, (b) predictive service
through health analytics, (c) preventive service through
monitoring, and (d) participatory and empowering service
enabling self-management to save on health care costs and
resources (Hood & Friend, 2011).
Unfortunately, current health care services lack
support for the 4 Ps, which has resulted in little active
participation by patients in the health care process (Pryce,

aEriksholm Research Centre, Oticon A/S, Snekkersten, Denmark
bDepartment of Planning, the Technical Faculty of IT and Design,
Aalborg University, Denmark
cDepartment of Behavioural Sciences and Learning, Linköping
University, Sweden
dOticon Medical, Smoerum, Denmark
Annette Cleveland Nielsen is no longer affiliated with Eriksholm
Research Centre.

Editor-in-Chief: Sumitrajit Dhar
Editor: Jill Preminger

Received January 12, 2018
Revision received May 18, 2018
Accepted September 13, 2018
https://doi.org/10.1044/2018_AJA-IMIA3-18-0009
Publisher Note: This article is part of the Special Issue: Internet and
Audiology.

Disclosure: The authors have declared that no competing interests existed at the time
of publication.

American Journal of Audiology • Vol. 27 • 403–416 • November 2018 • Copyright © 2018 American Speech-Language-Hearing Association
403

Hall, Laplante-Lévesque, & Clark, 2016; Rolfe & Gardner,
2016). Most eHealth applications are developed from the
basis of technological opportunity rather than user needs
and expectations and are tested in pilot studies, demonstrat-
ing technical feasibility, but then stored on a shelf, never to
be used again (Wyatt, 2005). eHealth research has identified
the importance of co-design with relevant end users for
improving requirement analysis and grasping the complex-
ity of patient-centered solutions enabling self-management
(Carroll & Richardson, 2016).

eHealth: Promises Within Audiology

The World Health Organization (2016) describes
eHealth as:

The use of electronic means to deliver information,
resources and services related to health. It covers
many domains, including electronic health records,
mobile health, and health analytics, among others.
eHealth can put information in the right place at
the right time, providing more services to a wider
population and in a personalized manner.

eHealth has been proposed to improve access and
cost-effectiveness of health care (World Health Organization,
2016). For example, increasing connectivity rates and smart-
phone use may improve hearing rehabilitation by enabling
information and communication sharing outside the typical
face-to-face session in the clinic (Clark & Swanepoel, 2014).
Connected health, using mobile health through appli-
cations (apps) and smartphones, for instance, has the poten-
tial to place the clients in the center of their own health care
rather than as passive recipients of health care. Mobile
health can link clients to health care providers and enable
clients to monitor and manage their health conditions at
home. Future technologies will allow clients to provide digi-
tal health inputs to health care providers (Qiang, Yamamichi,
Hausman, & Miller, 2012). Such connected health applica-
tions in hearing health care could meet the 4 Ps in service
delivery by enabling self-management and personalizing
on-demand services by AUDs.

Participatory Design for eHealth in Audiology

Participatory design has been used for developing
health information technology since the 1990s. Research in
participatory design presents a broad variety of methods
and techniques for engaging key stakeholders in design of
future health information technology (Kanstrup, Madsen,
Nøhr, Bygholm, & Bertelsen, 2017). Audiology research
has also used participatory design to investigate different
stages of the client journey. For example, Hanssen and
Dahl involved AUDs and PHIs in the design of an interac-
tive tabletop interface with pictures and sounds of listen-
ing environments to improve the communication between
PHIs and AUDs during the hearing aid fitting process
(Dahl & Hanssen, 2016; Hanssen & Dahl, 2016). Further-
more, the authors also investigated how the prototype
shaped AUD–PHI interactions in experimental fitting

sessions. The results showed that the prototype encour-
aged an iterative PHI-driven approach and pace, stimulated
context-specific feedback and follow-up questions to a
larger extent than in traditional fitting sessions, and helped
PHIs make sense of information on HI and treatment op-
tions. Both PHIs and AUDs saw that the solution was able
to reduce the number of visits to the clinic.
Thorén et al. involved PHIs in an iterative development
and usability testing of an online audiologic rehabilitation
program consisting of weekly learning modules (Thorén,
Pedersen, & Jørnæs, 2016). The study concluded that PHIs
perceived advantages of the online program, such as the abil-
ity to do it from home in their own pace and the ability to
study some aspects of HI in more depth. They appreciated
being empowered on learnings about HI, and they especially
appreciated testimonial videos from peers. Furthermore, the
study observed the importance of how online rehabilitation
content is presented, as it influences usability, and how a
learning flow should be structured to be efficient.
Ferguson et al. developed a series of short interactive
videos, or reusable learning objects (RLOs), covering both
practical and psychosocial issues relevant to audiologic
rehabilitation for first-time hearing aid users (Ferguson,
Brandreth, Brassington, Leighton, & Wharrad, 2016;
Ferguson, Leighton, Brandreth, & Wharrad, 2018). In
the development of RLOs, the authors involved AUDs
in a participatory design through a Delphi review, where
they identified the key elements and topic areas for RLOs;
this was followed by three workshops involving PHIs
(n = 32) and AUDs (n = 11). The acceptability, usability,
and adherence of RLOs were evaluated through a ques-
tionnaire. RLOs were evaluated in three postevaluation
focus groups with PHIs and significant others (SOs).
Furthermore, an iterative approach of reviewing and revis-
ing the RLOs was done by both PHIs and AUDs. The
study concluded that RLOs provided valuable learning
and educational support to first-time hearing aid users
and could supplement clinical rehabilitation practice.

An eHealth Environment for Assisted Service
Delivery of Hearing Rehabilitation

The connectivity of hearing aids to the Internet through
a smartphone and Bluetooth enables new opportunities for
eHealth solutions within hearing health care. An eHealth
environment could enable data-driven hearing rehabilitation
with easy and personalized information, learning, and com-
munication exchange between PHIs and AUDs. For instance,
PHIs could send real-time information. Ecological momentary
assessment is a method for sampling an individual’s real-time
behavior and environment (Galvez et al., 2012). Ecological
momentary assessment enables PHIs to monitor their hearing
ability while in their own environment. It could empower
PHIs in being active in their own hearing rehabilitation by
enabling self-monitoring, self-evaluation of important lis-
tening situations, and self-management of their HI.
In this article, the eHealth solutions we aimed to co-
design with AUDs, PHIs, and SOs are framed within the

404

described eHealth environment. We present a participatory
design approach where end users of the final solutions are
involved in the design process for the design of eHealth
solutions within audiology. Through this participatory design,
we aimed to design eHealth solutions not from technologi-
cal opportunities but rather from the real needs and expecta-
tions of the end users. Personalized solutions would emphasize
patient participation and self-management in future hearing
rehabilitation service delivery. Our research question was:
What are the key users’ needs, expectations, and visions
within future hearing rehabilitation service delivery?

Method

This study involved the key stakeholders in hearing
rehabilitation: PHIs, SOs, and AUDs. SOs are allies in
successful hearing care as HI affects verbal communication
(Ekberg, Meyer, Scarinci, Grenness, & Hickson, 2015),
and AUDs are the health care providers at the center of
hearing rehabilitation.
We worked with a participatory design approach to
ground technological innovation in the needs and expectations
of its users. Our participatory design process followed the
principles of International Organization for Standardization
(ISO) standards for human-centered design for interactive
systems (European Committee for Standardization, 2010)
and applied principles and techniques from the user inno-
vation management method (Kanstrup & Bertelsen, 2011).
Central for these participatory approaches is that they aim
to ground innovation of future technology understanding the
target users and use situations. This is rooted in democratic
ideals that people who will be affected by technology should
also have the opportunity to shape the future by participat-
ing in forming future technology. It is also rooted in an
ambition to improve the quality of future technology, ac-
knowledging users as competent practitioners with valuable
knowledge that can contribute to the quality of future
technology.
Researchers and clinicians sometimes describe hearing
rehabilitation as a series of steps arranged along a pathway,
a process, a timeline, a journey, or a travel. This journey
metaphor along which the patient travels frequently occurs
in descriptions of health care pathways, especially in the
context of chronic health conditions where a process toward
self-management is put in place (Layton, Moss, & Morgan,
1998). However, adults with HI rarely describe clinical reha-
bilitation as a connected process or a journey (Laplante-
Lévesque, Brännström, Andersson, & Lunner, 2012). For
them, clinical interactions are isolated events rather than a
series of connected steps contributing to an overall goal.
Therefore, in this study, we chose to openly introduce the
concept of hearing rehabilitation as a client journey or a
travel to participants.
Four to six people participated in each focus group
session together with two researchers as facilitators. Each
focus group session lasted 2 hr. Table 1 and the following
sections describe the three phases of our study.

Participants Recruitment and Demographics

In total, we recruited 36 PHIs, 10 SOs, and eight
AUDs through online questionnaires to participate in the
three rounds of focus groups (Phases 1–3). All three key
stakeholder groups participated in the first round of focus
groups (Phase 1) to frame insights and visions for future
eHealth-assisted client journeys. Only PHIs participated
in the last two rounds of focus groups (Phases 2 and 3), as
the study aimed to design for this target group.
Recruitment focused on PHIs age 60+ years, SOs to
these PHIs, and AUDs who could contribute to this innova-
tive process. We focused on older PHIs as HI is an age-related
chronic disease and, thus, most prevalent in the older popula-
tion segment (Vos et al., 2015), and we wanted our partici-
patory-designed eHealth solutions to have the highest
impact on the population of PHIs. We included participants
who had experienced the hearing aid client journey and
wanted to contribute ideas and solutions to support others
on this journey. Participants reported that they had an inter-
est in technology, owned a smartphone, used apps on a reg-
ular basis (including health apps), and showed that they had
the skills to complete an online recruitment questionnaire.
Exclusion criteria for PHIs were use of current hearing
aids for more than 5 years and nonuse of hearing aids within
the last month. We used purposive sampling to achieve
maximum variation in the sample regarding age, gender,
years of experience with hearing aids (PHIs) or practice as
an AUD, hearing aid distribution channel (public/private/
Eriksholm Research Centre) for both PHIs and AUDs, and
job situation for PHIs (working at least 9 hr a week paid
or unpaid or being retired). Enforcing these maximum vari-
ation criteria, we strived for extrapolation of the results to
a typical hearing aid user population. We asked PHIs to
provide their latest hearing test results. If results were older
than 1 year, we performed a new hearing assessment. The
SOs of the PHIs were only recruited if they had never tried
or owned hearing aids, as to have no mix up of participant
contribution to the innovation process. Table 2 presents
detailed demographic information for the participants.
Despite an almost equal gender distribution of PHIs
(see Table 2), female SOs outnumbered male SOs with
only one male SO participating. All SOs, except for one
niece, were spouses of PHIs. AUDs had a fair gender distri-
bution and a wide range of years of practice (1.5–25 years).
The PHIs had varying levels of years of experience with
hearing aids, from being a new user (0.5 years) to having
used hearing aids for most of their life (62 years). As seen
in Table 2, 78% of the PHIs had an education level of 12 or
more years, and 36.1% had used a private or public hearing
aid distribution channel (i.e., not having received hearing
aids through the Eriksholm Research Centre). Most PHIs
had a slight or moderate HI, and five PHIs had a severe or
profound HI. Twenty-eight percent (10) of the PHIs were
still employed even though their mean age was 70.3 years.
All participants received information on the research
and provided written informed consent prior to participat-
ing. Eriksholm Research Centre has ethical clearance for its

Cleveland Nielsen et al.: User-Innovated eHealth Solutions
405

research activities from the Committee for Health Research
Ethics, Capital Region, Denmark. For more details on the
participant recruitment and selection, see Kanstrup, Rotger-
Griful, Laplante-Lévesque, and Cleveland-Nielsen (2017).

Data Analysis

The data consisted of video recordings of all focus
groups and photographs of the materials that each focus
group generated (e.g., wireframes and digital prototype
alterations and suggestions). We conducted an inductive
thematic analysis after each round of focus groups (Phases 1,
2, and 3) to identify, organize, and describe the data related
to user innovation and design of eHealth solutions for hear-
ing rehabilitation. Following the principles of inductive
thematic analysis (Braun & Clarke, 2006; Kvale, 2007), we
made a transcript of verbal utterances in the focus group
conversations. These transcripts were analyzed through
rereading of the conversations in a process where we first

identified themes in the participants’ conversations and,
second, labeled the identified themes with codes (i.e., the-
matic coding). Hence, our coding process focused on read-
ing and coding semantic content. As a third step, we
looked for patterns and relationships across the codes
progressing to key themes that appeared in the different
focus groups, themes that appeared across all focus groups,
and themes that captured core elements of the participants’
needs and requirements for successful hearing rehabilita-
tion. The analysis was an iterative process of moving back-
ward and forward between single themes and quotes and
the entire video-recorded data set. The key themes were
reviewed by authors A. C. N., S. R. G., and A. M. K., and
suggested revisions were made. Photographs of produced
materials from the focus groups (Phases 1, 2, and 3) were
used in combination with the inductive thematic analysis
to look for consistency in verbal utterances and decisions
taken in the groups (e.g., participants’ priorities of func-
tionality, barriers).

Table 1. Description of the participatory design processes and the involved participants.

Project phase
Participants (n = 54)
Design activities

Planning phase
Researchers
Online recruitment
Purposive sampling for maximum variation
Inclusion criteria based on innovation potential
Client journey context chosen
Phase 1: First round of focus groups
4 groups of PHIs (n = 24)
2 groups of SOs (n = 10)
2 groups of AUDs (n = 8)

Specify user requirements in the client journey:
Barriers in experienced client journey and visions
Pack a future client journey suitcase of insights
Phase 2: Second round of focus groups
4 groups of PHIs (n = 23)
Produce design solutions:
Sketch ideas from visions
Transform ideas to app like paper wireframes
Include action and sharing information
Prioritize app functionalities
Phase 3: Third round of focus groups
4 groups of PHIs (n = 17)
Produce design solutions:
More mature digital solutions
Mock-up app with appetizers
User interaction and alterations
After phase
Researchers
Evaluate the mock-up app to meet user requirements

Note.
PHIs = persons with hearing impairment; SOs = significant others; AUD = audiologists.

Table 2. Demographic information on participants.

Participant
group
Gender
(female/male)
Age
Hearing aid
usage (years)

Education
level/practice
(years)

Distribution
channel (private/
public/ERH)

Grade of hearing
impairment and PTA

Grade
Grade in dB

PHI (n = 36)
16/20
70.3 (5.6; 61–81)
14.2 (14.8; 0.5–62)
9–11: 8
12–13: 18
> 13: 10

7/6/23
Slight: 11
Moderate: 20
Severe: 4
Profound: 1

L: 50.5 (15.2)
R: 49.0 (13.9)

SO (n = 10)
9/1
64.9 (14.0; 31–76)
—
—
1/1/8
—
AUD (n = 8)
5/3
—
—
8.9 (8.2; 1.5–25)
2/6/0
—

Note.
Mean values with standard deviations and ranges in parentheses are shown for the continuous data: age, hearing aid use in years, AUDs’
years of practice, and PTA. Education level is shown as years of education and number of PHIs on that level and, for AUDs, number of years of
practice. Distribution channel indicates private or public clinics or Eriksholm Research Centre test person (ERH) for SOs dependent of PHIs’
distribution channel. Grades of hearing impairment (dB) are based on better ear PTA (0.5, 1.0, 2.0, and 4.0 kHz). Em dashes indicate data not
available. PTA = pure-tone average; PHI = person with hearing impairment; L = left; R = right; SO = significant other; AUD = audiologist.

406

Phase 1: First Round of Focus Groups
Participants

In the first round of focus groups (Phase 1), we met
with all key stakeholders: four groups of PHIs (n = 24),
two groups of SOs (n = 10), and two groups of AUDs
(n = 8).

Method

We met with all key stakeholders to identify via con-
versations insight, visions, and barriers of the current and
future client journey (see Figure 1). First, we presented
the current client journey as this was used as framework
across the Phase 1 sessions (e.g., identify insights of dif-
ferent phases of the current client journey and visions for
the future). The focus group activities enabled the partici-
pants to express themselves not only through self-reflection
(e.g., individual card sorting) but also through group dis-
cussions. In the card sorting activities, participants were
provided with some predefined cards in addition to blank
cards to provide their own ideas. For more details on the
methods followed on the first round of focus group, see
Kanstrup, Rotger-Griful, et al. (2017).

Results

Results of the first round of focus groups (Phase 1)
are described elsewhere (Kanstrup, Rotger-Griful, et al.,
2017). In the following section, we summarize the findings
from Phase 1 that were used to prepare for subsequent
rounds of focus groups.

Key Stakeholders’ Visions for Future
eHealth-Assisted Client Journeys

The first round of focus groups identified the three
key stakeholders’ (PHIs, AUDs, and SOs) requirements for
information, communication, and learning along the future
client journey, as illustrated in Figure 2, the key stakeholders’
envisioned eHealth-assisted future client journey. As visual-
ized in Figure 2, we introduced four stages within the client
journey: (1) prefitting (prepare), (2) fitting (departure),
(3) follow-up (explore the new world), and (4) aftercare
(established in the new world). The stakeholders described
a motivation stage before the prefitting stage. In the moti-
vation stage, the PHIs and SOs become aware of a possible
HI, and the SO is often supportive in motivating the PHI to
investigate a possible HI. All stakeholders described their
requirements for every stage of the client journey.
PHIs desired personalized information delivery with
the right timing of the information to their daily listening
needs; timely on-demand communication with AUDs; and
ongoing learning about hearing, hearing aids, new assis-
tive technologies available, and self-management. The
SOs expressed requirements for access to the same informa-
tion as PHIs in the client journey and involvement in the
hearing rehabilitation process. The AUDs desired efficient
communication with PHIs and for greater empowerment
of PHIs. AUDs wanted PHIs to take responsibility for their
own HI rehabilitation to increase efficiency.
The PHI requirements for each stage of the client
journey were as follows:

•
Stage (1) Prefitting: to have access to trustworthy in-
formation and learning on HI and hearing aids from
the Internet and to trustworthy HI tests.

Figure 1. First round of focus groups (Phase 1) on present and future client journeys (November 2016): two groups
with audiologists, two groups with significant others, and four groups with persons with hearing impairment.

Cleveland Nielsen et al.: User-Innovated eHealth Solutions
407

•
Stages (1) Prefitting and (2) Fitting: to share one’s own
description of hearing problems, personalized prefitting
information, and rehabilitation expectations to AUDs,
thus giving AUDs and PHIs insights for a personalized
fitting session.

•
Stages (3) Follow-up and (4) Aftercare: to receive
personalized information and rehabilitation through
eHealth solutions by facilitating rehabilitation through
connected health.

All key stakeholder groups had design requirements
on empowering the SOs on their close one’s HI and reha-
bilitation for a more effective rehabilitation process. All
key stakeholders suggested a digital solution where the
SOs could experience the PHI’s individual hearing loss by
simulating the PHI’s hearing loss and his or her need for
communication strategies. Key stakeholders also suggested
a digital solution that enables PHIs to train communica-
tion strategy, hearing aid use and maintenance, and so forth,
in the first weeks after fitting. This training would empower
PHIs and prepare them for self-management with ongoing
self-monitoring, self-testing, and learning. For instance, they
could follow their own development over time through self-
evaluation and self-reported ratings of listening tests or
important listening situations. PHIs also had a requirement
for sending audio recordings on the fly to the AUDs to

access on-demand problem solving. As illustrated in Figure 2,
some PHIs would prefer to fine-tune their hearing aids
themselves, whereas others would prefer to visit the AUD
or receive remote fine-tuning prescribed by the AUD.
Based on all the identified requirements, we selected
three main concepts upon which we built the second round
of focus groups (Phase 2): My information, My hearing,
and My development. The developed future client journey
was used in the subsequent focus groups sessions (Phases 2
and 3) to provide the desired contextualization for digital
hearing rehabilitation. It allowed us to explore and sketch
ideas that met the elicited user requirements.

Phase 2: Second Round of Focus Groups
Participants

In the second round of focus groups (Phase 2), we
met with four groups of PHIs (n = 23). Not all PHIs that
participated in the first round of focus groups (Phase 1)
also participated in the second round (Phase 2). Seven PHIs
were excluded because they provided little input during
the first round of focus groups, and six PHIs could not par-
ticipate in the second round because of schedule conflicts.
Thus, a total of 13 new PHIs were recruited for this second
phase following the same selection criteria as in Phase 1.

Figure 2. The hearing rehabilitation client journey that the key stakeholders (persons with hearing impairment, significant others, and audiologists)
envisioned for the future.

408

Although including only participants from the first round
of focus group would have been an advantage, we prioritized
involving innovative PHIs.

Method

In the second round of focus groups (Phase 2), we
went from the visions for a future eHealth-assisted client
journey identified in Phase 1 to co-design more concrete
solutions for future eHealth solutions. Specifically, we
obtained participants’ feedback on large smartphone wire-
frames that were created based on the insights and visions
of PHIs who were in the first round of focus groups. Smart-
phone wireframes are visual tangible artifacts, which, in
this case, emulated the screen of an app. We encouraged
individual self-reflection and group discussion about the
wireframes, which included the envisioned functionality
shown in Table 3.
We created a big wireframe for each of the main
features in Table 3 (My information, My hearing, and My
development). By use of cards and stickers, we engaged
participants in reflection and discussion about priorities
and opportunities for future eHealth solutions presented
in the wireframes. The stickers included “share cards,”
naming the people with whom the information should be
shared (e.g., AUD, SO, peer groups), and “action cards,”
describing which actions (e.g., contact AUD, think) they
would take in the specific subfeature (see Table 3). Blank
cards were also provided to motivate additional reflections.
Figure 3 shows some of the PHIs of the focus groups inter-
acting with the wireframes.

Results

Three Key Themes for Future eHealth Solutions Targeted
Older PHIs
In the second round of focus groups (Phase 2), the
PHIs prioritized their favorite eHealth solutions from the
wireframes as follows: My fine-tuning (ID F2.5 in Table 3)
where PHIs fine-tune their hearing aids themselves had top
priority; followed by Try my HI (ID F2.2 in Table 3), where
SOs could try their close one’s HI; My hearing tests (ID F2.7
in Table 3), where PHIs could self-test their hearing over
time; and My development (ID F2.9 in Table 3), where PHIs

could follow their self-rating of important listening situations
or hearing test results over time. Even though My fine-tuning
and Try my HI were prioritized highly by the PHIs, we
chose not to include these eHealth solutions in the digital
prototype of the third round of focus groups (Phase 3), as
the solutions were already part of solutions commercially
available at the time of the study.
Based on the analysis of the results in Phase 2, we
identified three key themes to explore by means of a digi-
tal prototype in the last round of focus groups (Phase 3):
(a) expectations for hearing rehabilitation, including infor-
mation and reflections on one’s own hearing abilities and
rehabilitation needs; (b) learning and training with hearing
aids; and (c) monitoring one’s own hearing development.
Regarding the key theme on expectations related to IDs
F2.1 and F2.2 in Table 3, the PHIs would use these eHealth
solutions for ongoing reflection on their HI and rehabilita-
tion. The PHIs emphasized willingness to share data with
their SOs such as their hearing test results and tools, such as
the speech banana, to explain the impact of hearing loss.
Regarding the key theme on learning and training re-
lated to IDs F2.3 and F2.4 to F2.6 in Table 3, the PHIs
would use these solutions for ongoing learning. The digital
solution should promote self-management and PHI em-
powerment. For example, it could provide tips and tricks
for changing batteries.
The PHIs should be able to train on issues that are
personally important to them, and they should be able to
access help if needed. Solutions should include a possibil-
ity to share learnings and problems with SOs, AUDs, men-
tors, or a group of peers.
With regard to the key theme on following one’s
own hearing rehabilitation development related to IDs F2.7
to F2.9 in Table 3, the PHIs would use these for ongoing
monitoring and analysis of their own development. The
digital solutions should collect and display the PHIs’
monitoring data over time (i.e., from tests and self-ratings).
The PHIs would use the knowledge themselves for reflec-
tion, personal awareness, and empowerment in their reha-
bilitation process or share the data with AUDs, SOs, a
mentor, or a group.
All the findings mentioned above were used to de-
velop the digital prototype used in the last round of focus

Table 3. Envisioned functionality of the eHealth tool discussed in the second round of focus groups (Phase 2) by means of wireframes.

Main feature
Subfeature
ID
Description

My information
My expectations
F2.1
PHI’s expectations on hearing rehabilitation
Try my hearing loss
F2.2
SOs try spouses’ HI and communication problems
My tips and tricks
F2.3
Links to information
My hearing
My personal hearing coach
F2.4
Two weeks of training and empowerment
My fine-tuning
F2.5
PHIs preferred fine-tuning
My audiologist fine-tuning
F2.6
Remote fine-tuning based on PHI’s audio input
My development
My hearing tests
F2.7
Regular self-testing and pushed reminders
My log
F2.8
Self-rating of important listening situations
My development
F2.9
Own development over time is visualized from data

Note.
PHI = person with hearing impairment; SO = significant other; HI = hearing impairment.

Cleveland Nielsen et al.: User-Innovated eHealth Solutions
409

groups (Phase 3) to gather the PHIs’ reactions to digital
solutions that attempt to address these themes. For descrip-
tion and examples, please see Phase 3 below.

Phase 3: Third Round of Focus Groups
Participants

In the third round of focus groups (Phase 3), we met
with four groups of PHIs (n = 17). All PHIs who partici-
pated in this last round of focus group also participated in
at least one of the previous rounds’ focus group (Phase 1
and/or 2). Participation on a previous focus group was
important for the consistency in the design of the eHealth
solution.

Method

In the third round of focus groups, the PHIs were
presented with an interactive prototype (mock-up app) on
an iPad exemplifying how the envisioned solutions devel-
oped in the previous rounds of focus groups (Phases 1 and
2) could look like. The digital prototype evolved around
three main features identified in the previous phase: My
expectations, My personal coach, and My development.
Table 4 shows the main features of the mock-up app.
The interactive digital prototype gave participants
appetizers of possible eHealth solutions for future hearing
rehabilitation based on the results in Phases 1 and 2. The
prototype was similar to an app, with many opportunities
for the PHIs to interact with the prototype based on their
experiences. Screenshots of the interactive digital proto-
type translated to English are available as Supplemental

Material S1: “App(etite) for life with hearing loss—Mock
up app.”1 For example, the PHIs could play sounds
above and below a hearing curve to illustrate hearing
loss implications and expectations related to the main fea-
ture My expectations (described, e.g., in ID F3.1 in Table 4
and illustrated in Screenshots 5/21 or 7/21 in Supplemen-
tal Material S1). Related to My personal coach, they
could watch video testimonials from other PHIs or videos
on handling skills (IDs F3.5–F3.8 in Table 4 and Screen-
shots 9/21, 10/21, 12/21, and 13/21 in Supplemental Material
S1). Related to My development, they could describe their
hearing difficulties and developments (described in IDs
F3.2, F3.3, F3.9, or F3.13 to F3.15 in Table 4 or illustrated
in Screenshots 6/21, 19/21, to 21/21 in Supplemental Ma-
terial S1). Through this approach, we intended to evaluate,
further co-design, and innovate future eHealth solutions
with the PHIs and pinpoint the most essential features in
designing future digital eHealth solutions.
In each focus group, we presented each main feature
according to Table 4 and its subfeatures one at a time in
plenum and gave instructions on how to navigate the digi-
tal prototype. The PHIs then used the digital prototype
themselves on an individual iPad, one feature at a time. As
Figure 4 illustrates, the participants wore headsets to hear
the audio provided in the digital prototype. They had oppor-
tunities to reflect on the prototype, prioritize features,
suggest new ideas, and comment on lacking content and
actions. They took notes on their individual digital proto-
type flowchart followed by a group discussion.

1Supplemental Material S1 for this article is available online at https://
doi.org/10.23641/asha.7310729.

Figure 3. Second round of focus groups (Phase 2) on visions for future eHealth solutions using wireframes
(March 2017): four focus groups with persons with hearing impairment.

410

Results

Increased Personalization of eHealth Solutions
We developed the interactive digital prototype based
on the results from the first and second focus group rounds
concerning the three key themes (My expectations, My per-
sonal coach, and My development). Acknowledging the PHIs’

need for personalization, we strived for a high degree of
personalization in our design of the interactive digital pro-
totype by, for example, having your personal hearing curve
in relation to the speech banana (ID 3.1 in Table 4 and
Screenshot 5/21 in Supplemental Material S1), your per-
sonal listening problems or preferences, own choice of em-
powerment videos or other materials, and self-rating of
own development, as illustrated in Table 4 and in Supple-
mental Material S1.
PHIs with a keen interest in technology and its pos-
sibilities (tech-savvy PHIs) requested personalization of
most aspects, for example, having access to (a) data dis-
plays of their test results over time and with possibilities
to compare with other PHIs, (b) a variety of sound exam-
ples in the subfeature My hearing (ID F3.1 in Table 4),
(c) creating own listening situations to rate and monitor,
and (d) receiving AUD feedback on My hearing tests
(ID F3.9 in Table 4) or self-reported ratings in the fea-
ture My development (IDs F3.9–F3.15 in Table 4). Less
tech-savvy PHIs, being less familiar and interested in technol-
ogy, had concerns about technical language and abstract
displays.

Interests and Willingness of the PHIs to Invest
Time and Effort in Different Digital Solutions

Based on the thematic analyses of Phases 2 and 3
with identification of the three key themes (Phase 2) and
the rich interaction with the digital prototype and pin-
pointing of the most essential future eHealth solutions
(Phase 3), we identified four different levels of interest and
willingness of the PHIs to invest time and effort in differ-
ent digital solutions. We labeled these different four levels
(a) No go, (b) Automatization, (c) Nice to have, and (d) Need
to have, as described in Table 5.
The first level, No go, with no investment from the
PHIs, related to training schedules. These PHIs were not

Table 4. Functionality of the eHealth prototype discussed in the third round of focus groups (Phase 3) by means of mock-up app in an iPad.

Main feature
Subfeature
ID
Description

My expectations
My hearing
F3.1
Personal hearing curves, the speech banana, and so forth
My important listening situations
F3.2
Tick off and send to AUD or the cloud
My listening preferences
F3.3
Try out sounds and send preferred sounds to the AUD or the cloud
My personal coach
My training configurations
F3.4
Training schedules
Tips & tricks
F3.5
Video on handling hearing aids
Tasks
F3.6
Listening to surroundings and report back to AUD
Reading material
F3.7
Book or other media for PHI’s empowerment
Mentor testimonial
F3.8
Example of a mentor testimonial
My development
My hearing tests
F3.9
PHI’s selection of a tests or questionnaires
My speech understanding test
F3.10
PHI tries the test
My satisfaction with hearing aids
F3.12
PHI fills in the questionnaire example
My important listening situations
F3.13
Data visualizations of self-reported ratings
My data on “My hearing tests”
F3.14
Data visualizations of PHI’s speech understanding test related to
norm data
My data on “My important listening
situations”
F3.15
Graph showing PHI’s rating of selected important listening situations
over time

Note.
AUD = audiologist; PHI = person with hearing impairment.

Figure 4. Third round of focus groups (Phase 3) on digital concepts
using a digital prototype (April 2017): four focus groups with persons
with hearing impairment.

Cleveland Nielsen et al.: User-Innovated eHealth Solutions
411

interested in any form of training involving fixed train-
ing schedules. In the digital prototype, we asked the
PHIs to select the amount of time they would be willing
to use on My personal hearing coach training (IDs F3.4–
F3.8 in Table 4), choosing from 30 to 90 min of training
daily. Instead, PHIs suggested that we divide training
into training packages for beginners, intermediate, and
advanced PHIs in hearing rehabilitation, with a possi-
bility for the PHIs themselves to choose the different
training features from a drop-down list (IDs F3.4–F3.8
in Table 4 and Screenshot 8/21 in Supplemental Mate-
rial S1).
The second level, Automatization, with limited PHI
investment, concerned automatizations and fixing of the
HI without PHI involvement or engagement, for instance,
automatic hearing aids updates, automatic fine-tuning, and
voice commands to adjust hearing aids.
The third level, Nice to have, was characterized by
medium PHI investment related to quick and easy access
to information such as frequently asked question (FAQ)
lists, learning and empowerment through self-tests, self-
monitoring, and group empowerment or through partnership
with SOs or AUDs (illustrated in Screenshots 7/21, 9–10/
21, 12–14/21, and 16–21/21 in Supplemental Material S1).
The fourth level, Need to have, with a high invest-
ment from the PHIs, was related to both situated and
personalized support with customized digital solutions to
select from when experiencing daily HI problems (e.g.,
illustrated in Screenshots 9–10/21 and 13/21 in Supple-
mental Material S1). Moreover, this level was also con-
cerning PHIs’ need for self-evaluation, self-exploration,
and self-management of daily HI problems before con-
tacting the AUD, thus taking responsibility for own
rehabilitation (illustrated in Screenshots 5/21, 6–7/21
[self-grading], and 17–20/21 in Supplemental Material
S1). The possibility of sending audio files for problem
description to the AUDs was also a Need to have digital
solution.

Technical Savviness and Difference in Obtaining
Rehabilitation Strategies

When we introduced the interactive digital proto-
type, PHIs appeared broadly to be divided into two dif-
ferent types regarding technical savviness (tech-savviness).
This was expressed in their interaction with the digital
prototype, and this again influenced their preferences on
rehabilitation strategies. The first type consisted of very
tech-savvy and progressive PHIs who were highly interested
in functionality and had an abundance of ideas for further
design and development of the digital prototype. The sec-
ond type consisted of less tech-savvy PHIs who found some
of the functionalities of the prototype confusing and needed
extensive instruction on the technology. Despite their inse-
curity, they also expressed a motivation to explore, train,
and learn to use the prototype. The less tech-savvy PHIs
typically related to the Automatization and the Nice to have
levels of interest (see Table 5) with wishes for automatiza-
tion and quick and easy information, but still with an inter-
est in self-testing and sharing and comparing results with
others. In contrast, the tech-savvy PHIs typically were
on the Need to have level with interest in self-rating, self-
exploration, self-evaluation, self–fine-tuning, and taking
responsibility of their own HI both today and tomorrow by
having access to information on the newest available HI
technology and getting feedback from AUDs on their self-
monitoring. Nevertheless, both types thought it was essential
to include situated and personalized support, as illustrated
in the Need to have level.
The tech-savvy PHIs desired rehabilitation strategies
related to personal problem-solving, self-efficacy, and self-
tailoring by self-evaluation of problematic listening situations,
self-reporting of tests and listening situations, self-monitoring
of personal data, and self-tuning. Thus, this type of PHI
wanted to engage in a high degree of self-management. The
less tech-savvy PHIs were more inclined to use traditional
information solutions for empowerment. That is, they

Table 5. Person with hearing impairment (PHI) levels of interest and willingness to invest time and effort in using different digital solutions.

Level of interest
Investment
Identifiers
Features

1. No go
None
Training schedules
Scheduled training packages
2. Automatization
Low
Fix my HI
Automatic hearing aid updates
Automatic hearing aid fine-tuning
3. Nice to have
Medium
Quick and easy info
Monitoring
Sharing experiences
Empowerment in a group

FAQs
Testimonials from other users on specific problems
Many self-tests for instance on speech intelligibility and HI
Monitor and relate your test results to other PHIs
Share self-tests or experiences with SOs, AUDs, or a group
4. Need to have
High
Situated and personalized support
in important listening situations
Individual empowerment
Responsibility for HI

Customized important listening situations and support
Self-management and self-evaluation of a list of specific
personal problematic listening situations
Audio files for easier problem description to AUDs
Self-exploration of and self–fine-tuning of hearing aids in
specific individually important listening situations
Self-evaluation of developments and tests

Note.
HI = hearing impairment; FAQs = frequently asked questions; SO = significant other; AUD = audiologist.

412

wanted social support in all steps and preferred AUDs or
an automated solution to act on their behalf. Thus, the less
tech-savvy PHIs obtained rehabilitation strategies related
to utilizing already available resources such as FAQ lists
and lists of common problems, as well as social support,
where they could discuss and share problems with SOs,
mentors, a group, or the AUDs. They also desired to part-
ner with AUDs in problem solving.

Discussion

This study used participatory design to involve key
stakeholders in innovating eHealth solutions for service
delivery to older PHIs. Our research question was: What
are the key users’ needs, expectations, and visions within
future hearing rehabilitation service delivery? The partici-
patory design process was staged via focus groups, and
data were analyzed using an inductive thematic analysis.
This resulted in these findings: (a) all key stakeholders’ vi-
sions for a future eHealth-assisted client journey, (b) three
key themes for future eHealth solutions targeting older
PHIs, (c) PHIs’ interest and willingness to invest time and
effort in different digital solutions, and (d) PHIs’ tech-
savviness and its influence on PHIs’ desired rehabilitation
strategies. In this section, we discuss these results in rela-
tion to future eHealth solutions and related work.

The Future eHealth-Assisted Client Journey
for Hearing Rehabilitation

Fitting and fine-tuning of hearing aids today are
minimally personalized through digital prefitting or fine-
tuning information from PHIs. This contrasts the key
stakeholders’ proposed design solutions for future eHealth-
assisted client journeys in hearing rehabilitation, which
are based on the 4 Ps in future health care: personalized,
participatory, preventive, and predictive (Hood & Friend,
2011). Personalization was central in all digital solution
features: sending personalized prefitting information and
hearing aid expectations to AUDs, thus giving AUDs per-
sonalized insights on PHIs for planning of the fitting session
and enabling more effective and personalized communica-
tion during the fitting session. For example, both types
of PHIs wished to send audio files to the AUD to describe
experienced hearing problems. PHIs reported that they had
experienced a mismatch between the situations in which
they were tested in clinical settings and their experiences in
real life. This resulted in dissatisfaction with hearing aid
performance when they moved out of the controlled clini-
cal settings and out in real life, as also mentioned in previ-
ous studies (Dahl & Hanssen, 2016; Hanssen & Dahl, 2016).
Moreover, using daily listening environments in the reha-
bilitation process during fitting have enabled PHIs to reflect
and communicate more easily about self-perceived HI in
real-life situations and have a feeling for how their hearing
aids would perform in real-life situations (Hanssen & Dahl,
2016).

Support toward patient participation is lacking in to-
day’s service delivery (Pryce et al., 2016; Rolfe & Gardner,
2016). The future client journey developed in this study
empowers PHIs and SOs by giving access to information,
education, and training possibilities. This enables a par-
ticipatory rehabilitation, where PHIs self-manage through
access to trustworthy information on the Internet and a
personal hearing coach training in the first weeks postfitting
to ensure ongoing learning and reflection in their rehabili-
tation process. Our focus groups revealed that even very
experienced PHIs have very little knowledge of realistic ex-
pectations for HI. That is, they are still not familiar with
describing or having knowledge on expectations for their
rehabilitation or identifying important listening situations,
listening preferences, and so forth, which could otherwise
empower their participation in the rehabilitation process.
In our study, the PHIs claimed that the empowerment they
get from seeking information from the Internet is confus-
ing, difficult to understand, and of uncertain validity. This
is in alignment with studies showing that web information
on HI and rehabilitation requires 9–14 years of education to
be understood (Laplante-Lévesque et al., 2012; Laplante-
Lévesque & Thorén, 2015).
Participatory and preventive design solutions in future
health care’s 4 Ps are creating other demands for services
in the future, where data-driven hearing rehabilitation with
data inputs from PHIs could personalize hearing rehabilita-
tion to new levels and enable evidence-based preventive
hearing health care through self-monitoring and health
analytics. The user-innovated design solutions in this study
enable a predictive and preventive approach in future ser-
vice delivery by giving access to outcome measures data or
self-reported ratings prefitting and postfitting from PHIs’
training activities and self-ratings of developments, which
neither AUDs nor PHIs have access to in today’s service
delivery. This also fulfills the participating AUDs’ require-
ment for effective PHI’s communication and empowers
participating PHIs to take responsibility for their own reha-
bilitation. However, these new demands in service delivery
with a high degree of interaction between PHIs and AUDs
could be time-consuming for the AUDs. From our first
round of focus groups, including AUDs, the main constraints
identified for future service delivery were time, timing, and
transition; thus, a core vision was that the right information
has to be delivered at the right time to the right person in
the right dosage, not being time-consuming for the AUDs,
but supporting efficiency by qualifying time in the clinic
(Kanstrup, Rotger-Griful, et al., 2017). Both PHIs and SOs
wished to involve the SOs in training of personalized com-
munication strategies, thus expanding the participatory
approach in the future 4 Ps in health care. Involvement of
SOs in hearing health care is supported by Preminger (2003)
and Preminger and Rothpletz (2016), who documented larger
treatment effects sizes when SOs participated in the same
rehabilitation groups as their PHIs.
We found that PHIs preferred to determine their own
training schedules, instead of being recommended a set
training time frame, and to train for solutions occurring in

Cleveland Nielsen et al.: User-Innovated eHealth Solutions
413

their daily life here and now. Morrison, Yardley, Powell, and
Michie (2012) reviewed effective design features in eHealth
interventions, including activity planning, and found activity
planning ineffective as an eHealth design feature. This find-
ing supports the participating PHIs’ refusal of fixed train-
ing schedules/activity planning.
Situated and personalized support in PHIs’ im-
portant listening situations and personalized empower-
ment were needs for both tech-savvy and less tech-savvy
PHIs. Thus, research has identified a need for digital
solutions that contextualize listening experiences in real-
life settings and anchor user’s learnings from daily life
experiences.

Tailoring Future eHealth Solutions to Various
Users and Rehabilitation Strategies

In general, our tech-savvy PHIs were well educated
and had active lifestyles enjoying both regular physical exer-
cise and social gatherings, and almost one third of them
were still employed. This group of PHIs prioritized self-
tailoring designs. They craved a very high degree of per-
sonalized digital solutions and had very high participatory
needs for self-management, including self-efficacy and self-
tailoring. For example, they desired to have the ability
to audio-record their own experiences in a problematic lis-
tening situation and self–fine-tune their hearing aids in
these situations. From Phase 2 prioritization, self–fine-tuning
also was a top priority for digital solution features. The
same need for participation and self-tailoring was identified
in a previous study (Dahl & Hanssen, 2016), where PHIs
needed individual customization by being able to tailor the
listening environments to recreate difficult situations. This
leads to a fine-tuning process driven by the client’s self-
perceived disability in real-life situations.
Self-tailoring allows patients to receive solutions that
are chosen based on their own characteristics, such as
lifestyles and personal goals (Morrison et al., 2012). Self-
monitoring is an effective eHealth intervention and partic-
ularly if combined with feedback possibilities and goal
settings (Morrison et al., 2012). This is in line with the re-
quirements from our tech-savvy PHIs, who wanted to self-
monitor and get AUD feedback if their tests were over
threshold levels (for instance, deteriorating HI threshold
levels). Thus, the tech-savvy PHIs in our study are most
likely representatives of the typical PHI of the future, who
will embrace the 4 Ps in future hearing rehabilitation ser-
vice delivery and take an active role in supporting their reha-
bilitation through connected health. Maidment, Brassington,
Wharrad, and Ferguson (2016) also found an association
between PHIs with more competences in Internet usage and
more efficient management of HI, concluding that increased
perceived self-efficacy, which goes hand in hand with in-
creased digital literacy skills in the typical older PHI of the
future, could further enhance hearing outcomes. The burden
on health care costs increases due to an aging population
with chronic health conditions such as HI (Vos et al., 2015),
but the identified tech-savvy and self-managing group of

PHIs of the future could reduce these health care costs. These
self-managing, tech-savvy PHIs could enable more efficient
client journeys, saving valuable clinic time and costs. This
saved time could be used for PHIs who require more in-
tensive and time-demanding traditional hearing rehabili-
tation. The tech-savvy PHIs’ need and preferences for
rehabilitation strategies must be taken in to account when
designing eHealth solutions for service delivery to older
PHIs in the future.
The less tech-savvy PHIs preferred self-management
strategies using social support and partnership with AUDs
as health care providers, combined with learning from
easily accessible information (FAQs or testimonials), as
also described by Pearce et al. (2016). Previous findings
support social support design needs: (a) Rehabilitation ef-
fects were improved when participants received a combi-
nation of social support from peers and information or
a combination of social support and communication strat-
egy training (Preminger & Yoo, 2010), (b) increased PHI
satisfaction and improved awareness of HI problems were
shown when RLOs were watched together with SOs
(Ferguson et al., 2016), and (c) a design for peer-to-peer–
mediated communication was associated with a positive
intervention outcome (Morrison et al., 2012). Furthermore,
the less tech-savvy PHIs preferred rehabilitation strategies
involving automatization and a quick fix of HI. This corre-
lates with the participating AUDs’ perception that many
PHIs want others to take responsibility for their HI and re-
habilitation. Thus, this PHI type is probably the main type
today, and their needs and rehabilitation strategy prefer-
ences must be taken into consideration when designing
eHealth solutions for hearing rehabilitation service delivery
in the near future.

Limitations and Future Research

The current study has three main limitations. First,
the selection of innovative users with an interest in technol-
ogy, health apps, and a future hearing rehabilitation client
journey as participants means that the study population
was not representative of the average PHI. Scandinavians,
and especially Scandinavian PHIs, use the Internet at a
higher rate than those in other countries, such as the
United Kingdom (Ferguson et al., 2016; Thorén, Öberg,
Wänström, Andersson, & Lunner, 2013). Furthermore,
our selected participants included a subgroup of highly
tech-savvy PHIs. Therefore, our results concerning tech-
savviness and interest and willingness in different eHealth
solutions can be biased in comparison to populations
of PHIs with lower Internet and smartphone usage and
proficiency.
Second, our research participants were familiar with
hearing rehabilitation in Denmark, and hearing rehabilita-
tion varies from country to country. We strived for a bal-
anced sample of PHIs from both public and private clinics,
but 23 (64%) out of the 36 participating PHIs received
their hearing services at the clinic of the Eriksholm Re-
search Centre. To be research participants at Eriksholm

414

Research Centre clinic, the PHIs need to fulfill some addi-
tional requirements (e.g., being able to express themselves).
This biased our sample toward active, healthy, and high-
functioning older PHIs. Finally, our eHealth solutions for
service delivery were designed for older PHIs, and thus,
our findings cannot be extrapolated to service delivery to
younger PHIs, including children with HI.
Future development of specific digital solutions is
required, but many aspects of the user-innovated eHealth
solutions from this study are already influencing upcoming
commercial rehabilitation apps. The effect of the user-
innovated eHealth solutions in our study should be tested
in matched controlled trials in a more typical population
not selected for their innovation potential to shed light
on the effectiveness of eHealth-assisted hearing rehabilitation
compared with traditional hearing rehabilitation. Focus
should be on investigating the feasibility and effectiveness
of hearing rehabilitation when more interaction between
PHIs and AUDs are imposed through the 4 Ps in future
service delivery.

Conclusions

Our results show that future eHealth solutions for
older PHIs must be anchored in everyday life situations,
with the ability to tailor solutions to provide personalized
information, communication, and learning milieus. Despite
the quite homogeneous group of participants in the study,
our results have identified that PHIs have various needs,
expectations, and visions for future hearing rehabilitation
service delivery. The types of rehabilitation strategies and
services that PHIs envision for the future appear to be influ-
enced by their level of tech-savviness. Future eHealth-assisted
hearing rehabilitation must facilitate these broad needs, ex-
pectations, and visions by enabling PHIs’ adaptation of per-
sonalized rehabilitation strategies on an appropriate level
of tech-savviness. Moreover, the key stakeholders’ visions
for eHealth solutions for service delivery call for connect-
ing both digital and analogue services.