Original Paper

An Electronic Patient-Reported Outcome Mobile App for Data
Collection in Type A Hemophilia: Design and Usability Study

Francesco Petracca1, MSc; Rosaria Tempre2, MSc; Maria Cucciniello1,3, PhD; Oriana Ciani1,4, PhD; Elena Pompeo2,
MSc; Luigi Sannino2, MSc; Valeria Lovato2, PhD; Giancarlo Castaman5, MD; Alessandra Ghirardini2, MSc; Rosanna
Tarricone1,6, PhD

1Centre for Research in Health and Social Care Management (CERGAS), Government, Health and Non Profit Division, SDA Bocconi, Milan, Italy
2Roche SpA, Monza, Italy
3University of Edinburgh Business School, Edinburgh, United Kingdom
4Institute of Health Research, University of Exeter Medical School, Exeter, United Kingdom
5SODc Malattie Emorragiche e della Coagulazione, Azienda Ospedaliero Universitaria Careggi, Firenze, Italy
6Department of Social and Political Sciences, Bocconi University, Milan, Italy

Francesco Petracca, MSc
Centre for Research in Health and Social Care Management (CERGAS)
Government, Health and Non Profit Division
SDA Bocconi
Via Sarfatti, 10
Milan, 20136
Italy
Phone: 39 02 58365257

Abstract

Background: There is currently limited evidence on the level and intensity of physical activity in individuals with hemophilia
A. Mobile technologies can offer a rigorous and reliable alternative to support data collection processes but they are often associated
with poor user retention. The lack of longitudinal continuity in their use can be partly attributed to the insufficient consideration
of stakeholder inputs in the development process of mobile apps. Several user-centered models have been proposed to guarantee
that a thorough knowledge of the end user needs is considered in the development process of mobile apps.
Objective: The aim of this study is to design and validate an electronic patient-reported outcome mobile app that requires
sustained active input by individuals during POWER, an observational study that aims at evaluating the relationship between
physical activity levels and bleeding in patients with hemophilia A.
Methods: We adopted a user-centered design and engaged several stakeholders in the development and usability testing of this
mobile app. During the concept generation and ideation phase, we organized a need-assessment focus group (FG) with patient
representatives to elicit specific design requirements for the end users. We then conducted 2 exploratory FGs to seek additional
inputs for the app’s improvement and 2 confirmatory FGs to validate the app and test its usability in the field through the mobile
health app usability questionnaire.
Results: The findings from the thematic analysis of the need-assessment FG revealed that there was a demand for sense making,
for simplification of app functionalities, for maximizing integration, and for minimizing the feeling of external control. Participants
involved in the later stages of the design refinement contributed to improving the design further by upgrading the app’s layout
and making the experience with the app more efficient through functions such as chatbots and visual feedback on the number of
hours a wearable device had been worn, to ensure that the observed data were actually registered. The end users rated the app
highly during the quantitative assessment, with an average mobile health app usability questionnaire score of 5.32 (SD 0.66;
range 4.44-6.23) and 6.20 (SD 0.43; range 5.72-6.88) out of 7 in the 2 iterative usability testing cycles.
Conclusions: The results of the usability test indicated a high, growing satisfaction with the electronic patient-reported outcome
app. The adoption of a thorough user-centered design process using several types of FGs helped maximize the likelihood of
sustained retention of the app’s users and made it fit for data collection of relevant outcomes in the observational POWER study.
The continuous use of the app and the actual level of engagement will be evaluated during the ongoing trial.

JMIR Form Res 2021 | vol. 5 | iss. 12 | e25071 | p. 1

Trial Registration: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT04165135; https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04165135

(JMIR Form Res 2021;5(12):e25071) doi: 10.2196/25071

KEYWORDS
mobile apps; mHealth; hemophilia A; rare diseases; usability; user-centered design; design science; mobile phone

Introduction

Background

Patients with hemophilia A, an X-linked recessive bleeding
disorder that occurs in approximately 1 in 5000 live male births,
suffer from bleeding episodes, especially in their joints and
muscles, and moderate impairment of balance and mobility
associated with reduced bone mineral density in both
adolescence and adulthood [1]. Because of these limitations,
patients with hemophilia typically exhibit reduced levels of
physical activity [2].

Few empirical studies have reported on the level and intensity
of physical activity in small cohorts of children and adolescents
[3-5] and in adult populations with hemophilia A [6-9]. These
studies were based on either accelerometers or patient-reported
questionnaires and showed that the recommended quantity and
quality levels of physical activity were often unmet, with the
degree of joint damage accounting for only a small fraction of
the observed variability [10]. However, no study has measured
the physical activity levels in the hemophilia population and
evaluated the correlation between the sequelae of different
bleeds and the consequent limitations on physical activity levels.

POWER, a multicenter, noninterventional, prospective study
aims at contributing to fill this gap by evaluating the relationship
between physical activity levels (and intensity) and bleeding in
a target population of approximately 150 individuals aged
between 12 and 50 years with severe (Factor VIII<1%) or
moderate (Factor VIII≥1% and Factor VIII≤2%) hemophilia A
without inhibitors against Factor VIII. The study was approved
by the Ethics Committee of each participating clinical center
and registered at ClinicalTrials.gov (NCT04165135).

This study leverages the widespread availability, low cost, and
high degree of reliability of mobile technologies [11] to support
the collection of significant amounts of data, including physical
activity levels and patient-reported outcome measures (PROMs)
[12]. In the field of hemophilia, previous studies have addressed
the potential of telehealth-delivered interventions and mobile
health (mHealth) solutions to enhance patient adherence to
medication and promote independence in disease management
[13], improve record keeping [14], and create patient
communities that facilitate the interaction of people with
hemophilia [15], particularly when they move to adult treatment
centers and may report significant feelings of isolation [16].
Although the potential of mHealth technologies to support data
collection processes in hemophilia is essentially unexplored,
data collection in the POWER study instead relies on 2 different
digital devices. The physical activity levels were measured daily
in terms of active minutes, the metabolic equivalent of tasks,
and the step counts by a wearable fitness device (also called
fitness tracker) used continuously during the study participation.

Concurrently, other relevant self-reported outcome domains
(bleeds, medications used for bleeds treatment, health-related
quality of life, visual analog scale for pain, etc) were registered
through an electronic patient-reported outcome (ePRO) app
installed on smartphones or tablets after enrollment.

Although a fitness tracker collects physical activity levels
through passive sensing, without requiring any extra effort to
input data and with very limited engagement with the device
besides the need to wear it, the ePRO app requires sustained
active input by study participants.

Objectives

User engagement and the continuous app use are persisting
challenges in mHealth app implementation [17], with poor user
retention being observed in the real world [18,19]. This is also
true for ePRO systems, whose interfaces should be continuously
monitored and improved to reduce the attrition rates in clinical
trials and to enhance the retention postimplementation in clinical
practice [20]. A decreasing adherence rate to electronic reporting
has also been observed in previous studies that involved digital
solutions for patients with hemophilia [21-23].

This effect can be partly attributed to the lack of stakeholder
input in the development of mHealth technologies: the apps are
often made available to the public without sufficient attention
devoted to their design [24] and without a thorough
understanding of the context of their proposed deployment and
the needs of their end users, regardless of whether they are
patients, caregivers, or clinicians [25].

Therefore, to maximize electronic outcome reporting and to
ensure continuous data collection throughout the POWER study,
we incorporated users’ expectations, experiences, and needs in
the design process of the ePRO app. This paper reports on the
process adopted for the development of a mobile app aimed at
collecting PROMs in patients with hemophilia A during the
POWER study.

Methods

Theoretical Framework: User-Centered Design
Approach

We adopted a user-centered design (UCD) and engaged
prominent stakeholders in the development of the ePRO app
[26]. Among the existing design methods of mHealth apps,
UCD primarily focuses on the tasks or activities that the users
must accomplish and identifies the corresponding user needs
to tackle [27].

According to the UCD approach, during the concept generation
phase, a thorough investigation of the needs is conducted to
understand the environment of the end users and their
requirements. On the basis of this investigation, a set of

JMIR Form Res 2021 | vol. 5 | iss. 12 | e25071 | p. 2

functional requirements were identified for the ePRO app
through thematic analysis, leading to the design of a prototype.
The next phases of the design cycle included continuous,
iterative evaluation and refinement of the prototype and its
usability testing.

Study Design

To improve the app rapidly during the user-centered process,
we used focus groups (FGs) as a human factor research
technique [28], which could provide appropriate evaluations
owing to their flexibility and their ability to probe the
participants on key design ideas [29]. Figure 1 shows the various
design phases adopted to build the final app.

Figure 1. Design process of the electronic patient-reported outcome app.

In harmony with UCD, the initial concept generation phase
aimed to analyze the environment of the projected end users of
the app and to determine their specific requirements in the
context of the POWER study. An initial prototype of the app
conceived on the basis of the study goals defined in the protocol
was used as a starting point and included 3 main screens: (1)
the home page, where recent interactions with the app and
activities due were listed; (2) the questionnaire page, through
which all the PROMs could be accessed and completed; and
(3) the My Health Diary page, where all the recorded data could
be retrieved.

The need-assessment FG aimed to elicit specific design
requirements and specifications for the prototype app and to
bring the environment of the intended end users to focus. The
script of this initial meeting revolved around: (1) the definition
of functional features to be included in the app to maximize the
participants’engagement with data collection; (2) the suggestion
of app characteristics, intended as elements that would qualify
the app’s visual appearance and its speed or ease of usage; and
(3) the discussion of a specific design feature of mHealth
studies: the preference between having the app installed on the
participant’s own device (thus following a personal device
strategy) or receiving a study device at enrollment with the app
downloaded on it.

On the basis of the results of this preliminary activity, we
implemented a set of functionalities and engagement strategies
and discussed them during the following cycles of the design
process, when 2 complementary, yet different sets of FGs were

run: exploratory FGs (EFGs) and confirmatory FGs (CFGs)
[28].

EFGs were conducted to seek additional inputs for improvement,
to refine the prototype, and to maximize the likelihood of
technology acceptance. A moderator demonstrated the intended
use of the mobile app, while participants were asked to provide
their feedback on the proposed prototype during an open
discussion.

When the finalized version of the app was completed, the CFGs
aimed at gathering evidence of its preliminary efficacy. After
a brief introduction of the study objectives, the participants were
provided with a smartphone or a tablet equipped with the ePRO
mobile app, presented with its use case scenarios, and asked to
perform a list of 10 different activities (Textbox 1).

After the test, the participants were asked to quantitatively assess
the usability of the app, a multidimensional property associated
with attributes such as ease of use, user satisfaction,
attractiveness of the layout, and error rates compared with the
intended use [30]. According to the World Health Organization,
usability testing constitutes the initial step of the evaluation
process of any digital health technology [31]. To evaluate the
usability of the ePRO app, participants completed the mHealth
app usability questionnaire (MAUQ), an 18-item questionnaire
recently developed by scholars on a 7-point Likert scale ranging
from 1 (strongly disagree) to 7 (strongly agree) [32]. The
MAUQ is the first scale developed to specifically assess the
usability of mHealth apps, and its reliability and validity were

JMIR Form Res 2021 | vol. 5 | iss. 12 | e25071 | p. 3

shown and compared against other commonly used
questionnaires that were not strictly designed for mHealth apps
[32]. For the app validation process, we presented the
participants with the standalone, patient-specific version of the
questionnaire, which included 3 main dimensions: (1) ease of
use, (2) interface and satisfaction, and (3) usefulness. According

to the questionnaire scoring method, higher average values
indicated higher usability levels of the app. The MAUQ is yet
to be validated in Italian: we used forward and backward
translation to adapt the instrument but did not aim to formally
validate it, given the small number of panel components.

Textbox 1. Use case scenarios for the electronic patient-reported outcome app (N=10).

1.
You have just been enrolled in the POWER study. Go to the Study Details section to read the main characteristics of the study and the reasons
why your participation is significant.

2.
Use the Medication Reminder function to set an alert every 3 days at 6:30 PM.

3.
Report a bleeding episode that happened yesterday in your right thigh and was treated with Factor VIII inhibitors. The bleeding ended and resulted
in no days away from school or work.

4.
Complete the Health Questionnaire you have pending on the home screen. You are feeling great today!

5.
Ask the chatbot if your wristband is synchronized with the ePRO mobile device.

6.
Fill in the Assigned Treatment questionnaire that you find in the Messages section.

7.
After a follow-up with your clinician, your therapeutic plan has been modified. Modify the Medication Reminder settings and set an alert every
Tuesday and Thursday at 8:30 AM.

8.
The month is coming to an end: fill the Patient and Caregiver Burden questionnaire and report 2 days away from work in the past month.

9.
Go back to read the Enrollment Update section where updated statistics on enrolled participants are reported.

10. Check the My Diary section to verify that the information you have inputted are available and easily accessible.

Participants

We invited different target participants to undergo the various
rounds of FGs. The initial need-assessment FG was held in
February 2019, with the participation of 4 representatives of
patient associations for type A hemophilia. The choice to run
this initial meeting with representatives of the most established
patient associations in Italy was to maximize the understanding
of the particular needs of the targeted end user groups, owing
to their continuous and long-term contact with a significant
number of affected individuals.

Two different stakeholder groups participated in the subsequent
EFGs: 4 hematologists in the clinician FG held in May 2019,
whereas 5 patients with hemophilia A in the patient EFG in July
2019.

After the finalization of the refined app, we only involved the
intended end users during the CFG phase, with patients and
their parents (when patients were minor) being asked to
ultimately test the app. Prototype validation through usability
testing is usually achieved with 2 to 3 cycles of testing [33],
whereas for data saturation, small samples of 5 participants
typically identify approximately 80% of the usability issues
[34,35]. In this study, 2 different meetings were held in
November 2019 and January 2020, with 4 and 5 participants,
respectively.

Clinicians participating in the EFG were selected among the
study centers on a voluntary basis, whereas patients for both
EFGs and CFGs were recruited through the patient associations
involved in the initial stage of the design process. Health care
professionals were eligible if they were hematologists
specializing in bleeding disorders and could speak and read
Italian. Eligibility criteria for patients included: confirmed

diagnosis of hemophilia A, the ability and willingness to
complete outcome questionnaires on the ePRO app, the ability
to provide their written consent, and the ability to interact in
Italian. Parents of underage patients were invited to participate
if their children met the clinical eligibility requirements under
the study protocol and if they were willing to provide their
informed consent and to test the ePRO app. No rewards or
compensation were offered to the individuals participating in
the study, whereas a participation fee was awarded to the patient
associations involved.

Data Analysis

All FGs occurred in a conference room, lasted for approximately
90 minutes, and were recorded (audio only) and then
professionally transcribed. We obtained the written informed
consent from all the participants before the start of the meeting.
The participants were asked to provide essential personal data,
including their age, their professional role (if applicable), and
their self-reported comfort in the use of mobile devices. During
FGs, we used sticky notes to collect the recommendations of
the participants regarding design changes and content review.
The analysis of the need-assessment and exploratory FGs was
facilitated by Dedoose qualitative software (SocioCultural
Research Consultants), a web-based platform for mixed methods
analysis [36] that enabled the identification of recurrent themes
and the development of a coherent coding index. An inductive
analysis was performed by 2 researchers (FP and MC), with
emerging themes identified by the systematic reading and coding
of the transcripts. Different opinions between the coders were
discussed by the research team to reach a consensus.

JMIR Form Res 2021 | vol. 5 | iss. 12 | e25071 | p. 4

Results

Participant Characteristics

Of the 22 participants, 11 (50%) were patients, 4 (18%) were

patient representatives, 4 (18%) clinicians, and 3 (14%) parents
of young patients. Detailed information about the category, age,
and gender of the study participants by each research stage has
been presented in Table 1.

Table 1. Participant characteristics (N=22).

Total, n (%)
CFGsc, n (%)
EFGsb, n (%)
Need-assessment FGa, n (%)
Characteristics

Category

3 (14)
3 (33)
0 (0)
0 (0)
Caregiver

4 (18)
0 (0)
4 (44)
0 (0)
Clinician

11 (50)
6 (67)
5 (56)
0 (0)
Patient

4 (18)
0 (0)
0 (0)
4 (100)
Patient representative

Age (years)

8 (36)
4 (44)
4 (44)
0 (0)
<30

2 (9)
1 (11)
1 (11)
0 (0)
30-39

2 (9)
1 (11)
0 (0)
1 (25)
40-49

4 (18)
1 (11)
2 (22)
1 (25)
50-59

6 (27)
2 (22)
2 (22)
2 (50)
>60

Gender

16 (73)
7 (78)
6 (67)
3 (75)
Male

6 (27)
2 (22)
3 (33)
1 (25)
Female

aFG: focus group.
bEFG: exploratory focus group.
cCFG: confirmatory focus group.

Concept Generation: Need-Assessment FG

Thematic analysis of verbatim transcripts of the need-assessment
FG led to the identification of 6 themes that were of help in
refining the initial prototype.

First, the participants stated that it was paramount to guarantee
maximum simplification of the app functionalities, ensuring
that the burden on individuals was minimized to what was
strictly necessary for study purposes. One patient representative
said the following:

Rather than improving the quality and quantity of the
app experience, I believe it is fundamental to make it
easy, simple, user-friendly, and self-explanatory,
making it possible to access it also for somebody who
would not want to know how it actually works.
[Patient Representative, 53 years]
Second, the participants made specific recommendations about
the sense-making process related to the app, which should
leverage the intrinsic motivation of individuals to be part of a
noteworthy initiative where the individual benefit is negligible
when compared with the profit for the entire community of
interest. Therefore, numerous patient representatives suggested
the inclusion of specific functionalities to give feedback on the
study progress and make every individual part of a larger
community. For example, one patient representative vigorously
emphasized this point, as follows:

The appeal and the willingness to participate and
continuously input data are based on the fact that
somebody believes in what the study is proposing,
everything else is just a plus...you must necessarily
find a way to transfer the sense of what you are asking
people to do. [Patient Representative, 64 years]
Third, the FG participants suggested that the app should ensure
maximum integration, refraining from any request for data or
for doing tasks that can already be performed through different
means.

Fourth, a common theme pertained to the need to limit the
feeling of external control that a digital solution could exercise
on individuals, which can ultimately be linked back to the need
to ensure that the participants were reassured about the study’s
purposes and modalities. For instance, one participant said the
following:

No one should ever get the feeling of being controlled
by the app or somebody behind it. I have no need for
further sources of control that can make me feel more
ill than I already am. [Patient representative, 53 years]
The aesthetics of the user interface were identified as another
factor to improve, with the FG participants advising to adopt
different color sets to make the layout catchier, but not trivial,
than the initial one and to enable individuals to tailor some of
the app’s graphical features to their personal preferences.

JMIR Form Res 2021 | vol. 5 | iss. 12 | e25071 | p. 5

One final emerging theme pertained to the type of device used
during the POWER study. The participants unanimously agreed
that providing them with an additional device exclusively for
study purposes would prove excessively burdensome and would
not help maximize patient engagement, probably generating
increased attrition rates instead. One patient representative stated
as follows:

Honestly speaking, to propose in 2019 to participate
in a study in which individuals are obliged to use an
additional device could be detrimental to the overall
study participation. [Patient Representative, 40 years]

Changes to the App After Need-Assessment

Consistent with the demands expressed during the preliminary
phase and coded through qualitative analysis, the app underwent
the following modifications and additions:

•
The Study details and Enrollment update pages were added
to provide the participants with valuable information about
the study and its status, leveraging the required
sense-making process;
•
Environmental alerts were added to prompt the participants
to input the required outcome data;
•
Users were given the opportunity to tailor the design
features of the app based on their preferences;
•
Acknowledgments on activity completion were reinforced
to maximize efficiency by providing visual confirmation
that the inputted data had been registered;
•
A Treatment reminder functionality was included in the
app and made accessible on a voluntary basis.

Prototype Refinement: EFGs

During the 2 EFGs, the clinicians and patients with hemophilia
were asked to provide feedback on the refined prototype version
of the app to achieve rapid incremental improvements.

During the clinician EFG, the participants univocally
acknowledged the significant contribution of the POWER study
to provide up-to-date information on the population of interest.
Four main codes were identified during the discussion and
considered as recommendations to further improve the app.

First, participants suggested avoiding duplications, as some of
the sections were potentially overlapping and were not
necessarily mutually exclusive. This had primarily related to
the structure of the Home page, which was initially designed as
a repository of the most recent information included in all the
other sections of the app.

Second, a recurrent theme pertained to the graphical interface
of the app, against which clinicians suggested facilitating the
detection of different domains with corresponding bright colors.
One clinician explained the following:

I find the app look slightly monotonous...to better
highlight the various items and domains, different
colors could be used across the different sections of
the app. [Clinician, 62 years]
Additional recommendations focused on the study update
section. The Study details and Enrollment update sections that

were added to the app after the need-assessment phase were
appreciated but considered not adequately positioned within
the app for accessibility.

Finally, a fourth emerging theme pertained to the possible uses
of the app outside of the study settings. To further reduce the
patient burden in completing the questionnaires, clinicians
suggested machine-readable formats, voice learning, and voice
recording. However, these proposals were not technically
feasible given the timeframe of the POWER study and,
therefore, could not be embedded in the current version of the
app.

During the patient EFG that followed, the participants were
presented with a refined version of the app that incorporated
the main comments collected during the clinician EFG in terms
of outlook and content organization.

The coding analysis highlighted several recurrent topics that
were brought to attention during the meeting.

First, patients reported their need for support in daily
management and coping, expressing a strong willingness to feel
a tighter bond with their clinicians and the hope that this could
be channeled through enhanced data sharing via the app. In the
context of persisting issues in finding appropriate and continuous
type of support to sustain patients with hemophilia A daily,
there was wide acknowledgment of the potential of digital
technologies in closing the existing gap with health care
professionals. One patient described this as follows:

To have somebody to actually follow us through our
daily struggle and provide us with prompt feedback
would mean a lot...sometimes you just have the
impression that you get a pre-set response hours later
your request. [Patient, 18 years]
As a second element, the participants confirmed the need to be
supported and facilitated in their participation in the study and
in the use of the app to relieve the burden linked to data entry
that could cause disaffection with the app, if it were not well
supported.

Regarding the interface design, the participants only suggested
minor revisions in the layout of some questionnaires, particularly
to make the reporting of bleeding events more straightforward.
Furthermore, one user recommended substituting the human
body where bleeds were indicated to make it less stylized and
more realistic.

On the basis of the inputs collected during the EFGs, additional
graphical refinements were introduced to further streamline
participation in the study: (1) a new chatbot was included to
support individuals in finding information related to the app
and its functionalities; (2) an additional screen with visual
feedback on the number of hours the wearable device had been
worn was added to ensure the per-protocol minimum (10
hours/day) was reached and that the observed data were actually
registered. The final display of the app home page, chatbot
functionality, and bleeding reporting have been shown in Figure
2.

JMIR Form Res 2021 | vol. 5 | iss. 12 | e25071 | p. 6

Figure 2. Screenshots of the electronic patient-reported outcome app final prototype.

Usability Evaluation

During the CFGs, participants tested the final version of the
app, followed a list of 10 use case scenarios (Textbox 1), and
completed the MAUQ to assess their satisfaction with the system
usability.

The average scores showed an upward trend: the overall MAUQ
score increased from 5.32 (range 4.44-6.23; SD 0.66) to 6.20
(range 5.72-6.88; SD 0.43) over the 2 CFGs, showing
increasingly positive feedback on the app usability as its design
was further refined.Considerable improvements were observed
especially in terms of perceived usefulness, which increased
from 4.80 (SD 0.92) to 6.24 (SD 0.40), and the system
information arrangement of the app (from 5.30 to 6.17).

During the first CFG, participants reported poor responsiveness
of certain features and a few technical problems, primarily when
filling some of the PROMs or when using the chatbot. These
issues ultimately affected the reported usefulness and the
interface evaluation of the app. The technical difficulties were
addressed between the 2 meetings, and the app’s usability ratings
improved accordingly. During both the meetings, all participants
reported being intuitively able to launch the app and requiring
minimal support from the study team during the testing.

On the basis of the inputs provided by the CFG participants
through qualitative comments, minor additional changes were
included in the finalized version of the app that is currently
being used in the POWER study.

Discussion

Principal Findings

We applied UCD for the development of the ePRO app currently
in use in the POWER observational study, adopting an iterative
process in which progressive modifications were informed not
only by the participants’ inputs but also by the technical
feasibility of the proposals. This approach has been identified
as particularly effective when adapted to mHealth apps [37],
with different frameworks being used as powerful alternatives
to the shared design based on the end users’ preferences [27].
A recent integrative review analyzed studies that employed a
qualitative methodology for the design, development and testing
of mHealth apps, identifying 69 articles, and proposing an
integrated methodology structured in 4 different sessions [38].
These results confirm the continuous growth in the literature
on user-centered approaches for app development. However,
all the design studies included in the review aimed to develop
apps to support individuals in actively managing their disease
through the adoption of behavior change techniques [39] and
other cognitive and emotional strategies.

In contrast, none of the studies intended to support the design
of data collection apps, with the exception of a single article
that focused on the development process of an app for
conducting population surveys, but it was meant to be used by
health care professionals only [40].

The design process of the ePRO app for the POWER study is
a novel attempt to adopt participatory approaches (and UCD,
more specifically) to support the collection of patient-reported
data. Although we did not aim to elicit improved
self-management behaviors, maximized technology acceptance
is a fundamental prerequisite to increase the continuity in data

JMIR Form Res 2021 | vol. 5 | iss. 12 | e25071 | p. 7

entry and the likelihood of a study’s success. As the precise
aims that the app had to pursue were already explicit in the
POWER study protocol (ie, to maximize the likelihood of
collecting robust outcome data), the design process did not start
from scratch and revolved around the how rather than the what.

Despite this difference in the ultimate aim of the app, some of
the adopted design strategies we used are comparable with
recurring themes in previous studies.

To sustain user engagement, several of the included features
and strategies aimed at powering the intrinsic motivation of the
participants, defined elsewhere as altruistic motivation [41].
This is coherent with the belief that although strategies that rely
on extrinsic motivation only (doing something that can lead to
an identifiable outcome) can be effective in the short term, when
individuals are intrinsically motivated (doing something which
is felt inherently enriching), they tend to achieve better results
and guarantee their continued participation in the long run [42].
As a result, increased attention was given to the Study details
and the Enrollment update sections, that intend to make the
individuals feel they were part of a community and of a mutual
effort, which was certified by the growing number of active
sites and study participants enrolled.

Concurrently, we included multiple strategies aimed at making
the individual experience with the app as efficient as possible,
such as the acknowledgment notification to give visual
confirmation of the recording of completed questionnaires and
the chatbot function to facilitate users in the management of
any technical or content-related issues. Furthermore, the
questionnaires were tested and revised multiple times to
streamline their completion and to minimize the participants’
burden.

Third, to further facilitate the engagement activation process,
we tried to take on the challenge of personalization, realizing
that technologies should focus on each individual as unique,
even in their communication preferences and approaches to data
collection processes [43]. Personalization is a recurring theme
in app design studies but is typically implemented for ad hoc
self-management functionalities or goal setting [44-47]. Instead,
given the need to collect the same outcome data for all
participants in the POWER study, with no room for content
personalization, we included the possibility for users to tailor
some of the app graphics and added individual functionalities,
such as the treatment reminder, which could be accessed on a
voluntary basis. These enhancements do not have a potential
interventional effect on the outcomes of interest, and may help
generate a greater, personalized bond between the individual
user and the mobile app.

In addition to the app content, another domain that might sustain
user engagement pertains to the type of mobile device used
during the study (either a personal or a study device). Although
this ambivalence is a specific feature of mHealth studies, very
few studies have attempted to compare the 2 strategies
empirically in terms of adherence, with inconclusive statistical
results [48]. Despite this debate, there is still no unambiguous
settlement on the use of personal devices. However, this
strategy, which also goes by the name Bring Your Own Device,
has been unquestionably identified as the preferable solution

during this app’s development process. This option is not exempt
from potential shortcomings associated with the need to develop
apps that are compatible with a wide range of systems and
security settings [49], the potential selection bias that excludes
population segments who do not own a smartphone [50], and
the impossibility of locking down the device and maximizing
the methodological accuracy. Nevertheless, a personal device
presents one major advantage that counterbalances all of the
previous shortcomings, as it enhances the convenience for
patients, potentially reducing their burden and adopting a
pragmatic, real-world approach that replicates a setting more
familiar to all the participants.

Finally, to enhance the engagement with the ePRO app, we
strengthened the connection with the fitness tracker that records
physical activity levels. Although wearables are standard
technologies that do not allow for discretion in their design and
were previously perceived as highly acceptable by patients with
severe hemophilia [7], we reinforced their linkage with the
ePRO app by including an ad hoc screen that provided
participants with feedback on the number of daily hours the
tracker has been actually worn and confirmed whether the
per-protocol minimum for physical activity levels to be actually
registered (10 hours) was being met.

In addition, the ePRO app may indirectly activate engagement
by improving communication with the providers using
previously recorded data during routine consultations. The need
to be more closely monitored by their physicians was reported
by the patients during the FGs and has also emerged in previous
app design studies [51,52]. Furthermore, the enhancement of
communication links between the health care professionals and
the patients, as well as the capture of patient-reported data, are
considered among the 4 primary ways through which mHealth
can improve the management of hemophilia A [14].

By the end of the design process, we achieved broad agreement
that the app was easy to use and had an appealing layout, both
preconditions for its sustained use over time. As shown
previously by other studies [37], 2 iterative cycles of usability
testing were sufficient to reach a satisfactory consensus among
the participants and the potential end users. The comparisons
of usability with other mobile apps that underwent a thorough
development processes are difficult to make because this app
is not directly aimed at self-management, and this study was
among the first to adopt the MAUQ.

Strengths and Limitations

This research was based on a large sample of participants and
included various perspectives by considering the views and
needs of the patients, their parents, their representatives, and
those of the clinicians during the development process.

Moreover, this study emphasized that user-centered approaches
can be applicable, and possibly even more significant, to the
development of digital solutions for populations affected with
rare diseases, which, by definition, require unique considerations
that may be less well-known compared with those for other
chronic disease populations. At the same time, the application
of the selected methodology to a rare disease group generated
additional challenges linked to the difficulties in selecting and

JMIR Form Res 2021 | vol. 5 | iss. 12 | e25071 | p. 8

enrolling the participants. Working with smaller sample sizes
in rare study populations may be the only way to study them,
particularly for methodologies that require the physical presence
of participants [53], but several limitations should be
acknowledged. First, in terms of patient selection, although we
always targeted 5 participants in each of the FGs, in a couple
of cases, one of the intended participants communicated their
unavailability at short notice because of hemophilia-related
issues. Furthermore, to facilitate the identification of the
potential participants, we not only adhered to the inclusion
criteria identified for the POWER study, but also invited patients
with hemophilia A with different severity and inhibitor levels.
Although some of the participants were not within the target
population of the study, all patients with hemophilia A were
subject to similar outcome data collection in standard clinical
practice and were, thus, entitled to bring their contribution to
the development of the app.

Second, the number of practitioners involved was relatively
small and their points of view may not be representative of the
entire clinician population or of the organizations they
represented.

An additional limitation pertains to usability, which was only
evaluated before the field testing of the app in the study and
was not assessed longitudinally. Usability evaluation should be
a continuous process and should not be limited before
dissemination in the field. Additional usability evaluations were
planned during the study and at the end of the study through ad

hoc use metrics aimed at analyzing the use trajectories.
Moreover, we based our usability assessment only on the end
user testing and did not properly include any heuristic evaluation
involving computer scientists, nor assessed the time to task
completion. The mobile app was subject to continuous technical
evaluations, and the technical development went hand in hand
with the content design.

Finally, the UCD process we adopted was mainly based on user
and clinical expert involvement, which are however just 2 of
the developmental factors could be included in the design phase
of an app [54]. We have noted that alternative methodologies
have been developed and they are becoming popular in studies
on mobile devices, such as the experience sampling method
[55].

Conclusions

The ePRO app will serve as a data collection platform in the
POWER observational study. Because all the outcome data
collected by the app are directly inputted by the patients, UCD
supported the identification of user requirements and the
refinement of the app. This process will hopefully meet the
users’ expectations and maximize their continuous use of the
app throughout the study. The actual level of engagement will
be properly monitored during the ongoing POWER study,
whereas future research results will assess the effectiveness of
this app and demonstrate the value of the development process
described here.