DOI 10.1186/s12911-015-0148-4

RESEARCH ARTICLE
Open Access

Engineering a mobile health tool for
resource-poor settings to assess and manage
cardiovascular disease risk: SMARThealth study

Arvind Raghu1*, Devarsetty Praveen2,4, David Peiris3,4, Lionel Tarassenko1 and Gari Clifford5,6

Abstract
Background: The incidence of chronic diseases in low- and middle-income countries is rapidly increasing both in
urban and rural regions. A major challenge for health systems globally is to develop innovative solutions for the
prevention and control of these diseases. This paper discusses the development and pilot testing of SMARTHealth, a
mobile-based, point-of-care Clinical Decision Support (CDS) tool to assess and manage cardiovascular disease (CVD)
risk in resource-constrained settings. Through pilot testing, the preliminary acceptability, utility, and efficiency of the
CDS tool was obtained.
Methods: The CDS tool was part of an mHealth system comprising a mobile application that consisted of an
evidence-based risk prediction and management algorithm, and a server-side electronic medical record system.
Through an agile development process and user-centred design approach, key features of the mobile application that
fitted the requirements of the end users and environment were obtained. A comprehensive analytics framework
facilitated a data-driven approach to investigate four areas, namely, system efficiency, end-user variability, manual
data entry errors, and usefulness of point-of-care management recommendations to the healthcare worker. A
four-point Likert scale was used at the end of every risk assessment to gauge ease-of-use of the system.
Results: The system was field-tested with eleven village healthcare workers and three Primary Health Centre doctors,
who screened a total of 292 adults aged 40 years and above. 34% of participants screened by health workers were
identified by the CDS tool to be high CVD risk and referred to a doctor. In-depth analysis of user interactions found the
CDS tool feasible for use and easily integrable into the workflow of healthcare workers. Following completion of the
pilot, further technical enhancements were implemented to improve uptake of the mHealth platform. It will then be
evaluated for effectiveness and cost-effectiveness in a cluster randomized controlled trial involving 54 southern Indian
villages and over 16000 individuals at high CVD risk.
Conclusions: An evidence-based CVD risk prediction and management tool was used to develop an mHealth
platform in rural India for CVD screening and management with proper engagement of health care providers and
local communities. With over a third of screened participants being high risk, there is a need to demonstrate the
clinical impact of the mHealth platform so that it could contribute to improved CVD detection in high risk low
resource settings.

Keywords: Mobile health, Cardiovascular disease risk, Clinical decision support tool, Primary care, Chronic disease,
LMIC, India

1Institute of Biomedical Engineering, Department of Engineering Science, Old
Road Campus Research Building, Headington, OX3 7DQ Oxford, UK
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

© 2015 Raghu et al.; licensee BioMed Central. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction
in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication waiver
(http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article, unless otherwise stated.

Page 2 of 15

Background
Diseases that may affect the heart, arteries and circulation
of the blood are collectively referred to as Cardiovascular
disease (CVD). This can include ailments such as stroke,
coronary heart disease, atherosclerosis, or peripheral
arterial disease [1] and account for the majority of deaths
worldwide according to the World Health Organization
(WHO) [2]. Over 80% of these deaths occur in Low-
and Middle-Income Countries (LMICs) [3]. In developing
countries like India, even though approximately 70% of
the total population live in rural areas, the doctor to
patient ratio is lesser in rural areas (1:20000) as com-
pared to the urban areas (1:2000) [4]. Access to prevention
and control of CVD at the primary care level is poor
in these communities. Even the use of medications for
secondary prevention of stroke or myocardial infarction
is very low [5]. Furthermore, the epidemiological transi-
tion from communicable to chronic disease as the primary
cause of mortality has posed a substantial challenge to the
health systems of LMICs. There is a need to prioritise lim-
ited resources to manage the exponential demands of the
health system [6]. The existing physician-centric, western
style care is therefore unsustainable in these regions and
there is a need for more innovative solutions. One such
solution is to expand the capacity of the existing health-
care workers and provide them with appropriate tools
to manage CVD [7]. In 2005, the National Rural Health
Mission (NRHM) was launched by the Indian Govern-
ment with the aim of providing efficient primary health
infrastructure for its vast rural population. One of the
key features in this framework was the creation of the
Accredited Social Healthcare Activists (ASHAs) per 1000
population, who are female healthcare workers acting as
an interface between the people in rural areas and their
public health centre.

With 5.4 billion mobile phone subscriptions just in the
developing world today [8], the penetration of mobile
phones has been substantial and continues to grow. This is
an enabler for the delivery of healthcare services through
mobile technology. Mobile health (or mHealth) has there-
fore been the subject of considerable research in recent
times with a vast number of studies aimed at explor-
ing its potential. The impact of mHealth on community
health workers in LMIC was reviewed by Källander et al.
[9], who reported the common mHealth interventions in
the literature to be text messages and phone reminders
to encourage healthy behaviour, attendance at follow-
up appointments, and healthcare data collection. The
authors also noted the need for innovation and research
towards mHealth solutions for clinical decision support.
Beratarrechea et al. [10] reviewed mHealth interventions
on chronic disease in LMICs and found a positive impact
on disease outcomes even though the number and size
of studies were small. A recent review on mHealth for

LMICs has concluded that despite the potential of a vari-
ety of applications in non-communicable disease care,
mHealth is currently dominated by only behaviour change
interventions [11].

There is substantial literature discussing CVD risk pre-
diction and well-cited articles and reviews [12-14] have
mentioned the need to focus research on the usage of risk
algorithms in clinical practice for decision making, patient
motivation, communication of absolute risk as well as
understanding physician approval, behaviour and usage.
At the same time, limited evidence exists in literature on
using electronic CDS systems for CVD risk in resource-
constrained environments. Other studies in LMICs, such
as that by Ali et al. [15] who reviewed electronic CDS tools
for diabetes care, highlight the need for well-designed
investigations on the feasibility of using technology in
clinical decision support.

In this study, we have designed and pilot tested a
multifaceted healthcare worker intervention utilising an
mHealth platform that comprises a clinical decision sup-
port tool for CVD risk assessment and management in
rural India. The outcomes focussed on a preliminary eval-
uation of the tool for utility, effectiveness and acceptability
by the ASHAs and community participants in this setting
in order to inform large-scale evaluation.

Methods
Data collection
Data on CVD and associated risk factors were collected
through an mHealth system consisting primarily of a
client side mobile application and server side electronic
medical record. The mobile application was compart-
mentalised into four steps, which enabled health workers
to conveniently assess rural participants for CVD risk
and disseminate appropriate recommendations. Table 1
describes the data acquisition process through the mobile
application.

Computing 10-year absolute CVD risk
The World Health Organisation/International Society of
Hypertension (WHO/ISH) provide colour-coded charts
[16] which were used for the prediction of a 10-year risk of
fatal or non-fatal cardiovascular event (myocardial infarc-
tion or stroke) in different epidemiological sub-regions
of the world. Depending on the availability of cholesterol
information, Low Information (LI) or High Information
(HI) versions of the CVD risk charts can be used. The
colour-coded ranges in the WHO risk charts indicated five
levels of CVD risk for different values of risk factors [16].
The following information was necessary for the risk to be
estimated:

• Presence or absence of diabetes
• Gender

Page 3 of 15

Table 1 Table showing the 4 step process designed in the CDS tool for collecting patient data and decision support

Step 1
Step 2
Step 3
Step 4

(Demographics)
(Medical history)
(Risk factor acquisition)
(Decision support)

Age
Past history of Myocardial infarction/Angina
Blood Pressure
Recommendations

Gender
Past history of Stroke
Blood Glucose
(Smoking cessation,

Location
Past history of PVD
(fasting/random)
nutrition and

Patient ID
Past history of Diabetes
Cholesterol
lifestyle modifications),

Name
Family history of Myocardial infarction/Angina
(TC,HDL,LDL,TG)
Next Visit

Family history of Stroke
Height
(CVD risk screening,

Family history of Diabetes
Weight
Diabetes screening

Doctor referral),

Medication

(Blood pressure lowering,

Lipid lowering,

Anti-platelet therapy),

Tagets

(SBP, DBP)

Terminology used: PVD - Peripheral Vascular Disease, SBP - Systolic Blood Pressure, DBP - Diastolic Blood Pressure, TC - Total Cholesterol, LDL - Low Density
Lipoprotein, HDL - High Density Lipoprotein, TG - Triglycerides, Patient ID - Patient Identifier.

• Smoking status
• Age
• Systolic blood pressure (SBP)
• Total blood cholesterol (TC), if known.

Treatment and recommendations for the management
of CVD were based on Indian national and international
guidelines. The prediction and management applications
were stringently validated in two stages. The first stage
was code validation, where the algorithm was coded by a
physician in SPSS, and by an engineer as an Android appli-
cation. This was run on a large external dataset from the
Andhra Pradesh Rural Health Initiative [17] (which is a
cross-sectional study of CVD risk-factors from people in
rural Andhra Pradesh). The results were compared to find
differences and iterative refinements were made to the
algorithm and code to ensure full agreement. In the sec-
ond stage, the same dataset was used where 100 individ-
uals were randomly selected by a physician not involved
in the algorithm development. The physician performed
a manual assessment of CVD risk and treatment options,
and compared her results with the assessments made by
the CDSS on the same data. This was useful to refine
the management options for CVD, which is outlined in
the next section (Section ‘Estimating sub-conditions for
management’ and ‘Management and treatment of CVD’).

Clinical decision support
Estimating sub-conditions for management
Subsequent to the computation of a 10-year CVD risk for
a given set of risk factors, the mobile application offered

support for management of the participant’s risk and fur-
ther follow-ups. In order to arrive at appropriate recom-
mendations, the tool calculated sub-conditions (as listed
in Table 2) that indicated high risk conditions or the pres-
ence of elevated glucose levels (impaired fasting glucose
or IFG), high BMI (indicating obesity), or hypertension.

Management and treatment of CVD
After computation of the CVD risk score and sub-
conditions for assessing high risk, the CDS tool was
designed to offer point-of-care (POC) decision support
to both ASHAs and physicians for the management of
CVD. This included three categories - general recom-
mendations, referral, and treatment recommendations
and were based on international and national guide-
lines [18,19]. General recommendations are intended for
controlling or modifying behavioural risk factors includ-
ing smoking, alcohol consumption, physical inactivity,
and diet/nutrition. Except detailed advice on smoking
cessation (which are given only to smokers), other recom-

Table 2 Computation of essential sub-conditions based on
patient’s assessment

Clinically high
risk

Impaired fasting
glucose

Weight
Hypertension

SBP≥160 mmHg or
DBP≥100 mmHg or
TC≥320 mg/dL
or LDL≥240 mg/dL
or TC/HDL>8

Fasting blood sugar
level between
110 mg/dL and
126 mg/dL or
history of diabetes

Obesity if
BMI≥30
Overweight if
25≤BMI<30

SBP≥140 or
DBP≥90 or
history of
hypertension

This is performed as a precursor to CDS recommendations for CVD
management; Terminology - BMI stands for Body Mass Index.

Page 4 of 15

mendations are advised to all users. A referral indicated
the need for consulting a primary care physician, which
was also the outcome for ‘next visit’ flags for absolute
risk and diabetes screening. Treatment recommendations
were available only to physicians. The CDS output for
different CVD risk profiles are summarised under Table 3.

CDS tool design
An important factor in the success of any technology-
based intervention depends on how well it can fit within
the needs of the users and the environment [20]. In our
context of managing CVD in resource-constrained set-
tings, the challenge and opportunity was to design an
appropriate tool that could be easily used by minimally
trained health workers (who were the end users) as well
as fit the needs of local primary care physicians and
community participants.

Conventional methods of design and development
relied on traditional “requirements engineering” [21],
where the emphasis is on preparing thorough documen-
tation with clear specifications prior to the development
of a proposed solution. This is often the first phase in
the waterfall software development model which relies on
a pre-planned sequential design procedure [22]. Another
popular practice in software engineering is the agile
development methodology which emphasises iterative

development with constant feedback from the stake-
holders whereby requirements emerge along the process
[23]. This has the advantage of evolving to changes in a
dynamic environment.

The requirements of our end-users compounded with
the uncertainties in technical infrastructure (such as the
availability of uninterrupted 2G/3G internet connectivity)
could not be gauged thoroughly through a needs assess-
ment. Therefore, the agile development approach was
followed in our study to iteratively design prototypes
and elicit feedback from the end-users. However, our
approach differed from conventional practice since the
end users had little or no experience with using infor-
mation and communication technology and could not
drive the design. To overcome this, firstly we employed
a multidisciplinary team comprising an engineer, local
physician, sociologist, and an expert physician to balance
system requirements (for designing features for an effec-
tive intervention, such as understanding the local clinical
practice for ways of conveying recommendations for man-
aging CVD risk, or assessing accuracy of ASHAs asking
questions like medical history) with user requirements
(for instance, to observe if the ASHAs can compute the
year of birth based on age). Secondly, we performed
phases of prototyping and user assessment (which is
illustrated through Figure 1) where the multidisciplinary

Table 3 Table showing referral and medication recommendations for a particular CVD risk category

Risk category
Referral
Medication

CVD risk screening
Doctor referral

High risk
≥30% risk
every 3-6 months
Yes
BP lowering therapy
or past CVD history
Lipid lowering
Antiplatelets

Intermediate
20 to <30% risk
every year
Yes
BP lowering therapy
risk
(if BP≥140/90)
Lipid lowering
(if Diabetes is present
or SBP≥160 mmHg
or TC>200 mg/dL or
LDL>120 mg/dL)
10 to <20% risk
every 2 years
Yes if
BP lowering therapy
(Diabetes or
(if Diabetes is present
IFG is present)
and BP≥140/90
or SBP≥160 mmHg)
or
Lipid lowering
(history of diabetes
(if Diabetes is present
and SBP≥160 mmHg)
or SBP≥160 mmHg)

Low risk
0 to <10% risk
every 5 years
Yes if
BP lowering therapy
(Diabetes or
(if Diabetes is present
IFG is present)
and BP≥140/90
or SBP≥160 mmHg)
or
Lipid lowering
(history of diabetes
(if Diabetes is present
and SBP≥160 mmHg)
or SBP≥160 mmHg)

Page 5 of 15

team evaluated the end user interactions with the mobile
application through observations and post-procedure
interviews.

Some of the key features that were incorporated through
our agile approach included:

• One touch navigation

Since the end user base had little or no experience,
touch errors were common and frequent. The mobile
application’s design was such that ASHAs could
navigate through the majority of the content using a
single button. Care was taken to ensure idiosyncrasies
of the mobile-based device that interfered with
workflow were minimal. For example, in certain cases
the virtual keyboard was minimised subsequent to
user input.
• CVD Risk Projection meter

The application had a visual risk projection meter (as
shown in Figures 2 and 3) to convey the meaning of
CVD risk to the patient in an understandable way.
For example, Figure 2 illustrates the case of a 33-year
old smoker with diabetes. The participant has a blood
pressure value of 160/89 mmHg, total cholesterol of

176 mg/dL and his risk of developing CVD over a
10-year period is shown to be high. If the participant
reduced his blood pressure alone by approximately
10 mmHg (as shown in Figure 3), his 10-year risk of
developing CVD is reduced substantially from above
40% to between 20% and 30%. Thus the cause and
effect of each risk factor for a particular patient can
be visually emphasised. This is intended to help the
patients visualise the effect of controlling risk factors
and was designed to encourage adherence to
medication and a change in behaviour of modifiable
risk factors, such as smoking.
• Event calendar/age entry

It was found that some of the participants did not
know their date or even year of birth accurately. This
was due to factors such as date of birth being
mandatory for registration only after the Indian
Registration of Births and Deaths Act, 1969 [24].
Therefore, the mobile application used methods to
increase the accuracy of the estimated age; a vital
parameter in the risk assessment algorithm. A
comprehensive list of well-known historical events
(for example, Indian Independence day, 1947) could

Figure 1 Phases of design and development following a User centred design aproach, where the aim was to bring out issues centred around the
end user’s interaction with a prototype without placing any explicit demands on them. The process diagram shows prototypes in the form of an
alpha (α) and beta (β) CDS tool, each followed by a user centred design phase. This led to the development of a tool for the pilot study, which upon
further improvement would be suitable for a randomised controlled trial.

Page 6 of 15

Figure 2 CVD Risk projection meter indicating present risk factor levels for the patient.

Page 7 of 15

Figure 3 The projected 10-year risk if the patient reduces his blood pressure by approximately 10 mmHg, as shown by the CVD Risk projection meter.

Page 8 of 15

be retrieved in order to help the patient decide how
old they were at that point in time. Also, for female
patients, specific questions (mostly related to
maternal health) that had a high probability of
narrowing down the exact age were used.
• Information buttons

These buttons were embedded in the standard risk
assessment procedure and intended to disseminate
essential information for a particular question the
user wanted to know more about. For instance, the
button could be used to recap the protocol for blood
pressure measurement or retrieve a list of commonly
used drugs to see if the patient had a history of taking
any of them.
• Review patient

The review patient feature offered the option to
review existing patients who have been screened
previously by that user. This was especially motivated
by the recommendations of a physician who intended
to use a staff nurse to screen patients before they had
an appointment with him. Using the Review Patient
feature, the physician could assess and review the
participant’s CVD risk in an efficient way, thereby
promoting greater ease of adoption of the tool in the
primary care setting.
• Accuracy of data entry

To ensure correctness of data entry and avoid
transcription errors, on-screen checks were
performed at the end of each step if the entered data
was not clinically valid. Furthermore, a validated
Blood Pressure (BP) device (Stabil-O-Graph [25]) was
used, which could interface with the tablet via
Bluetooth and send three BP measurements to the
tablet. However, blood glucose was measured using
the OneTouch Ultra2 glucometer which did not have
Bluetooth functionality although it was desirable.
This was because the recurring cost of test strips was
prohibitively high for a Bluetooth-enabled
glucometer. All data in the CDS tool could be
corrected or inputted manually.

The CDS-based CVD risk assessment and management
tool was built for devices running Android 4.0 and above,
and supported both Telugu (local language) and English.
The application was optimised to run on a higher-end
version of a low-cost tablet (£100) for use by ASHAs,
and a Samsung Galaxy 7-inch tablet (£160) to be used
by physicians. Low-cost tablets were preferred for two
reasons. The first was to assess if they could perform ade-
quately in our setting so as to inform cost-effectiveness
of the intervention. The second reason was the high
healthcare-worker:doctor ratio in resource-constrained
regions which required cost-effective tablets (since they
can be replaced more easily if damaged or stolen).

Field testing
The mobile based CDS tool was field tested by 11 ASHAs
who performed door-to-door screening of community
participants in 3 villages in rural Andhra Pradesh, India.
Each ASHA was to screen approximately 20 partici-
pants in one month for high risk and a convenience
sampling method was followed, where participants could
be selected based on their accessibility and proximity
to the ASHAs. The ASHAs were trained for one week
to use the CDS tool and tablet. The data from each
participant screened by the ASHA were uploaded to
a secure server hosting an electronic medical record
system (OpenMRS [26,27]). Decision support on treat-
ment was available to physicians, who used the CDS
tool as a standalone system to screen and manage
patients visiting their clinic. The entire mHealth infras-
tructure was designed to be interoperable and leveraged
the Sana Mobile platform, an open-source telemedicine
framework [28,29].

A four point Likert scale [30] was used to evaluate
usability at the end of every risk assessment performed
by the ASHAs. To understand user behaviour and pat-
tern of interaction with the mobile application, an ana-
lytics framework was built within the tool. It recorded
the data and timestamp for every click made by the
ASHAs as they performed CVD risk assessments. For
ease of comparability of usage patterns and to highlight
diversity in trends amongst different end-users, three dis-
tinct ASHAs were chosen based on the total number
of assessments they performed and years of experience
they had in performing their role. Everyone amongst
the chosen three ASHAs were identified through inter-
views as being primarily a Telugu speaker, and claimed
to be able to read and write English at secondary school
level.

The variability in end-user usage was analysed in this
study to gauge the performance of ASHAs. This was done
in order to identify the stage at which additional support
or training was needed if necessary. Data from the three
ASHAs, representing all the ASHAs in performance, were
analysed individually to obtain an estimate of their mean
procedure time over the course of the pilot study. Boot-
strapping was performed considering all samples available
up until and including that procedure. This was per-
formed to investigate bias towards uneven sampling. For
example, if we are to estimate the mean completion time
and confidence interval (CI) for an ASHA who has per-
formed 10 risk assessments, her procedure times until and
on the 10th procedure would be taken as our sample for
bootstrapping. The 95% CI for the mean was subsequently
estimated and plotted individually for the three ASHAs.
This is useful to understand how variable the ASHA’s own
procedure times can be and with sufficient samples (of
risk assessment procedures), we can reliably estimate how

Page 9 of 15

long an ASHA can take and how much training is needed
until she is proficient to use the CDS tool (which may be
shown by a narrow confidence interval).

The ASHAs manually entered the glucose values into
the tablet, a process susceptible to errors. However, to
assess the extent of errors, the blood glucose values stored
in the glucometers were downloaded and compared with
those values entered by the ASHA in the tablet during
risk assessment. Care was taken to ensure that the glucose
readings being compared were taken at the same time.
This was performed by obtaining timestamps from the
analytics framework in the CDS tool and the glucometer’s
memory.

In-depth qualitative interviews with the ASHAs and
focus group discussions were also undertaken to identify
barriers to the adoption of mobile technology. These are
detailed in the article by Raghu et al. [31] and are not
presented in this paper.

Ethics: The study was approved by the ethics com-
mittee of Centre for Chronic Disease and Control,
India and the University of Sydney, Austrlia (registration:
CTRI/2013/06/003753). Informed, written consent was
obtained from all participants contributing data in the
study.

Results
A total of 227 individuals (mean age of 51.4 ±13.1
years) were screened by 11 ASHAs, while 3 PHC
physicians independently used the mobile application
(HealthTracker) as a clinical decision support tool to
screen 65 in-patients (mean age of 55.3 ± 11.7 years)
who visited their clinic (total N=292). Although physi-
cians used the mobile application, the results pre-
sented in this paper focuses entirely on usage by the
ASHAs.

The three distinct ASHAs chosen for detailed usage
analysis had a mean age of 29 ± 2 years and had the
experience of using a mobile phone at the time of this
study. We shall refer to the three ASHAs as npB1, npM1,
and npL1 and they had 3, 7, and 4 years of experi-
ence working as an ASHA and performed 28 (highest
number in this study), 20 (median number of assess-
ments in this study), and 16 (lowest number of assess-
ments amongst ASHAs in our study) risk assessments
respectively.

CVD risk profile
Figure 4 shows the distribution of a 10-year risk of devel-
oping CVD for the participants for the study participants.
Most individuals were either at low risk (<10%) or high
risk (due to a previous incidence of CVD, or had a clin-
ically high condition as previously defined in Table 2, or
both).

Evaluation of mHealth platform
Data Analytics -User behaviour and interactions
System Efficiency The overall time taken for screening
the community participant’s CVD risk over the dura-
tion of the study is shown in Figure 5. The median
time for all ASHAs was 00:21:10 (read in terms of
hours:minutes:seconds) with an IQR of 00:14:08. ASHAs
npB1, npM1, and npL1 took 00:27:28 (IQR 00:14:05),
00:24:20 (IQR 00:12:12), and 00:33:53 (IQR 00:32:41)
respectively. A decreasing trend in completion time as
users performed more procedures is observed.

The distribution of time taken for each step of CVD risk
assessment for all ASHAs is shown in Figure 6. Step 3 (risk
factor acquisition) took the longest during data collection
and its extensive spread observed from the distribution
shows a large variation (IQR 00:11:22) between ASHAs in
completing that step.

The number of times the ASHA chose Bluetooth trans-
mission over manual transmission (or the Bluetooth BP
device usage rate) was analysed and is shown in Figure 7.
Only one transmission from the BP device was needed for
three BP measurements in each CVD risk assessment pro-
cedure. From Figure 7, ASHA npB1 had a usage rate of
61% (17/28 procedures) with mean BP acquisition time of
00:05:20 (σ = 00:03:36) while npM1 had a usage rate of
50% (10/28) with mean BP acquisition time of 00:07:06 (σ
= 00:02:36). ASHA npL1 had a usage rate of 37% (6/16)
with mean BP acquisition time of 00:08:24 (σ = 00:02:56).
The ASHA who used Bluetooth the most (npB1) for trans-
ferring BP readings had the lowest mean BP acquisition
time. However, the ASHA with most experience (npM1)
showed more consistency when acquiring BP.

Before the 10th procedure, Bluetooth usage rate was 40%
for npB1, 50% for npM1, and 10% for npL1 while after the
10th procedure (midway between their ‘assigned’ target of
20 procedures as previously described in Section ‘Field
testing’), the usage rates were 65%, 44%, and 80%
respectively.

User variability From Figure 8, we observe that npM1 is
consistent and has the most narrow CI [00:21:01, 00:28:27]
while npL1 has the widest CI [00:31:58, 00:57:58] for the
estimated mean procedure time towards the end of the
study. The three ASHAs show less variability in proce-
dure time over the course of the pilot study (when they
complete more risk assessments).

In the initial stages of the pilot study (for instance, at
the end of 5 procedures completed by each ASHA), the
bootstrapped estimate of the mean procedure times for all
ASHAs are high with wide CIs. ASHA npL1 has the largest
estimate with mean time 00:53:02, 95% CI [00:32:36,
01:24:35]. ASHAs npM1 and npB1 have comparable esti-
mate of mean times but the latter has a much wider 95% CI
(npM1 - mean time 00:30:33, 95% CI [00:26:30, 00:32:45];

Page 10 of 15

Figure 4 Distribution of CVD risk scores in the pilot population (N=292). CHR denotes clinically high risk. 34% of screened participants had a CVD
risk score greater than 30% or had CHR or CVD or both.

ASHA npB1 - mean time 00:35:45, 95% CI [00:20:00,
01:03:28]).

At the end of 10 procedures (or approximately mid-
way through the assigned target of 20 assessments for
the ASHAs), the estimated mean time and CI contin-
ues to decrease (npL1 - mean time 00:43:31, 95% CI
[00:31:05, 01:04:19]; npM1 - mean time 00:26:28, 95% CI
[00:21:50,00:30:29]; npB1 - mean time 00:35:18, 95% CI
[00:24:34, 00:55:45]).

When 15 procedures have been completed by the
ASHAs, the estimated mean stabilizes while CI continues
to become narrower (npL1 - mean time 00:41:05, 95% CI
[00:30:56, 00:56:24]; npM1 - mean time 00:26:18, 95% CI
[00:22:34,00:30:22]; npB1 - mean time 00:34:43, 95% CI
[00:25:07, 00:52:08]).

At the end of the pilot study, npL1 has an estimated
mean time 00:42:15 with 95% CI [00:31:58, 00:57:58] that
is compared to the last milestone (15 procedures) and

there has not been an appreciable increase in the number
of procedures the ASHA had performed. npM1, having
completed 5 more procedures since the last milestone,
finishes with a slightly lower estimated mean procedure
time 00:24:42 with narrower 95% CI [00:21:01, 00:28:27].
npB1 had finished 13 procedures more than the previous
milestone and ends with a lower estimated mean time
00:31:21 with 95%CI [00:25:27, 00:41:32].

Errors in manual entry of Blood Glucose measure-
ments Out of 227 patients assessed, 14 patients had an
erroneous value of glucose level entered. The median
error was 9.55 mg/dL with IQR 35.75 mg/dL (0.53 mmol/L
with IQR 1.99 mmol/L).

Usefulness of point-of-care management recommen-
dations for ASHAs Table 4 quantifies the extent to
which the built-in management guidelines for CVD were

Figure 5 Graph illustrating the total CVD risk assessment procedure time over the number of procedures performed by the ASHAs. The median
time for completion of a risk assessment was 00:21:10 (read as hours:minutes:seconds). The median time for all ASHAs was taken at every procedure
and the resulting trend suggests a decrease in total procedure time as more CVD procedures were performed. The first procedure has a lower
median time and this may be because it was performed immediately after the training phase for ASHAs.

Page 11 of 15

Figure 6 Assessment of individual step times, broken down as Step 1- Demographics with median time of 00:02:37 (IQR 00:02:16), Step 2- Medical
History with median time of 00:01:08 (IQR 00:01:35), Step 3 - Risk factor acquisition with median time of 00:10:33 (IQR 00:11:22), and Step 4 - Decision
support 00:01:30 (IQR 00:01:53).

used by the ASHAs through the number of clicks recorded
in each management section (outlined previously in
Table 1) for all procedures completed. It can be observed
that the usage of the risk projection meter was much lower
in comparison to the other sections for the three ASHAs.
Also only 81% participants screened by ASHA npL1 were
told about their next visit for follow-ups while in contrast,
ASHA npB1 disseminated the information to 93% of her
participants.

CVD referrals
An important component of the mobile based CDS
tool is the referral indication (as mentioned in Section

‘Management and treatment of CVD’). Out of 227 partici-
pants screened by the ASHAs, the CDS tool identified 57%
(n=128) for referral to a physician either for high CVD risk
(n=88) or IFG (n=40).

Usability
The end users of the application were asked to com-
plete a questionnaire at the end of every risk assessment
procedure. In over 72% of the screening procedures per-
formed, the mobile application was found easy to use
for that particular procedure. Users concurred similarly
on the usefulness of a graphic bar that visualised risk
scores in communicating the meaning of absolute CVD

Figure 7 Plot of BP acquisition times over procedures performed on the course of our pilot study. Acquisition times at 0 indicate Bluetooth
transmission was not attempted. Overall Bluetooth BP device usage rate was 55% and overall median acquisition time was 00:06:50 (IQR of 00:02:33).
Four out of 219 procedures were not considered as the risk assessments were performed non-sequentially by the ASHAs.

Page 12 of 15

Figure 8 Estimate of the mean procedure times with 95% confidence intervals for ASHAs npB1, npM1, and npL1 over successive procedures
performed (for the duration of the pilot study). ASHA npM1 has the narrowest CI and least estimated mean procedure time while npL1 has the
widest CI and highest estimated mean procedure time at end of the study. The estimate of 95% CI and mean procedure time was obtained using a
bootstrapped sample that included risk assessments performed up until and including that time period in the study. This was performed to account
for uneven sampling bias (for example, at the 5th procedure, procedure 1 till 5 were taken as samples and bootstrapped). After ASHA npL1’s 13th

procedure, her estimated mean procedure time increases which suggests that she took much longer to complete the last two risk assessment
procedures.

risk reduction to the community participants. No user
gave the application a rating below 3 on a scale of 4, with
4 being most useful and 1 being least useful. In less than
2% of the procedures performed, the ASHAs recorded
difficulties with collection of risk factors (such as blood
pressure, height and weight, blood glucose).

Discussion
The CDS tool was designed and developed using the agile
development methodology with the close engagement of
the ASHAs and physicians. The process was repetitive
until the ease of use was confirmed by the end-users and
this stage became the final version of the CDS tool. A
number of key features were added through this process.
The use and integration of open-source telemedicine plat-
forms such as OpenMRS and SanaMobile were intended
to increase interoperability. This is important because in
the area of mHealth application development, there exists

Table 4 Statistics for how often the management
recommendations in the CDS tool were actually used by
the ASHAs

ASHA
Risk projection meter
to communicate
CVD risk association
between risk factors

Recommendations
(lifestyle, smoking,
nutrition)

Next visit
(doctor
referral, CVD
risk/diabetes
screening)

npB1
79% (22/28)
96% (27/28)
93% (26/28)

npM1
75% (15/20)
85% (17/20)
90% (18/20)

npL1
81% (13/16)
81% (13/16)
81% (13/16)

silos of numerous non-interoperable mHealth applica-
tions which are likely to increase the risk of duplication
in effort and fragmentation of purpose. The risk profiles
of screened participants in the three villages in Andhra
Pradesh had a bimodal risk distribution, where the partici-
pants were mostly either low risk or high risk. The number
of participants at high risk of CVD was almost one third
of the screened sample. There was a decrease in median
completion time with more number of procedures per-
formed. This indicated the ASHA’s increased familiarity
with the process as well as provides evidence for expected
or optimal usage and actual usage. The median proce-
dure time for ASHAs was 21 minutes for a complete CVD
risk assessment with Step-3 (risk factor acquisition) taking
maximum time (of over 10 minutes although it recorded
large variations between ASHAs). Acquisition of three BP
measurements, on its own, took approximately 7 minutes.
This could be useful to assess the maximum number of
community participants that can be screened by an ASHA
given her usual commitments towards antenatal care.

It is interesting to compare the usage patterns of the
three ASHAs (npB1, npM1, and npL1) from four param-
eters that we have analysed - total number of risk assess-
ments, median completion time and 95% CI, use of
Bluetooth functionality, and rate of disseminating man-
agement recommendations to participants. npB1 may be
classified as one of the better performing ASHAs in the
pilot study as, firstly, she performed the highest num-
ber of risk assessments amongst all ASHAs. Secondly, she
had the highest usage rate of Bluetooth functionality and

Page 13 of 15

lowest mean BP acquisition time. Thirdly, she had the
highest rate of disseminating management recommenda-
tions although her mean procedure time and 95% CI was
fairly average compared to other ASHAs. npM1 showed
more consistency than any other ASHA in all aspects of
her performance. The number of assessments she com-
pleted was exactly the same as the approximate target of
20 procedures prescribed for all ASHAs at the start of
the pilot. With regard to the automated Bluetooth feature,
the usage rate was almost the same before the ASHA’s
10th procedure (50% usage rate) and after her 10th pro-
cedure (44% usage rate). With the lowest estimated mean
time and smallest 95% CI as well as an approximately
average rate of disseminating management recommenda-
tions, ASHA npM1 was the most consistent performer.
npL1 performed the fewest assessments, had the highest
estimated mean time with a wide 95% CI, low dissem-
ination rate of management recommendations, and the
lowest usage rate of the automated Bluetooth feature.
However, with regard to Bluetooth usage, we observe that
even though only a single attempt (or 10%) was made
before her 10th procedure, her usage rate increased to
80% thereafter. Though this may indicate a longer learn-
ing curve, ASHA npL1 may be identified as one that
would need additional attention or performance moni-
toring. By recording user interactions with the mobile
application, we could thus gauge the end-user’s behaviour
and effectiveness of the tool’s features such as the
rate of dissemination of point-of-care CVD management
recommendations.

The introduction of automated Bluetooth BP measure-
ments in this study found low adoption initially. How-
ever, we observed that towards the end of the study, the
ASHAs recognised the ease of use and utility of this fea-
ture, as was observed through qualitative interviews (not
reported in this paper). ASHAs also recorded difficul-
ties with operation of the BP monitor. Given the current
overall adoption rate of 55%, a less sophisticated BP mon-
itor with faster acquisition times may increase adoption
and optimise time taken for Step 3. The errors reported
from manual data entry during blood glucose measure-
ment demonstrate that transcription and transposition
errors were likely and the erroneous values had a wide
range. With regard to POC decision support, communi-
cation through the risk meter found the lowest adoption
in Table 4 and this is possibly due to difficulties in the
ASHA’s understanding of the risk projection feature. The
overall user trends in user interactions was observed by
the usage of our analytics framework in the CDS tool.
This was beneficial to understand learnability [32], which
is an indicator of how easily the ASHAs performed tasks
as well as efficiency [33], which is an analysis of the
ASHA’s ability to quickly perform the task they have
learnt. The understanding of these parameters can aid in

better design (for example, by evaluating features widely
used versus those un-used or difficult to use) and learn
about user performance over time so that adequate sup-
port may be given to those ASHAs who need technical
assistance (for instance if the ASHA’s efficiency declines,
as her estimate of mean procedure time increases
successively).

By involving the end-users iteratively as well as acquir-
ing information through data analytics, we minimise
social desirability bias [34,35], an important issue in
acceptance testing in global health. Another key aspect
of our study is the design thinking process that has
cohesively involved the local community participants
and end-users, and therefore differs from global health
projects which ’push’ solutions onto the community. The
in-depth design strategies resulted in a tool that could
be easily integrated within the workflow of the ASHAs,
as reflected by the majority agreeing with its easy of
use, usefulness, and increased speed of assessments over
time.

The main limitation in this pilot study was the limited
sample size. However, this was not designed to be repre-
sentative. With respect to technical improvements, apart
from robust software-engineering, we think it is also nec-
essary to ensure appropriate patient identification (when
dealing with thousands of participants) through advanced
pattern matching methods which may rely on a combina-
tion of patient demographics and risk factors. This would
ensure that there is no inadvertent misidentification of
patients which may be harmful if treatment regimens are
prescribed to the incorrect patient. Infrastructural barri-
ers observed in our pilot study included power constraints
as power supply was limited to fixed times of the day, and
so the low-cost tablets had to be charged frequently or
would not function optimally.

Conclusions
In this study, we used an evidence-based CVD risk pre-
diction and management tool to develop an mHealth
platform in rural India for CVD screening and manage-
ment with proper engagement of health care providers
and local communities. Field evaluation found the plat-
form to be acceptable and feasible for use. Detailed
usage patterns could be gauged from analysing the inter-
action pattern of ASHAs with the mobile application.
With over a third of screened participants being high
risk, there is a need to demonstrate the clinical impact
of the mHealth platform so that it could contribute
to improved CVD detection in high risk low resource
settings. With further technical improvements such as
robust patient registration, we will conduct a two year
cluster randomised trial covering 54 villages in south-
ern India to evaluate the clinical impact of this mHealth
platform.

Page 14 of 15

The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Authors’ contributions
AR led the development and analysis of the mobile health platform. GC and LT
contributed to the development and analysis of the study. The mobile health
intervention was designed by DPe, DPr, and AR. DPr and DPe were responsible
for the implementation of the study on the field. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript.