Original Paper

Computerized Clinical Decision Support System for Emergency
Department–Initiated Buprenorphine for Opioid Use Disorder:
User-Centered Design

Jessica M Ray1, PhD; Osama M Ahmed1, BSc; Yauheni Solad2, MD; Matthew Maleska3, MBA; Shara Martel1, MPH,
MS; Molly M Jeffery4, PhD; Timothy F Platts-Mills5, MSc, MD; Erik P Hess6, MSc, MD; Gail D’Onofrio1, MD, MS;
Edward R Melnick1, MD, MHS

1Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, United States
2Yale New Haven Health, New Haven, CT, United States
3The Patient Revolution, New Haven, CT, United States
4Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States
5University of North Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC, United States
6University of Alabama at Birmingham School of Medicine, Birmingham, AL, United States

Edward R Melnick, MD, MHS
Yale School of Medicine
464 Congress Ave, Suite 260
New Haven, CT, 06519
United States
Phone: 1 9176081760
Fax: 1 203 785 4580

Abstract

Background: Emergency departments (EDs) frequently care for individuals with opioid use disorder (OUD). Buprenorphine
(BUP) is an effective treatment option for patients with OUD that can safely be initiated in the ED. At present, BUP is rarely
initiated as a part of routine ED care. Clinical decision support (CDS) could accelerate adoption of ED-initiated BUP into routine
emergency care.
Objective: This study aimed to design and formatively evaluate a user-centered decision support tool for ED initiation of BUP
for patients with OUD.
Methods: User-centered design with iterative prototype development was used. Initial observations and interviews identified
workflows and information needs. The design team and key stakeholders reviewed prototype designs to ensure accuracy. A total
of 5 prototypes were evaluated and iteratively refined based on input from 26 attending and resident physicians.
Results: Early feedback identified concerns with the initial CDS design: an alert with several screens. The timing of the alert
led to quick dismissal without using the tool. User feedback on subsequent iterations informed the development of a flexible tool
to support clinicians with varied levels of experience with the intervention by providing both one-click options for direct activation
of care pathways and user-activated support for critical decision points. The final design resolved challenging navigation issues
through targeted placement, color, and design of the decision support modules and care pathways. In final testing, users expressed
that the tool could be easily learned without training and was reasonable for use during routine emergency care.
Conclusions: 
A user-centered design process helped designers to better understand users’ needs for a Web-based clinical
decision tool to support ED initiation of BUP for OUD. The process identified varying needs across user experience and familiarity
with the protocol, leading to a flexible design supporting both direct care pathways and user-initiated decision support.

(JMIR Hum Factors 2019;6(1):e13121) doi: 10.2196/13121

JMIR Hum Factors 2019 | vol. 6 | iss. 1 | e13121 | p. 1

KEYWORDS
user-centered design; decision support systems, clinical; opioid-related disorders; opiate substitution treatment; health information
technology

Introduction

Background

Opioid use disorder (OUD) is an escalating public health crisis
that has impacted all regions of the United States and represents
a substantial portion of emergency department (ED) visits each
year. An estimated 2.1 million people in the United States have
OUD [1] and 275 million people have OUD worldwide [2].
More than 33,000 opioid-related deaths occur annually in the
United States and 118,000 opioid-related deaths occur annually
worldwide [3]. From 2016 to 2017, EDs experienced a 30%
increase in visits for opioid overdose [4]. As the primary source
of care for many people with OUD, the ED offers an important
opportunity to engage patients receiving care for acute and
comorbid conditions related to opioid use.

Buprenorphine (BUP), a partial opioid agonist often combined
with an opioid antagonist, is a proven effective treatment for
OUD that decreases mortality, withdrawal symptoms, craving,
and opioid use [5-7]. Initiating BUP in the ED doubles the rate
of addiction treatment engagement in ED patients with OUD
[8]. However, ED-initiated BUP has not yet been adopted in
most hospitals [9,10]. This delay in adoption of evidence-based
practice is not unique—on average, it takes 17 years from
discovery to the adoption of evidence-based practices into
routine care [11,12].

Clinical decision support (CDS), computerized systems that
offer patient-specific assessments or recommendations to
clinicians, represents one approach to facilitating and
accelerating the implementation process [13,14]. A 2011 review
of randomized controlled trials investigating CDS guidance for
drug therapy showed that CDS improved care in 64% (37/59)
of studies [15]. In a broad review of CDS designed to address
a range of care processes, meta-analysis favored the use of CDS
for supporting clinician treatment orders (odds ratio 1.57, 95%
CI 1.35-1.82). Large studies have shown CDS implementation
in the ED to have supported the adoption of evidence-based
practices for computed tomography imaging use [16,17].

However, CDS faces its own challenges, including unintended
consequences such as alert fatigue and increased cognitive load
[18-22]. CDS design principles support careful consideration
of the sociotechnical environment and delivery of the right
information, to the right person, in the right format, and at the
right time in clinical workflow to optimize medical decision
making [23-26].

Across the fields of technology and human-computer interaction,
building usable systems has been found to be essential to
improve efficiency and reduce errors [27]. International
Organization for Standardization standards for user-centered
design outline the process by which technological design can
incorporate context and organizational requirements to produce
and evaluate solutions [28]. The engagement of end users (the
people who will be using the technology) throughout the process

is critical to anticipate and avoid pitfalls of new information
technology such as increased cognitive load and lack of user
engagement [26]. Specifically, pragmatic approaches to usability
evaluation are necessary to rapidly design, iterate, and test health
care information systems [29].

Objectives

Our objective was to develop a pragmatic, user-centered CDS
for ED-initiated BUP and referral to treatment for patients with
OUD. The user-centered design process for the development
of this tool is described here. We developed this CDS
specifically for the purposes of a planned multisystem pragmatic
trial to study the effectiveness of user-centered CDS on adoption
rates of ED-initiated BUP [30].

Methods

Clinical Context and Population

From March to July 2018, we utilized a multiphase,
user-centered design methodology for the formative design,
development, 
and 
evaluation 
of 
the 
EMergency
department-initiated Buprenorphine for opioid usE Disorder
(EMBED) CDS intervention. Primary phases in this method
included (1) needs assessment, (2) initial prototype design, (3)
iterative design feedback, and (4) final prototype testing.
Formative feedback sessions were approved by our institution’s
institutional review board; given the minimal risk of the study
and a protocol that did not involve the collection of participants’
private information, all participants gave verbal consent for
participation.

Eligible participants included ED clinicians and key stakeholders
(including administrative and information technology leaders
and ED addiction counselors) from an urban academic level I
trauma center with 103,000 patient visits per year. Recruitment
for user feedback sessions focused specifically on attending
physicians and residents in the second, third, or fourth year of
postgraduate medical training. During a 4-month period from
March to June 2018, a total of 26 unique participants offered
feedback during iterative design, including 14 through informal
sessions and 12 through formal user feedback sessions. In
addition, 6 participants offered feedback on multiple versions
of the design. Informal sessions were conducted in the ED or
private administrative offices and lasted 10 to 30 min. Formal
sessions were conducted in the Yale Center for Medical
Simulation and were approximately 45 min in length. Formal
user design sessions were conducted in parallel with both
attending and resident physicians by a human factors researcher
(JR).

Pragmatic Approach

Given our goal to rapidly increase adoption rates of ED-initiated
BUP for a subsequent pragmatic trial, we elected to take a
pragmatic approach to formative usability evaluation, as
described by Mann et al [29]. This approach included rapid
iterative design and testing cycles to provide user feedback and

JMIR Hum Factors 2019 | vol. 6 | iss. 1 | e13121 | p. 2

input on prototype design iterations. All sessions of user testing
included direct observation, think aloud, and observational
note-taking. In addition, notes were reviewed with each
participant at the end of each session to ensure completeness.
Pragmatic data analysis was performed by the design team
during weekly meetings to debrief and summarize findings and
to determine the design, functionality, and interface changes to
make based on these findings. Termination was based on
consensus, cost, and time constraints, as opposed to thematic
saturation [29]. To minimize the assessment burden, we did not
capture demographic data such as age, gender, race, or ethnicity
(other than professional role) for the participants in the study
[31].

Phase 1: Needs Assessment

The initial phase of design consisted of a focused discussion
with key content and context experts as well as 3 ethnographic
observation sessions of 2 to 5 hours in length. In the first 2
observations, the lead designer (MM) shadowed attending
physicians in the ED. The third observation period focused on
the processes of registration and the administration of patient
flow through the waiting room and ED. Five 1-hour, individual
interviews were then conducted with an ED drug and alcohol
program counselor, a drug and alcohol treatment coordinator,
an attending physician, and a resident. Interviews captured
additional detail on workflow, roles, and user information needs.

Phase 2: Initial Prototype Design

After identifying potential users and their information needs,
an initial low-fidelity prototype was designed. This prototype
focused on key components necessary for implementing the
ED-initiated BUP protocol, including modules to evaluate
patients for OUD based on the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual
of Mental Disorders, 5th Edition (DSM-5) criteria [32] and for
opioid withdrawal severity using the Clinical Opioid Withdrawal
Scale (COWS); the protocol for initiating BUP in the ED; and
the steps necessary for referring patients for continued
medication for OUD [33,34]. The initial prototype design was
then reviewed by the design team as well as a subject matter
expert on ED management of substance use disorder (GD) and
a targeted sample of attending physicians and administrative
leaders from the department. The goal of the initial prototype
design phase was to establish the components necessary for the
decision support tool and workflow. Questions identified during
the initial review were addressed at this stage of design before
moving forward to iterative design feedback sessions.

Phase 3: Iterative Design Feedback and Prototype
Revision

With the initial static design complete, an interactive prototype
was built in InVision (InVision, New York, NY). This prototype
provided users with an interactive navigation and functionality
experience. Feedback was gathered both through informal
review and through formal user design sessions. Informal review
included the distribution of electronic or print versions of all
screens in the design to both attending and resident physicians.
After verbal consent was obtained, each participant was oriented
to the session format and read a case (Multimedia Appendix 1)
of a patient presenting to the ED for treatment following an

opioid overdose. Users were then given an electronic version
of the CDS and asked to talk through how they would proceed.
If participants did not initially mention the use of the tool, they
were prompted to think about how and when they would expect
to access the tool in this patient encounter. Participants were
asked to think aloud describing how they expected to interact
with the tool and were prompted for their initial reactions to it
[35]. At the conclusion of each session, participants were asked
to provide their overall impression of the tool’s content and
format as well as suggestions to make the tool easier to use and
to increase the likelihood of incorporating it into their practice.
All data were entered in a design log identifying the user need,
recommendation, 
and 
changes 
resulting 
from 
those
recommendations. Recommendations were reviewed by the
design team weekly to determine how they should inform design
revisions. After each iteration, additional feedback sessions
were conducted to gather additional data and further refine
design.

Phase 4: Final Prototype Testing

Final testing of the interactive InVision prototype consisted of
formal user feedback sessions that proceeded until the design
team reached a consensus that the prototype would exceed all
users’needs 80% of the time based on the 80/20 rule [36]. These
sessions followed the format of the formal iterative design
feedback sessions (detailed above in Phase 3). Participants
included both resident and attending physicians with a wide
range of experience with the ED-initiated BUP. Sampling was
deliberate to include both participants from earlier iteration
sessions as well as new participants naïve to the user design.

Results

Phase 1 (Needs Assessments) and Phase 2 (Initial
Prototype Design)

Overall, 4 key topics for design were identified in Phase 1 (Table
1). These initial areas of concentration included appropriate
patient identification, defining potential users of the decision
support tool, avoiding workflow disruptions, CDS steps, and
supporting user understanding of the treatment process.
Attending physicians were expected to be the target system
users, yet early observations and feedback suggested parts of
the decision process might be completed by other members of
the care team, such as medical students, residents, or nurses.
This broadened view of system users, with varying clinical roles
and experience, became an ongoing design challenge driving
decisions of how and when to present support.

Activation of CDS tools was an early feedback topic. The initial
design was an Epic (Epic Systems, Verona, WI) best practice
alert (BPA; Figure 1) triggering a pop-up window when a patient
was identified as potentially having OUD. However, users
disliked the pop-up alert format as it could easily be dismissed
if triggered at the wrong time in the clinical workflow,
potentially causing a missed opportunity to support the
intervention.

A second area of concern for users (throughout all iterations)
was avoiding workflow disruptions; they preferred that the tool
take no longer than 2 to 5 min to use. Similarly, users

JMIR Hum Factors 2019 | vol. 6 | iss. 1 | e13121 | p. 3

highlighted the need for system flexibility to accommodate for
the user’s experience level by allowing for decision support as
needed as well as a direct care pathway selection with less
support for more experienced clinicians.

Table 1. Needs assessment at baseline and ethnographic observation results.

How they were expressed
Needs/topics

Is it possible to have nurses identify patients with OUDa?
Appropriate patient identification

Need to properly explain COWSb to patients, who may understand it as “dope sick”

Can discharge instructions for opioid abuse be a trigger to activate CDSc?

There needs to be advanced search terms to trigger the CDS system—BPAsd should not be the common denom-
inator for analysis

Avoid BPAs. They are intrusive and are rarely acted upon
Avoiding workflow disruptions

Sometimes, physicians do leave electronic health record to access MDCalc or clinical resources websites

Attending physicians usually do not have time for decision support. Better to tailor this toward residents and
nurses

Entire intervention should take 2-5 mins to increase adoption

Integrate COWS into the H & Pe template, with integrated decision support and order sets to determine the need

for BUPf
Streamlining CDS steps

If a user is initiated for OUD diagnosis, then workflow should be streamlined and skip through the diagnostic
criteria for OUD and go straight to treatment decision support

Should patients be given a 4 mg or an 8 mg dosage?
Understanding treatment process

Need to have a short SBIRTg included in CDS to assess patient willingness to begin treatment

This is not the responsibility of our department but rather the substance abuse program

Patients are rarely in the right range of withdrawal to prescribe BUP. Need to have a system to allow them to

return at an appropriate time to the EDh

Some patients may have a preference for suboxone versus methadone

Some providers may have completed the waiver process but may not yet be recognized for it

Should we have patients return to the ED for follow-up post BUP administration, using the 72-hour rule?

aOUD: opioid use disorder.
bCOWS: Clinical Opioid Withdrawal Scale.
cCDS: clinical decision support.
dBPA: best practice alert.
eH & P: history and physical.
fBUP: buprenorphine.
gSBIRT: Screening, Brief Intervention, and Referral to Treatment.
hED: emergency department.

JMIR Hum Factors 2019 | vol. 6 | iss. 1 | e13121 | p. 4

Figure 1. Initial prototype user interface mockup as Epic best practice alert.

Figure 2. Second prototype user interface with optional decision support. DSM: Diagnostic and Statistical Manual for Mental Disorders; OUD: opioid
use disorder.

These needs informed the development of the first prototype
that incorporated existing paper forms into 1 process. This first
iteration presented step-by-step guidance through 6 sequential
screens (Figure 1 includes the first slide): introductory BPA,
DSM checklist for diagnosing OUD, COWS withdrawal
assessment, motivational interview prompts, treatment options,
and a referral form. Each step was delegated to a single screen
to emphasize the discrete steps in a streamlined workflow.

Phase 3 (Iterative Design)

We created 5 major prototypes based on ongoing feedback.
Multimedia Appendix 2 documents feedback received from
each version and how it was incorporated into the subsequent
revision. Across all prototypes, feedback focused on 4 thematic
needs: design changes, navigation, workflow integration, and
treatment process.

Feedback on the initial prototype (described above) focused on
streamlining the prototype. This feedback was used to inform
the second prototype (Figure 2) with the goal of a user-initiated

JMIR Hum Factors 2019 | vol. 6 | iss. 1 | e13121 | p. 5

CDS (instead of a BPA trigger) that could be embedded within
the electronic health record (EHR) and further streamline the
information in the individual steps.

Users found that this second iteration still had too many steps
and too much text. They expressed difficulty in locating the
decision support elements. Specific suggestions included
consolidating steps with more clarity in regard to navigating
the treatment options by including a progress bar.

These suggestions led to a complete redesign of the CDS in
prototype 3 (Figure 3). To improve clarity and consolidate steps,
this version included all treatment options in a single table on
1 screen with a row for each treatment option. User feedback

for this version focused on optimizing the design by changing
fonts, reducing the amount of text, and labeling treatment
options and the decision support tools appropriately.

This feedback informed the design of prototype 4 (Figure 4) in
which treatment pathways were presented in columns (rather
than rows) with 1-click treatment pathway selection at the
bottom of each column. Buttons in the far left column provided
access to modules for OUD diagnosis, withdrawal assessment,
and motivation and assessment of patient readiness for treatment.
Feedback for this version was mostly positive, with minor
navigation concerns about where to start the tool and how to
activate the decision support.

Figure 3. Third prototype user interface single-click care pathways. BUP: buprenorphine; COWS: Clinical Opioid Withdrawal Scale; DSM: Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders; EHR: electronic health record; SL/PO: sublingual/by mouth.

JMIR Hum Factors 2019 | vol. 6 | iss. 1 | e13121 | p. 6

Figure 4. Fourth prototype user interface with care pathways to columns. BUP: buprenorphine; COWS: Clinical Opioid Withdrawal Scale; DSM:
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders; SL/PO: sublingual/by mouth.

Phase 4 (Final Prototype Testing)

The final prototype design goal was an intuitive, simple layout
offering flexibility for direct treatment or user-initiated decision
support. In response to navigation concerns, nonessential text
was removed, and decision support was presented with blue
buttons in the far right column, following the horizontal path
for the DSM, COWS, and motivational interview (Figure 5).
Although feedback was generally positive for the simplified
layout, users suggested that the direct care pathways needed

clear delineation. These concerns were addressed in a final
design change to outline each treatment column. During final
testing, multiple users initially attempted to click in the middle
of the main screen to select a care pathway, so care pathway
activation buttons were changed to green to indicate the start
of treatment. All participants at this stage thought that the system
was easy to learn without training and reasonable for use in
their routine emergency care practice. Figure 6 summarizes the
needs assessment and general workflow of our intervention
based on all phases of formative evaluation.

JMIR Hum Factors 2019 | vol. 6 | iss. 1 | e13121 | p. 7

Figure 5. Final prototype user interface with decision support moved to the right column. BUP: buprenorphine; COWS: Clinical Opioid Withdrawal
Scale; DSM: Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorder; OUD: opioid use disorder.

Figure 6. Final information technology workflow for user-centered clinical decision support intervention based on formative evaluation. ED: emergency
department; EMBED: EMergency department-initiated Buprenorphine for opioid usE Disorder; EHR: electronic health record; OUD: opioid use disorder.

JMIR Hum Factors 2019 | vol. 6 | iss. 1 | e13121 | p. 8

Discussion

Principal Findings

We describe the iterative user-centered design process to
develop a CDS for ED-initiated BUP. Across 4 phases with 5
major revisions and continuous iteration, we identified user
needs for a flexible tool to support members of the care team
who could be either experienced users or those new to
ED-initiated BUP. Interactive feedback sessions identified key
themes throughout the refinement process, including issues of
navigation, overall design recommendations, considerations for
workflow integration, and questions regarding the treatment
protocol. Throughout the design process, how and where to
activate decision support represented a key challenge. Early
prototype versions provided step-by-step guidance through
existing forms and processes. Requests for a more efficient and
flexible tool resulted in an easy-to-read layout with options for
direct clinical care activation or user-activated decision support.
The challenge of simultaneously providing both a direct care
pathway and flexible decision support led to a design with
multiple navigation options. Adoption of key design principles
included minimizing unnecessary text, utilizing a standard form
and colors for buttons, and layout of information in meaningful
pathways. We selected a final design once all user-identified
concerns had been addressed and user feedback indicated the
tool was meeting their anticipated needs.

Strengths and Meaning of the Study

This study supports the use of user-centered design. Through
both formal and informal feedback, we captured user needs and
input that would not be captured in traditional CDS design
processes that lack a needs assessment or formative evaluation.
Expert review of content ensured accuracy, whereas feedback
from users with varying levels of experience highlighted the
need for flexible support. Comments from expert users
emphasized the need for an option to directly launch the desired
care pathway. Although a direct care pathway provides
flexibility for expert clinicians, novice clinicians emphasized
the need for more structured decision support and clarity in the
diagnostic and treatment processes. Specifically, less
experienced users welcomed the detailed criteria for OUD
diagnosis and withdrawal assessment, instructions for
conducting a motivational interview, and clarity regarding BUP
dosing. This contrast in user needs presented a design challenge
that highlights the importance of sampling participants across
the range of user experience levels with the protocol supported
by the CDS. A deliberate sampling of participants from earlier
iteration sessions as well as new participants provided
confirmatory feedback on how recommended changes were
incorporated into the design. Finally, design relied on both user
comments and existing standards for layout and use of specific
design features such as color.

Limitations

As the CDS supports a treatment pathway, the underlying
workflow driving development was identified as clinician
workflow. As such, clinicians were the primary users studied.
Less focus on other members of the care team could represent
a limitation—in particular, if the user population is broadened

in implementation at the site where the design process was
conducted or at other sites using the tool in the future. A number
of users suggested a role for other nonclinician staff in
identifying OUD patients in the ED. In particular, multiple
clinicians mentioned that the COWS could be completed by a
nurse. Therefore, the tool is designed with resources that can
be used by or distributed to other members of the care team (eg,
nurse, medical student, and addiction counselor). In this way,
a nonclinician could still complete the diagnostic or withdrawal
assessment, and the clinician could incorporate this assessment
into their final care pathway selection.

Given the urgency of the opioid epidemic, we made a conscious
decision to take a pragmatic approach to the design and
formative evaluation of our intervention. Developing the CDS
through a pragmatic approach instead of a traditional academic
approach allowed for the rapid inclusion of user feedback in a
shorter time frame [29]. We recognize that limitations to this
approach exist, including the potential for additional data that
could be captured in a deeper, more rigorous data analysis
typical of the academic approach. With a traditional academic
approach, data saturation anticipates capturing 100% of user
feedback themes, whereas this pragmatic approach to
development relies on capturing 80% of critical issues [36].
However, we were willing to accept this trade-off to achieve
the aim of the subsequent trial to accelerate getting this
life-saving treatment into routine emergency care.

This work represents the initial phase of a larger project for the
development, implementation, and testing of the effectiveness
of the CDS developed here. Design and user feedback sessions
were conducted at a single site, though implementation will
include multiple sites and could potentially interface with other
vendors’ EHRs. Having a limited group of users engaged in
design is practical and not unique to our work. However, we
recognize that this introduces the potential for design features
supporting local norms and processes that may not be
generalizable. To mitigate this potential limitation, we sought
feedback throughout the design process from external
collaborators as well as guidance from a subject matter expert
on ED management of substance use disorder.

Comparison With Prior Work

Given the devastating toll of the opioid epidemic, this
user-centered CDS was developed to give clinicians the tools
necessary to engage more people suffering from OUD in
effective treatment at a time when they may be particularly open
to it [8-10]. However, this intervention may be challenging to
disseminate for several reasons: (1) it implements a multistep
practice that is not familiar to clinicians; (2) ED clinicians are
unlikely to see immediate effects of their efforts; (3) the targeted
patient population is often perceived to be difficult to work
with; and (4) the legal status of BUP for OUD is complicated,
requiring a special waiver to prescribe for home use, but no
waiver required if the treatment is administered onsite for no
more than 72 hours [37,38].

Given these challenges to adoption, we perceived an opportunity
to increase the likelihood of success by employing user-centered
design to create the EMBED CDS intervention. Emerging
literature supports this approach [39-42]. For example, Thursky

JMIR Hum Factors 2019 | vol. 6 | iss. 1 | e13121 | p. 9

and Mahemoff have incorporated participatory design methods
to create antibiotic CDS for physicians in intensive care units
[39]. Kilsdonk et al have employed user-centered decision
support to create a tool that improved the speed and accuracy
of clinician’s identification of appropriate screening procedures
for childhood cancer survivors, relative to the use of a paper
guideline [40]. Plaisance et al have used a process similar to
our study to design a CDS for cardiopulmonary resuscitation
in the intensive care unit [42]. We have also previously
employed a user-centered design in developing CDS for patients
with head injury in the ED [41].

Notably, these studies have shown that including user feedback
in the design phase leads to greater effectiveness and efficiency
and, ultimately, to a sense of physician ownership of the CDS,
which increases its immediate uptake and continued use. They
have also highlighted rapid-cycle prototyping with user
engagement throughout a design process [42]. Similar to
previous reports in this area, we found that different groups of
users expressed different needs for the tool. We approached this
challenge through a design approach that balanced the goals,
priorities, and information processing needs of both novice and
expert users. This resulted in a tool that could support multiple
types of users and their preferred workflows. We demonstrate
how a single tool can be designed with the flexibility to meet

multiple users’ work processes and information processing
needs. Designing for the human requires an understanding of
workflows, information needs, priorities, and preferences;
user-centered design captures this through user engagement
across the design and development life cycle [26-28].

Conclusions

This work describes the design and formative evaluation of a
user-centered CDS for ED-initiated BUP. We add to the
expanding literature on the design of user-centered CDS tools
by describing the process and challenges of designing a flexible
tool that supports both novice and expert clinicians in identifying
appropriate patients and appropriate care pathways. Future work
will include summative usability evaluation and pilot testing of
the intervention to further optimize the tool for wide-scale
implementation within existing ED workflows in a large
pragmatic clinical trial across multiple health care systems. The
aim of this subsequent pragmatic trial is to increase adoption
of ED-initiated BUP for people suffering from OUD, thereby
decreasing morbidity and mortality associated with opioid
addiction. Users will also inform pilot implementation in a series
of focus groups. Although early engagement of users supports
the design process, we anticipate continued support of potential
users will be equally important across the project life cycle.