Vol.:(0123456789)

https://doi.org/10.1007/s10209-023-01049-z

LONG PAPER

Toward digital inclusion of older adults in e‑health: a case study 
on support for physical activity

Åsa Revenäs1,2,3   · Lars Ström4   · Antonio Cicchetti5   · Maria Ehn5 

Accepted: 20 September 2023 / Published online: 12 October 2023 
© The Author(s) 2023

Abstract
Older adults are a heterogeneous population for which many e-health innovations are inaccessible. Involving older adults in 
user-centered design (UCD) with a specific focus on inclusive design is important to make e-health more accessible to this 
user group. This case study aimed to explore the feasibility of a new UCD approach aiming to minimize bias in the design 
phase of a digital support for older adults’ physical activity (PA). The study used mixed methods and applied UCD principles 
in a four-iteration design phase followed by an evaluation phase where 11 and 15 older adults participated, respectively. The 
users’ gender, PA level and technology experience (TE) were considered in recruitment, data analysis and prioritization of 
improvement efforts. In the design phase, users with different gender, PA level and TE participated and contributed with 
feedback, which was prioritized in the development. The adaptation included improving readability, simplifying layout 
and features, clarifying structure, and making the digital content more inclusive and relevant. The evaluation showed that 
the users had a positive experience of the prototype and could use it with some help. The study demonstrated that adopt-
ing e-health to assure digital inclusion among older adults must address several aspects. The UCD approach was feasible 
for amending user bias and for confirming that users of both genders and with varied PA- and TE level shaped the design. 
However, evaluation of the method with larger samples is needed. Moreover, further research on methods to involve digitally 
excluded populations in UCD is needed.

Keywords  Equity · Gender · Digital technology · Older adults · User representation

1  Introduction

Insufficient physical activity (PA) is a global health chal-
lenge that is particularly severe in specific groups such 
as older adults [1], a globally growing population [2] for 
which PA has additional health advantages including pre-
vention of falls, fall-related injuries, functional decline, and 

osteoporosis [3]. Since e-health interventions are effective 
for increasing older adults’ PA, it has been recommended 
that e-health interventions should be included in guidelines 
to enhance PA [4]. However, digital exclusion is especially 
acute in older adults [5]. As e-health traditionally is a tech-
nology-driven domain [6], the need to pay specific atten-
tion to health-risk groups during design and development 
of health information technologies has been emphasized [7].
Digital inclusion, broadly defined as different strate-
gies designed to ensure that all people have equal access, 
opportunities, and skills to benefit from digital tech-
nologies and systems [8], is essential in e-health [9]. To 
increase the accessibility of e-health innovations to digi-
tally excluded populations, user-centered design (UCD) 
[10–12], with a specific focus on inclusive design [8] 
needs to be more influential in e-health [13]. Moreover, 
since older adults are a heterogeneous population, the 
problem of underestimating the diversity of target users 
[14] needs to be considered. Notably current digital solu-
tions for older adults’ PA, such as research-based apps 

 *	 Åsa Revenäs 
	

1	
School of Health, Care and Social Welfare, Mälardalen 
University, Box 223, 72123 Västerås, Sweden

2	
Centre for Clinical Research, Region Västmanland – Uppsala 
University, Västerås, Sweden

3	
Orthopaedic clinic Västerås hospital, Region Västmanland, 
Västerås, Sweden

4	
Livanda Internetkliniken AB, Ludvika, Sweden

5	
School of Innovation, Design and Engineering, Mälardalen 
University, Västerås, Sweden

294
	

containing digital exercise programs and motivational 
instruments (ActiveLifeStyle [15], Safe Steps [16], and 
M-OTAGO [17]), as well as apps/web sites adopting 
behavioral change techniques (Delbaere et al. [18] found 
significant reduction in falls and severe fall accidents in 
older adult in a randomized control trial) are supposed to 
be used independently by the users.
Inclusive UCD has been used in development and 
improvement of web-based mental health interventions to 
increase uptake, adherence, and efficiency [19, 20]. How-
ever, a systematic review on UCD and participatory design 
with older people showed that research on new methods that 
are flexible and responsive to the limitations and specific 
characteristics of older adults are needed [21]. Newell et al. 
claim there are challenges in conventional UCD in including 
needs of older and disabled users in the design process [22]. 
They therefore proposed an adaptation called User-Sensi-
tive Inclusive Design focusing on defining the user group, 
building empathic relationships between users and research-
ers, considering the whole person in design, designing for 
dynamic diversity, as well as using critical design- and pro-
fessional theater techniques to address sensitive issues [23].
Finding and recruiting representative users is essential 
in UCD [14, 24] and a challenge in research on digital 
health for older adults where participants, as compared 
to non-participants, on average are slightly younger, 
more educated, and report better memory, higher social 
participation, as higher familiarity with and greater use of 
digital technologies [25]. Hence, methods on how to recruit 
and engage older adults representing the heterogeneous 
user group in UCD are needed. A second gap in current 
knowledge on how to involve older adults in UCD concerns 
how to consider the heterogeneity of the older population 
in UCD: Schlesinger et al. [26] stated that understanding 
users becomes increasingly complicated when considering 
various overlapping attributes of an individual’s identity. 
Moreover, they identified that previous identity-focused 
Human–Computer Interaction research mainly analyzed 
one attribute at a time and introduced intersectionality as 
a framework for engaging with the complexity of users 
[26]. Related to this, Grates et al. identified representative 
clusters of older adults based on life-situations and involved 
cluster representatives in digital platform development [27]. 
However, as Grates et al. [27] describe their approach is 
time consuming and lighter methods for considering the 
complexity of users in UCD are needed. A third gap in 
knowledge on how to include older adults in UCD is related 
to methodologies available for prioritizing user needs of 
this heterogeneous user group in design of user interface. 
In fact, in the current UCD design literature methods for 
prioritizing user needs mainly focus on early design stages 
such as prioritization of requirements [28] and features to 
include in prototypes [29], or in UX road mapping [30].

This case study proposes a new, more inclusive, solution 
to support older adults’ PA, which combines a digital PA-
application used independently and a video application by 
which the older adult gets support from a coach. Video com-
munication was included based on previous research [31]. 
Video coaching may improve adherence and effectiveness 
of digital health interventions for PA [32]. In addition, the 
proposed solution contained step count, which has been sug-
gested to increase PA participation [33, 34]. The proposed 
system was based on user needs [35] and created by adap-
tation of an existing e-health service followed by its inte-
gration into a software system to which industrial partners 
contributed with specific sub-solutions. The objective of this 
case study was to explore the feasibility of a new proposed 
UCD approach aiming to consider the heterogeneity of and 
minimize bias among users of a digital support for older 
adults’ PA. The study addressed three research questions:

(1)	 What kind of improvements were requested by the users 
in adaptation of digital support for PA aiming to make 
it more inclusive for older adults?
(2)	 How may the heterogeneity among older adults be con-
sidered in UCD to prevent bias in the design phase?
(3)	 How effective was the new proposed UCD approach 
in producing a high-fidelity prototype that older adults 
could and wanted to use?

This article is structured as follows: Sect. 2 describes 
the method adopted to drive the research activities while 
Sect. 3 reports the results obtained in the various develop-
ment phases, including requirements collection, implemen-
tation of the solutions, users’ validation, feedback evaluation 
and planning for the next phase. Section 4 discusses both the 
qualities and the critical aspects of the proposed approach 
and Sect. 5 concludes the work.

2  Methods

This study had an explorative, mixed method design to sup-
port an open innovation (OI) development. It was performed 
according to UCD principles [36] and included a four itera-
tions design phase followed by an evaluation phase. The 
study was conducted during April to October 2018. An over-
view of the study design including study outcomes and their 
exploitation in the OI development is presented in Fig. 1.

2.1  Proposed UCD approach

In this case study, we wanted to illustrate how a new 
UCD approach, aiming to finding views and perceptions 
which were common for users with different personal 
characteristics, may be applied in the design and

295

development of a digital support system for older adults’ 
PA. Hence, the approach characterized the users by a 
limited number of main characteristics potentially relevant 
for the users’ experiences of the developed applications. In 
this case, the UCD approach was founded on three main 
characteristics: gender, technology experience (TE) and 
PA level. Previous research describes that sampling in 
UCD can be based on user groups identified by the main 
user characteristics, i.e., the most relevant characteristics 
for the specific product- or system type [14], and personal 
characteristics [37]. The characteristics were selected from 
scientific literature on fall prevention, PA, and technology 
adoption among older adults, as detailed in the following.

Gender was chosen since gender-based differences have 
been demonstrated as related to fall risk [38, 39], fall injury 
[40], fear of falling [41, 42] and have been indicated in 
exercise- and PA habits [43, 44], as well as in preferences 
for PA [45]. The need to integrate a gender perspective in the 

strategies to support older adults’ exercise for fall prevention 
has also been highlighted in a review by Sandlund et al. [46] 
and gender-bias in software is a well-documented problem 
[47].

Technology Experience (TE) was selected since integration 
of values from older adults not engaged in digital technolo-
gies, i.e., non-users [48], has proven to yield beneficial out-
comes in technology adoption but also in terms of learning 
and increased sense of participation [49]. In addition, a case 
study has identified that most of the innovation initiatives 
in a participatory design process of software artifacts came 
from future users (i.e., users with no or limited previous 
experience of similar software) [50].

PA level was selected since the purpose of the digital appli-
cation was to increase older adults’ PA level and thereafter 
maintain healthy activity habits in a behavior change process 

Fig. 1   Overview of the study 
design including the design and 
evaluation phases of an UCD 
process

296
	

[51]. Consequently, users’ activities and goals could differ 
between users with different PA levels.
All three main characteristics had two possible values 
(gender: male/female, PA level: high/low, TE: high/low). 
Eight (= ­23) different combinations of values, i.e., user 
profiles, could be defined (Fig. 2).
The case study aimed to recruit a group of users that 
represented all six values and with a distribution of user 
profiles (Males, Females, High PA level, Low PA level, 
High TE, Low TE) which was as equal as possible. Moreo-
ver, it was estimated that at least eight users would be 
plausible to involve in each test cycle (TC) of the UCD, 
a group size in line with recommendations from previous 
research [52].
In the design phase, the users contributed with individual 
feedback and usability data on high-fidelity prototype ver-
sions in four iterations. A user’s feedback was coded with 
his/her user profile (for example, “Males, Low PA, Low 
TE” indicated by a blue asterisk in Fig. 2). In the thematic 
analysis, feedback from all users was clustered according 
to similarity. When a cluster was identified, the codes of all 
included feedback (i.e., views) were summarized. The sum-
marized code of a cluster was intended to describe the link 
between users’ characteristics and corresponding feedback. 
Our underlying idea was that summarized codes including 
higher numbers of values reflected that diverse groups from 
at least two user profiles had provided the same feedback. 
More specifically, a summarized code with three values (of 
the six possible) corresponded to users from a single user 
profile (e.g., “Females, High PA, High TE” indicated by a 
black asterisk in Fig. 2), while a summarized code includ-
ing four values corresponded to users from two user pro-
files which only differed in values of one main characteristic 
(e.g., “Females, High PA, High TE” and “Females, Low PA, 
High TE,” indicated by black and red asterisks, respectively, 
in Fig. 2). Accordingly, summarized codes with five and 
six values corresponded to users from combinations of user 
profiles that differed in values on two and three main char-
acteristics, respectively. For example, a combination of the 
two user profiles “Males, Low PA, High TE” and “Females, 
High PA, High TE” (both indicated by green asterisks in 

Fig. 2) resulted in a summarized code representing five pos-
sible values.

2.2  Co‑production team and team member roles

The researchers (ME, ÅR, AC) represented academia and 
were responsible for the research study’s planning and exe-
cution. One of them (ME) was also the leader of a larger pro-
ject which included the current case study. The project was a 
collaboration between the university, one municipality and 
one regional health care provider, as well as four companies. 
Developers engaged in this case study were representatives 
of two companies. The companies had been identified by the 
researchers based on their existing products and recruited 
to the project based on their interest to contribute to the 
development. After each test cycle, the researchers presented 
results from the user tests to the company representatives 
and joint discussions concluded how prioritized suggested 
improvements could be implemented. Thereafter, the devel-
opers were responsible for developing their prototype based 
on the users’ feedback and the prioritization. The municipal-
ity and region representatives contributed with knowledge 
on the system’s potential context of use.

2.3  Participants

Users were selected according to the rationale presented 
above and the published protocol in Revenäs et al. [53]. In 
total, 11 older adults participated in the design phase, which 
included four iterations where 8–10 participants used the 
applications during observation. Fifteen older adults partici-
pated in the usability evaluation phase, where eight of these 
also had participated in the design phase (Table 1).
Inclusion criteria were age 65 years or older and living 
independently. Exclusion criteria were sight or hearing 
impairment that could not be compensated by aids and cog-
nitive impairments considered to affect the ability to provide 
feedback. The older adults were recruited through contact 
persons in primary care, municipality, a fitness organization 
and by direct contact with the researchers after having heard 
about the project. The contact persons informed about the 

Fig. 2   Definition of eight pos-
sible user profiles by three main 
dichotomized characteristics 
(Physical Activity (PA) Level, 
Technology Experience (TE), 
and gender). The asterisks 
indicate different user profiles 
referred to in the text

297

study and for those who were interested they asked for con-
sent to share their contact information with the researchers. 
The researchers then telephoned the potential participants 
to inform about the study and to obtain oral consent. Writ-
ten information (including information about the aim, what 
was needed from the participants in terms of activities and 
time, voluntariness, safe data storage) was sent out to those 
who consented to participate. The study participants did not 
get any compensation for participating in the study. Written 
informed consent was collected from all users prior to the 
tests.
The gender distribution was almost equal in the user 
groups of all test cycles (TCs) in the design phase and in the 
evaluation phase (Table 1). Initially, the user group had a 
higher proportion of users with high PA level, but the balance 
was improved after TC2. The representation of users with 

Table 1   Users in the case study’s design- and evaluation phases pre-
sented in numbers (n) of users per gender, physical activity (PA) level 
and technology experience (TE)

Study phase
Design
Evaluation

Test 
cycle 1
Test 
cycle 2
Test 
cycle 3
Test 
cycle 4

Total, n
8
10
8
9
15
Men/women, n
5/3
6/4
5/3
5/4
7/8
Users with high PA 
level/users with 
low PA level, n

6/2
7/3
4/4
5/4
8/7

Users with high TE 
/users with low 
TE, n

7/1
8/2
6/2
8/1
15/0

Fig. 3   Screen shot of the home-
page’s prototype version of the 
motivation support used in the 
evaluation (the language used in 
the application is Swedish)

298
	

self-rated low TE was low in all TCs. In the evaluation, it 
was desired that users had experience of using a smart phone. 
Here, 7 of the 15 users had not participated in the design 
phase (i.e., inexperienced users) and 8 had participated (i.e., 
experienced users) in 2–4 of the previous TCs.

2.4  The high‑fidelity prototypes

Prototypes of two digital applications (“motivation support” 
and “social support”) were used on a tablet. The former 
aimed to support older adults to increase PA in daily life 
and to perform regular PA (a screenshot is shown in Fig. 3). 
It was based on a web-based self-help program for cognitive 
behavioral therapy developed for other target groups [54]. 
The social support aimed to enhance coaches’ work in sup-
porting older adults changing PA behavior. The application 
included a calendar (commercialized product [55]) and a 
video-communication feature, integrated and developed in 
the OI process. Both prototypes represented the appearance 
and interaction of the final products, i.e., they were high-
fidelity prototypes [56], which were gradually improved 
and developed based on feedback and identified in the four 
iterations.

2.5  Procedures

All user tests were performed in a meeting room in a munici-
pal social meeting point for older adults. They were per-
formed individually under supervision of a researcher who 
was also a physiotherapist.

2.5.1  Design phase

The users completed a questionnaire [53] on background 
information in the beginning of their first test session. There-
after, the test was performed during 30–45 min following 
the same procedure:

1)	 Users were informed about improvements made in the 
prototypes after the previous TC;
2)	 Program features to be used were briefly demonstrated 
and the pre-defined tasks introduced;
3)	 Users performed tasks according to a think-aloud meth-
odology [57]. The researcher asked questions to facili-
tate for the users to verbalize thoughts and experiences;
4)	 Users were interviewed about their experiences.

Each TC included 2–5 tasks, in particular: TC 1—
registering as a user and reading about PA in the motivation 
support; TC 2—setting activity goals in the motivation 
support; scheduling activities in calendar and setting activity 
reminders in the social support; TC 3—reading improved 
texts and using improved features (goal setting, PA planning 

and self-evaluation) in the motivation support; TC 4—
reviewing the welcome page and using improved features 
(goal setting, PA planning, support texts) in the motivation 
support; making video calls in the social support.

2.5.2  Evaluation phase

The evaluation was performed according to the following 
procedure:

1)	 Users were asked to perform pre-defined tasks in a list, 
as many as possible in 30 min. The evaluation included 
seven tasks which had been conceived by considering 
their relevance for the purpose of the applications and 
were ordered according to their estimated level of dif-
ficulty. The tasks following were included: level 1—log-
ging in and retrieving specific information in the motiva-
tion support (2 tasks); level 2—setting goals, planning 
PA, and evaluating PA in the motivation support (3 
tasks); and level 3—retrieving PA results in the motiva-
tion support and making video calls in the social support 
(2 tasks);
2)	 The researcher observed and noted down which tasks the 
user completed, if support was requested, and the kind 
of support provided;
3)	 Users completed the User Experience Questionnaire 
(UEQ) [58] and an interview.

2.6  Data collection

2.6.1  Questionnaire on users’ background characteristics

A study-specific questionnaire [53] collected data on 
users’ demographics, PA, and TE levels.

2.6.2  Observation protocols

The researchers documented observations in study-specific 
protocols. In the design phase, observations focused on what 
the users did and said when using the prototypes; notably, 
the experienced difficulties, errors, or lacking features. In 
the evaluation, the observations focused on the number of 
tasks completed within the test time (30 min) as well as the 
number and type of support requested per task.

2.6.3  Interviews including rating questions

In the design phase, the users were interviewed about their 
experience of performing the tasks and answered 1–3 rating 
questions on a 100 mm visual analog scale. In the evalua-
tion, the researcher asked open questions related to the user’s 
experience with the program; the overall impression, if it

299

was perceived as motivating, supportive, valuable, useful 
and if anything was missing in the program. The answers 
were noted down by the researcher. The test sessions in the 
design- and evaluation phases were audio recorded to allow 
for validation of written documentation.

2.6.4  User experience questionnaire (UEQ)

In the evaluation, user experience was measured using the 
validated questionnaire UEQ [58]. UEQ contains six scales, 
all including four or six items formed as semantic differen-
tials (i.e., each item is represented by two terms with oppo-
site meanings) on a scale from –3 to 3. UEQ enables com-
paring products, identifying deficiencies, evaluating users’ 
overall experience of products and benchmarking products 
against a data set from more than 450 evaluations [59]. The 
questionnaire is available in 30 languages [60], including 
Swedish, which is the native language of the users in this 
study.

2.7  Data analysis

Data analysis was performed by the researchers in both study 
phases. In the design phase, clinically active PTs also par-
ticipated in the thematic analysis [61] of observations and 
interviews in most of the TCs and representatives from the 
companies that owned the digital applications participated 
in discussions on how to realize prioritized improvements 
after each TC.

2.7.1  Questionnaire on users’ background characteristics

Background data collected in questionnaires on the users’ 
demographics, PA, and TE levels, were analyzed using 
descriptive statistics. In the UCD, a user’s feedback was 
coded with his/her user profile based on gender (man, M/ 
woman, W), PA level (High PA level, HA/ Low PA level, 
LA) and TE (High TE, HT/ Low TE, LT). These codes were 
used in the thematic analysis of user feedback according to 
Revenäs et al. [53]. In the evaluation, a user’s quantitative 
results and qualitative feedback was coded with his/her gen-
der (M/W), PA level (HA/LA) and number of test iterations 
that he/she had participated in (0–4) in the design phase.

2.7.2  Observation protocols and interviews

In the design phase, the researcher’s notes on user feedback 
from observation protocols and interviews were processed 
and analyzed according to Revenäs et al. [53]. The analy-
sis followed a thematic approach [61] and identified both 
the users’ overall experiences as well as deficiencies in 
the applications. Here, the codes of all users in a cluster of 
feedback were summarized and the summarized code was 

analyzed based on which values of the main characteristics 
represented (for detailed description see Sect. 2.1).
In the evaluation, quantitative data from observation 
protocols on user performance was analyzed per task and 
by descriptive statistics. The types of support that the users 
requested for each task were analyzed qualitatively to iden-
tify deficiencies in the applications: support types were 
categorized according to similarities in underlying reasons. 
Also in this analysis, the codes of all users in a cluster of 
feedback were summarized and the summarized code was 
analyzed based on which values of the main characteris-
tics that were represented. The notes on users’ answers to 
the interviews were analyzed by following principles of a 
qualitative thematic analysis [61]. The answers were cat-
egorized according to similarities in experiences or deficien-
cies related to the involved applications. Identified themes 
were labeled to reflect users’ views and coded as described 
above. The themes were further categorized according to 
the UEQ-scales [58] and two additional categories (namely, 
Suggestions of new/modified functionality and Potential). 
The qualitative data provided an additional description of the 
users’ experiences related to the ratings on the UEQ-scales.

2.7.3  User experience questionnaire (UEQ)

In the evaluation, UEQ data were analyzed in the corre-
sponding analysis Excel-tool [62]. As the sample in this 
study was limited, the tool was used to estimate the user 
experience of the prototype. Therefore, the Excel-tool was 
used to calculate means for each UEQ-scale, as well as com-
pare means of all items within a scale with each other to ena-
ble comparison of the results with a benchmark dataset from 
452 UEQ studies with 20,190 users [62]. The UEQ analysis 
included data from 13 of the 15 users since data from two 
users was omitted due to identified score inconsistencies.

2.8  Prioritization of user feedback in OI 
development

In the design phase, improvements to amend the elicited 
deficiencies were prioritized based on criteria. The fol-
lowing three criteria had been defined: (1) The number 
(3–6) of values of the user characteristics in the sum-
marized code; (2) Whether the users had rated the defi-
ciency as important; and (3) Whether the researchers 
and developer considered that the deficiency had a high 
impact on the prototypes’ overall aim and usability [53]. 
The second criterion was based on the users’ scores on a 
100 mm rating scale which were measured and dichoto-
mized as “important” (scores > 50 mm) or “not impor-
tant” (scores < 50 mm). The researchers decided the cut-
off score.

300
	

2.9  Quantification of user feedback in the design 
phase

Contributions (i.e., feedback clusters) from each TC were 
categorized as “overall experiences” or “improvements.” 
“Improvements” were priority-categorized as “immedi-
ate,” “later” or “not prioritized.” Numbers of contributions 
per category and per TC were summarized. In particular, 
the numbers of contributions that came from both men and 
women, from only women and from only men, respectively, 
were counted. The same calculations were performed in rela-
tion to the users’ PA level (low PA level (LA) + high PA 
level (HL), LA only, HA only) and TE (high TE (HT) + low 
TE (LE), HT only, LT only). The method had a similar aim 
as the analysis of user group contributions performed in a 
case study by Roccetti et al. [50] but was less sophisticated 
since no statistical methods was included.

3  Results

3.1   Qualitative user feedback in design phase

This section presents results to address the first research 
question “What kind of improvements were requested by 
older adults in adaptation of a digital support for PA aiming 
to make it more inclusive for older adults?”.
Overall, the design phase focused on making the digital 
support easier to understand and use. For example, navi-
gation was facilitated, readability and layout were clarified 
and features for complex tasks (goal setting, planning and 
evaluation) were simplified. Moreover, the text content was 
expanded and processed according to the users’ needs to 
make the examples of activities more relevant as well as the 
texts more precise and meaningful. A more detailed pres-
entation of the results from the user tests per TC and their 
exploitation in the innovation development is provided next.
In TC1, the users registered themselves as users of the 
motivation support, logged in and retrieved information 
on PA. A group of users whose summarized profiles con-
taining all six possible values, i.e., Low PA, High PA, Low 
TE, High TE, Men, Women) expressed that the motivation 
support was thought-provoking, seemed useful for motivat-
ing PA, but also seemed to require a support from another 
person during an initial learning period (Table 2). The user 
tests identified several needed improvements (Table 2). The 
prioritization focused on improving the application’s fea-
sibility for the users, for example, by improving the layout 
and increasing the font size. Also, minor alterations and 
additions of texts and pictures that could positively influ-
ence the user experience were prioritized. The prioritization 
included feedback that came from a narrower range of users. 
For example, touch pens were purchased since men found it 

difficult to click on targets on the touch screen that were too 
small for their fingers. Things had been identified in TC1 
but not prioritized for immediate action included both func-
tions that were planned to be developed in later iterations 
(reminders, diary) or that were considered non-essential 
for the application’s feasibility (sound files of text content, 
option to hide to login letters). All had been expressed by 
users representing only single user profiles (summarized 
profiles containing three values).
In TC2, the users logged into the motivation support 
where they set activity goals. Thereafter, they jumped to 
the social support to schedule specific activities and set up 
reminders in calendar. A group of users whose summarized 
profile contained all six possible values expressed positive 
views on the motivation support and the video application 
and described the motivation support as thought-provoking 
(Table 3). The users expressed different views on whether 
the motivation support was easy or difficult to navigate in 
and use. They also had different opinions about whether the 
concept of self-rewards after performed PA (described in 
the motivation support) seemed relevant or not. It was also 
stated that the test situation was stressful and that learn-
ing how to use the tablet and the applications took some 
time. Making the goal setting and PA planning smoother for 
the users gained the highest priority after TC2. The overall 
result indicated that jumping between the two applications 
for goal setting and planning procedures caused confusion 
and problems. Consequently, researchers and developers 
agreed that the two applications needed to be better inte-
grated. Therefore, a calendar feature was included in the 
motivation support thus enabling all necessary steps in goal 
setting and planning to be performed in the same applica-
tion. Moreover, textual descriptions in the motivation sup-
port were revised and the goal setting feature was refined. 
Some issues identified in TC2 were not prioritized for 
action, for example problems impossible to address in the 
OI development (e.g., dazzling screen) and functions in the 
abandoned calendar. Some suggested functions were also 
scheduled for later: for example, a group of users whose 
summarized profile contained all six possible values had 
asked for rewards after performed PA as well as confirma-
tions on goal-achievement. Also, users representing single 
user profiles had asked for statistics on performed training, 
overviews of planned activities, and exercise videos.
In TC3, the users logged into the motivation support, read 
the improved textual descriptions, and used the improved 
features for goal setting, PA planning and self-evaluation. 
A group of users whose summarized profile contained all 
six possible values described the applications as easy to 
use, motivating for PA and having good help texts (Table 4). 
Most of the identified deficiencies were prioritized for 
immediate action (Table 4), for example, making the features 
for goal setting, PA planning and self-evaluation clearer and

301

Table 2   User feedback on prototype version 0 (motivation support) in test cycle (TC)1

User profiles

User profiles: Men (M), Women (W), Low physical activity level (LA), High physical activity level (HA), high technology experience (HT), 
Low technology experience (LT)

X = feedback from users with that characteristic

Green cells = feedback on needed improvements that were implemented before the next TC

Yellow cells = feedback implemented in later TCs

Red cells = feedback not implemented

Blue cells = feedback that describe general experiences which could not be translated to specific needed improvements

302
	

Table 3   User feedback 
on prototype versions 1 
(motivation- and social support) 
in test cycle (TC) 2

User profile

303

less complex. Also, textual descriptions were improved by 
revising unclear concepts and adding more relevant exam-
ples on PAs. Further, a set of technical errors (bugs) discov-
ered during the tests were fixed. Things not implemented 
after TC3 included a suggested feature to evaluate effects 
of PA as well as functions to make help texts optional, add-
ing exact time for planned activities and spell check of text 
insertions. These features were not considered to be essential 
for the application’s feasibility and were expressed by users 
representing single user profiles.
In TC4, the users logged into the motivation support 
application, reviewed the welcome page and the support 
texts as well as used the improved features for goal setting 
and PA planning. Thereafter, they were asked to enter the 
social support application and make a video call with a 
researcher in another room. A group of users whose summa-
rized profile contained all six possible values described that 
the digital support was overall easy to manage and under-
stand (Table 5). It was also stated that the step count was not 
wanted by some users and excluded users that cannot walk. 
Except for two functions (exercise training videos and chat 
functions) that were suggested by users representing single 
user profiles, all identified improvements were implemented 
immediately. Those aimed to make the motivation support 
application easier to understand and use. Notably, unclear 
words still needed to be changed or explained by concrete 
examples. Moreover, the goal setting feature was further 
refined based on user feedback.

3.2  Quantification of user feedback in the design 
phase

This section presents results to address the second research 
question, i.e., “How may the heterogeneity among older 
adults be considered in UCD to prevent bias in the design 
phase?” In this case study, the user groups were small, 
and this analysis was performed to illustrate how the UCD 
approach may be evaluated in larger samples.
Each TC in the design phase yielded 20–40 feedback 
clusters, hereafter called contributions (Fig. 4).
Numbers of contributions per TC were analyzed based 
on which users had expressed them. The analysis considered 
one main characteristic at a time to count the number of 
contributions that had been expressed by both variants of a 

characteristics (e.g., both men and women), as well as only 
by the two variants (e.g., only by men, and only by women, 
respectively) (Fig. 5).
Gender (Fig. 5a): Contributions expressed by both men 
and women outnumbered contributions expressed only by 
men and only by women, respectively (Fig. 5a). However, 
in TC 3 and 4, the number of contributions expressed by 
both men and women was only slightly higher than the 
amount expressed by men only. The number of contribu-
tions expressed by only women was lower than the amount 
expressed by only men. In the user groups of all TCs, num-
bers of females and men had been almost equal.
PA level (Fig.  5b): In TC1 and TC2, contributions 
expressed by both users with high and low PA level outnum-
bered contributions expressed by only users with high PA 
level, as well as by only users with low PA level (Fig. 5b). 
Here, the number of users with a low PA level was slightly 
lower compared to the number of users with a high PA level. 
However, in TC3 and TC4, where numbers of the users with 
high and low PA level were almost equal, contributions 
expressed only users by with high PA level outnumbered 
contributions expressed both high and low PA level users, 
as well as by only users with low PA level.
TE (Fig. 5c): Considering TE, which is difficult since only 
one or two users in each TC had low TE, the analysis indi-
cated that contributions expressed only by users with high 
TE outnumbered contributions expressed by users with both 
high and low TE in all TCs. The number of contributions 
expressed only by users with low TE was low in all TCs.
Although some of these received contributions 
described the users’ overall experience, most contributions 
identified needed or suggested improvements. Most of the 
improvements were prioritized immediately (Fig. 4). Three 
prioritization criteria were set up before TC1 (Methods 
section). However, the criteria were only used as support in 
the prioritization for downgrading suggested improvements. 
Suggested improvements were downgraded if they suggested 
additional features rather than improving excising once (e.g., 
features for evaluating effects of performed PA and for 
chatting with the coach) or required larger efforts perceived 
not feasible in the project time (e.g., sound files and films 
presenting information and training exercises). Downgrading 
was decided in joint discussions between the researchers 
and the company representatives. Also, a few suggested 

Table 3   (continued)
User profiles: Men (M), Women (W), Low physical activity level (LA), High physical activity level (HA), 
high technology experience (HT), Low technology experience (LT) 

X = feedback from users with that characteristic

Green cells = feedback on needed improvements that were implemented before the next TC

Yellow cells = feedback implemented in later TCs

Red cells = feedback not implemented

Blue cells = feedback that describe general experiences which could not be translated to specific needed 
improvements

304
	

Table 4   User feedback on prototype version 2 (motivation support) in test cycle (TC) 3

User profile

User profiles: Men (M), Women (W), Low physical activity level (LA), High physical activity level (HA), High technology experience (HT), 
Low technology experience (LT)

305

improvements related to a calendar feature removed 
after TC2 were consequently not prioritized. Suggested 
improvements that were identified in TCs 1–3 but prioritized 
for later related to the features for planning and evaluating 
PA, which indeed were planned to be developed in future 
iterations. Moreover, improvements which were a bit out of 
scope yet potentially valuable for the users were prioritized 
for future developments. In fact, as their summarized codes 
contained only 3 values, they were only suggested by users 
from single user profiles. Thus, the codes indicated that the 
suggestions were not expressed by a broad group of users 
based on the three main characteristics.

3.3  Evaluation of prototypes developed 
in the design phase

This section presents results to address the third research 
question, i.e., “How effective was the used UCD approach 
in producing a high-fidelity prototype that older adults could 
and wanted to use?”.

3.3.1  Task performance

All users, both inexperienced (had not participated in the 
design phase) and experienced (had participated in the 
design phase), were able to log in to the motivation support 
and retrieve information (Supplementary file 1, Table 1: 
Tasks 1a–b). Many users asked for support from the 
researcher. All users initiated the block of tasks that included 
setting PA goals, planning PA, and evaluating performed 
PA (Supplementary file 1, Table 1: Tasks 2a–c) but only a 
subset of them completed all three tasks. Both inexperienced 
and experienced users were able to accomplish the 
tasks mentioned, help was needed in all cases. Fewer 
inexperienced users than experienced ones were able to 
initiate the tasks focusing on reviewing PA results as well 
as entering to the social support application and making a 
video call (Supplementary file 1, Table 1: Tasks 3a–b). All 
participants that used the video application were able to use 
it, though help was needed in all cases. No conclusions on 
gender-related differences in task performance should be 
drawn from the test results. Moreover, no clear differences 
between genders or users with previous experience of the 
applications could be identified in the type of help that 
the users needed (Supplementary file 1, Table 2). On the 

contrary, both inexperienced and experienced users of 
both genders needed help to understand how to navigate 
between specific pages and how to use specific features 
(Supplementary file 1, Table 2).

3.3.2  User experience

The users’ experience of the prototypes was measured by the 
UEQ and explored by interviews.
Based on the users’ (n = 13) mean scores on UEQ-scales 
(Fig. 6) and a comparison with the benchmark data set 
(Fig. 6), the digital support prototype delivered a positive 
user experience.
The categorization of users’ experiences with the digital 
applications based on the interviews is presented in detail 
in Supplementary file 1, Table 3. A group of users repre-
senting men, women, inexperienced, and experienced users 
stated that the applications were too cumbersome to use: 
“Cost more energy than they give” and “Some technology 
experience and a certain educational level is needed to use 
the applications.” It was also described that the applications 
were not accessible and available for all older adults: for 
example, persons with dyslexia and walking impairments. 
A group of users representing men, women, inexperienced, 
and experienced users also described the applications as fun, 
interest-raising, helpful for establishing PA routines, as well 
as motivating inactive persons to PA. Features for making 
one’s own planning and video coaching were described as 
motivating. The analysis suggested that the motivation sup-
port application needed enhanced intuitiveness and clarity, 
simplified navigation, and structure, strengthened motiva-
tional feedback and praise, as well as features to provide 
clearer feedback on the users’ personal development.

4  Discussion

This article reports results of a case study on how the hetero-
geneity of the older population can be considered in proto-
type development of digital support for PA in UCD. In this 
study, the users’ gender, PA level and TE were considered in 
the recruitment, data analysis and prioritization of 
improvement effort to minimize bias in the design and 
evaluation phase by coding feedback from users according 
to their user profile (i.e., gender, PA level and TE). This 

X = feedback from users with that characteristic

Green cells = feedback on needed improvements that were implemented before the next TC

Yellow cells = feedback implemented in later TCs

Red cells = feedback not implemented

Blue cells = feedback that describe general experiences which could not be translated to specific needed improvements

Table 4   (continued)

306
	

Table 5   User feedback on prototype versions 3 (motivation- and social support) in test cycle (TC) 4

Characteristics represented 

User profiles: Men (M), Women (W), Low physical activity level (LA), High physical activity level (HA), High technology experience (HT), 
Low technology experience (LT)

X = feedback from users with that characteristic

Green cells = feedback on needed improvements that were implemented before the next TC

Red cells = feedback not implemented

Blue cells = feedback that describe general experiences which could not be translated to specific needed improvements

307

section discusses the main study results in relation to 
research literature and is structured according to the case 
study’s three research questions.
In this case study, the suggested adaptations of the 
motivation support included improving the readability 
(e.g., text fonts, contrasts), simplifying the layout, 

clarifying structure and page content, as well as making 
the features easier to use. These suggestions are well 
in line with results from other research on barriers and 
facilitators to the use of e-health by older adults [63] and 
on research on usability as experienced by older adults 
[64]. Moreover, the users in this case study needed 
help in using the features for planning, goal setting, 
and evaluation of PA, both in the design and evaluation 
phases. These features required by the users to accomplish 
several successive steps and users asked for confirmation 
about the completion of each step. This might both reflect 
that the tasks were complex and that the users needed 
more flexible interfaces, a need also identified by [64]. 
Moreover, the users suggested modification of the content 
in the motivation support (e.g., texts, pictures, examples 
in features) to make it more inclusive and relevant for the 
older adults which are in line with the above-mentioned 
studies [63, 64]. The results confirm that there is a need to 
pay attention to older adults’ specific needs [7] to ensure 
e-health interventions to enhance PA are accessible and 
effective for older adults.

Fig. 4   Number of contributions received per test cycle (TC) catego-
rized as “overall experiences” and “improvements,” further catego-
rized as “immediate,” “later” or “not prioritized”

Fig. 5   Number of contributions per test cycle (TC) received: a Both 
Men (M) and Women (W), only Men, and only Women, respectively; 
b Users with both Low and High physical activity (PA) level, only 
users with Low PA (LA) level, and only users with High PA (HA) 

level, respectively; c Users with both Low and High technology expe-
rience (TE), only users with Low TE (LT), and only users with High 
TE (HT), respectively

Fig. 6   Benchmarking of the study’s user experience questionnaire 
(UEQ) data against the UEQ benchmark dataset. For each of the six 
UEQ-scales, the colored bar indicates UEQ score intervals corre-

sponding to excellent, good, above average, below average and bad 
user experience. The mean UEQ score from the study is plotted in 
each bar

308
	

This study recruited a group of users with almost equal 
distributions of gender and PA level, both for the design- 
and evaluation phases. However, it was difficult to recruit 
users with low TE in the UCD, a challenge also described 
previously [25]. Nevertheless, the approach used to code 
each user by gender, PA level and TE, made the research-
ers aware of this bias and resulted in efforts to recruit users 
with low TE after TC1. The number of users involved in the 
design iterations was in line with previous recommendations 
[52, 65]. Finding and recruiting less experienced users of 
e-health in the design and development of e-health interven-
tions is a challenge, though essential to understand these 
users’ needs and enable digital inclusion of these groups.
The difficulty in engaging users with low TE in the design 
phase was also reflected in the results: While large amount 
of user feedback was obtained in the test sessions, a rela-
tively small amount of feedback was conveyed only by users 
with low TE. The tests were performed in a familiar place (a 
meeting room at the municipality social meeting point for 
older adults) with an individual test approach which made it 
possible for the user to perform the tests at own pace where 
the researchers could guide and answer questions when 
needed. However, users with low TE described that the test 
situation could be rather stressful. This clearly indicates that 
there is a need to further adopt UCD to user groups with 
specific needs, for example user with low TE, something 
addressed by the User-Sensitive Inclusive Design approach 
[23]. Although concurrent think-aloud has been shown to 
outperform both the retrospective and the hybrid methods 
in facilitating successful usability testing [66], co-discovery 
has proven to be the more effective among frail older adults 
[67]. The low abundance of user feedback unique for users 
with low TE can also reflect that few users with low TE 
participated in the UCD.
In this case study we propose a novel strategy to 
prioritize design ideas and modifications of already 
existing e-health applications. The prioritization was 
guided by relevance for the systems’ aim, size of needed 
effort, and impact for users representing as many of the 
user profiles as possible. This is all in line with previous 
research [14, 28, 30]. Most of the improvements identified 
in the design phase were implemented immediately (prior 
to the next TC). The defined criteria for prioritizing 
needed improvements, were used as guidance in the OI 
development which focused on increasing usability and 
inclusiveness for users representing as many of the user 
profiles as possible. Thereby, new functions considered 
a bit out of the system’s scope were not prioritized for 
action in the project but were documented for future 
development. The same thing applied to suggested 
improvements that required larger efforts from the 
development team and that were not crucial for usability 
or inclusiveness. The approach used by Rothgangel et al., 

(2017) [28] to select features for a digital application, to 
include available evidence from research literature in the 
prioritization, was not used as a direct criterion in the 
design phase of this case study. Instead, all the features 
of the motivation support prototype were evidence-based 
and the TCs focused on adapting them to the needs of the 
users.
The qualitative and quantitative results from the evalu-
ation indicated that the design iterations had been fruitful 
but not entirely sufficient for developing a prototype that 
met the needs of older adults. The four iterations identified 
and implemented improvements to increase the prototype’s 
usability and user experience. Nevertheless, the evalua-
tion showed that the participants could use the support but 
needed help. The UEQ indicated that the digital support was 
overall positively experienced by the participants. Although 
this result should be interpreted with caution due to the small 
sample. The users expressed that they would like to get more 
positive feedback and praise from the applications. These 
suggestions are relevant since digital behavioral change 
interventions to promote PA in older adults often include 
feedback on behavior as a supporting technique [68]. The 
interviews also identified that further development was 
needed to make the support more intuitive, motivating, and 
easy to use. These needed improvements are in accordance 
with identified facilitators to older adults’ use of e-health 
[63]. The users also pointed out that the support was inac-
cessible for users with visual impairment, dyslexia, and gait 
problems. This result is in line with previous research stating 
the complexity of understanding the various attributes of an 
individual that should be considered in UCD [26].
One main strength of this study is the group of recruited 
participants that, both in the design- and evaluation phases, 
had a representation of users of both genders and of users 
with self-rated high and low PA level. Moreover, all TCs 
of the design phase involved both users with high and low 
self-rated TE and had group sizes well in line with previous 
recommendations [52, 65]. Another strength is the combina-
tion of complementary methods used in the design- and the 
evaluation phases, which increased the comprehensibility 
of the users’ views. Also, the four iterations in the design 
phase which enabled repeated testing of stepwise developed 
features proved to be valuable both for the development and 
for the understanding of users’ needs [24]. The combination 
of usability testing and UX in the evaluation is another study 
strength: although both aspects are relevant [69] and the 
focus on UX has increased in product design, it is common 
that user evaluations still focus only on usability testing. On 
the contrary, this study used a validated tool to measure UX, 
which has been recognized to methodologically improve the 
UX field [70]. Finally, the multidisciplinary team involved 
created the preconditions for cross-fertilization thanks to

309

complementary roles, competences, and responsibilities 
throughout the study.
A weakness of this study is the small user group size in 
the evaluation, which limited the possibilities to draw any 
firm conclusions from the results, particularly regarding 
UEQ. With a bigger sample size statistical analysis of the 
impact of the users’ personal characteristic, as for example 
performed in Ayalon and Toch [37] could have provided 
more solid evidence of the relevance of the three selected 
user characteristics. However, the approach is reported 
in this article with the aim of illustrating how it can be 
applied in a specific user group. Moreover, although evalu-
ation participants had varied amount of previous experi-
ence with the applications, they all had high self-rated 
TE; this could constitute a bias in the sample and hence 
in the corresponding results. Furthermore, there were 
more contributions from men and from participants with 
high PA level and high TE, which may indicate a risk that 
the result reflects this group more specifically. Another 
potential discussion point is whether the single-occasion 
evaluation procedure in lab environment could represent 
a study weakness. In fact, tests in real environments can 
enable more authentic user experience [71] and may be 
particularly important when it comes to mobile devices 
[72]. Nonetheless, laboratory tests were considered appro-
priate in this case to quickly iterate on designs and address 
usability issues before real-life testing, thus avoiding 
releasing a poorly designed product [71].
This case study on digital support for PA has provided 
further insights into the design of e-health for the hetero-
geneous group of older adults, both related to practice and 
to research:

•	 Recruiting users with low TE is important yet chal-
lenging. Therefore, efforts should be made to recruit 
users with low TE both in UCD practice as well as in 
research on digital technology. Further research on best 
practice for performing tests with users with low TE is 
also recommended to strengthen their impact in UCD 
and thereby increase their digital inclusiveness. This rec-
ommendation is also relevant for other user groups with 
functional impairments, visual impairments or dyslexia;
•	 To gain a deepened understanding of the users’ needs 
in UCD, repeated iterations are needed. This case study 
illustrated that it is not advisable to decide in advance 
how many iterations to perform since that may result in 
prototypes insufficiently inclusive for the users. Instead, 
deciding the number of iterations during the process is 
recommended;
•	 Combining data collection methods in prototyping and 
evaluation is valuable for collecting diverse types of 
user feedback and therefore recommended. In this case 
study, the users’ immediate reactions and thoughts were 

collected by think-aloud methodology while interview 
questions after the tests gave them time to reflect;
•	 Monitoring specific user characteristics in UCD is help-
ful for identifying potential biases in group composition 
and to ensure all user profiles are shaping the design. 
However, the method used in this case study for monitor-
ing, coding and prioritizing user feedback was experi-
enced as time consuming. Development of lighter meth-
ods with the same aim is recommended;
•	 Several aspects should be considered when prioritizing 
improvement efforts in UCD processes. The few sug-
gestions that were not prioritized for actions in this case 
study were suggestions considered to be out of the sys-
tem’s scope.

5  Conclusions

The results from this case study confirmed the need of adapt-
ing e-health applications to promote digital inclusion among 
older adults. The study reports aspects that may be important 
to address in the adaptation: for example, applications must 
be easy to navigate, have clean pages, be experienced as 
helpful and efficient, and have a content that is relevant and 
inclusive. The approach to code the users’ feedback accord-
ing to user profiles made it possible for making strategic 
recruitment efforts to amend bias. Moreover, the approach 
confirmed that all user groups contributed to the design of 
the digital applications and facilitated decisions on prioriti-
zation. Further, the results confirm the heterogeneity of older 
adults and indicated that user characteristics, such as low 
TE, visual impairment, and dyslexia, should be considered 
in the testing and design of digital solutions.
This case study contributes with knowledge on how to 
better support diversity and promote digital inclusion for 
heterogeneous user groups with limited uptake of digital 
support systems. As such, this proposed UCD approach 
can be used both in the design of solutions and in future 
research on how interaction-design can support accessibility 
and inclusion of information technologies. Further research 
on lighter, less time-consuming methods to involve digitally 
excluded populations in UCD is needed. Moreover, older 
adults’ adoption of the case study’s digital applications 
needs to be evaluated in real-life setting with larger groups 
of users.

Supplementary Information  The online version contains supplemen-
tary material available at https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s10209-​023-​01049-z.

Acknowledgments  The authors would like to thank all older adults 
participating in the study. Moreover, the authors are grateful to Ann-
Christin Johansson for contributing to the planning and execution of 
the study and to Titti Johansson, Birgitta Knutsson and Jakob Vosjö 
for contributing in recruitment of participants and in the analysis of the

310
	

user feedback. The authors also want to thank the companies Abilia 
and Real-Test for their contributions in the technical development of 
the system.

Funding  Open access funding provided by Mälardalen University. 
This work was supported by the Swedish innovation agency (Vinnova) 
under Grant Dnr: 2017-0317 and the project partners (Abilia, Livanda 
Internetkliniken AB, Mälardalen University, Real-Test, Region 
Västmanland, Vital Integration of Scandinavia, Västerås Municipality).

Declarations 

Internetkliniken AB that owns and developed the motivation support 
application within the article. The other authors have no conflict of 
interest to declare relevant to this article's content.

Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons 
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, 
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, 
as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the 
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate 
if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this 
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless 
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not 
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended 
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted 
use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright 
holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/4.0/.