International  Journal  of
Environmental Research
and Public Health

Article
User-Centred Design of a Final Results Report for Participants
in Multi-Sensor Personal Air Pollution Exposure
Monitoring Campaigns

Johanna Amalia Robinson 1,2,*
, Rok Novak 1,2
, Tjaša Kanduˇc 1
, Thomas Maggos 3
, Demetra Pardali 3,
Asimina Stamatelopoulou 3, Dikaia Saraga 3
, Danielle Vienneau 4,5, Benjamin Flückiger 4,5, Ondˇrej Mikeš 6,
Céline Degrendele 6,7
, Ondˇrej Sáˇnka 6, Saul García Dos Santos-Alves 8, Jaideep Visave 9
, Alberto Gotti 10,
Marco Giovanni Persico 9,10
, Dimitris Chapizanis 11
, Ioannis Petridis 11
, Spyros Karakitsios 11,12,
Dimosthenis A. Sarigiannis 9,11,12 and David Kocman 1




Citation: Robinson, J.A.; Novak, R.;

Kanduˇc, T.; Maggos, T.; Pardali, D.;

Stamatelopoulou, A.; Saraga, D.;

Vienneau, D.; Flückiger, B.; Mikeš, O.;

et al. User-Centred Design of a Final

Results Report for Participants in

Multi-Sensor Personal Air Pollution

Exposure Monitoring Campaigns. Int.

J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18,

12544. https://doi.org/10.3390/

ijerph182312544

Academic Editor: Valentina Bollati

Received: 30 September 2021

Accepted: 23 November 2021

Published: 28 November 2021

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral

with regard to jurisdictional claims in

published maps and institutional afﬁl-

iations.

Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.

Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.

This article is an open access article

distributed
under
the
terms
and

conditions of the Creative Commons

Attribution (CC BY) license (https://

creativecommons.org/licenses/by/

4.0/).

1
Department of Environmental Sciences, Jožef Stefan Institute, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia;
rok.novak@ijs.si (R.N.); tjasa.kanduc@ijs.si (T.K.); david.kocman@ijs.si (D.K.)
2
Jožef Stefan International Postgraduate School, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia
3
Atmospheric Chemistry and Innovative Technologies Laboratory, NCSR Demokritos, 15310 Athens, Greece;
tmaggos@ipta.demokritos.gr (T.M.); demetra.pard@gmail.com (D.P.); mina.stam@ipta.demokritos.gr (A.S.);
dsaraga@ipta.demokritos.gr (D.S.)
4
Swiss Tropical and Public Health Institute (Swiss TPH), CH-4051 Basel, Switzerland;
danielle.vienneau@swisstph.ch (D.V.); benjamin.ﬂueckiger@swisstph.ch (B.F.)
5
University of Basel, CH-4001 Basel, Switzerland
6
RECETOX, Faculty of Science, Masaryk University, 62500 Brno, Czech Republic;
ondrej.mikes@recetox.muni.cz (O.M.); celine.DEGRENDELE@univ-amu.fr (C.D.);
ondrej.sanka@recetox.muni.cz (O.S.)
7
Laboratory of Chemistry and Environment, Aix Marseille University, 13003 Marseille, France
8
Institute of Health Carlos III (ISCIII), National Environmental Health Centre,

9
Department of Science, Technology and Society, University School for Advanced Study IUSS,
27100 Pavia, Italy; jaideep.visave@eucentre.it (J.V.); marco.persico@iusspavia.it (M.G.P.);
sarigiannis@auth.gr (D.A.S.)
10
EUCENTRE, European Centre for Training and Research in Earthquake Engineering, 27100 Pavia, Italy;

11
Environmental Engineering Laboratory, Department of Chemical Engineering,
Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, 54124 Thessaloniki, Greece; dimitris.chapizanis@gmail.com (D.C.);
ioannis.petridis89@gmail.com (I.P.); spyros.karakitsios@gmail.com (S.K.)
12
HERACLES Research Center on the Exposome and Health, Center for Interdisciplinary Research and
Innovation, 57001 Thessaloniki, Greece
*

Abstract: Using low-cost portable air quality (AQ) monitoring devices is a growing trend in personal
exposure studies, enabling a higher spatio-temporal resolution and identifying acute exposure to
high concentrations. Comprehension of the results by participants is not guaranteed in exposure
studies. However, information on personal exposure is multiplex, which calls for participant in-
volvement in information design to maximise communication output and comprehension. This
study describes and proposes a model of a user-centred design (UCD) approach for preparing a ﬁnal
report for participants involved in a multi-sensor personal exposure monitoring study performed in
seven cities within the EU Horizon 2020 ICARUS project. Using a combination of human-centred
design (HCD), human–information interaction (HII) and design thinking approaches, we iteratively
included participants in the framing and design of the ﬁnal report. User needs were mapped using
a survey (n = 82), and feedback on the draft report was obtained from a focus group (n = 5). User
requirements were assessed and validated using a post-campaign survey (n = 31). The UCD research
was conducted amongst participants in Ljubljana, Slovenia, and the results report was distributed
among the participating cities across Europe. The feedback made it clear that the ﬁnal report was
well-received and helped participants better understand the inﬂuence of individual behaviours on
personal exposure to air pollution.

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 12544. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph182312544
https://www.mdpi.com/journal/ijerph

2 of 18

Keywords: user-centred design; air pollution exposure campaign; report to participants; communica-
tion; focus group; design thinking

1. Introduction

The rise of low-cost personal air monitoring devices has democratised environmen-
tal health decision making, enabling scientists to involve the public in air quality (AQ)
monitoring programmes. The small size of these devices, their low cost, high temporal
resolution for data capture and internet connectivity for remote access facilitate their use
in large-scale studies of multiple stressors [1,2]. It is known that personal exposure to
air pollution depends on individual trajectories and activities [3], and exposure studies
have demonstrated the need for data with a high spatio-temporal resolution in order to
obtain a rigorous personal exposure assessment [4,5]. Exposure to air pollution is a serious
threat to human health, as even low-level exposure to pollutants is linked to acute systemic
inﬂammation and cardiovascular mortality and morbidity [6–8].
Reporting the ﬁnal results of personal exposure campaigns to the study participants
has not always been the practice [9,10], and even if they are, there is no guarantee that the
report is comprehensible to the non-specialist. We should also not take for granted the
participants’ desire to see ﬁnal data [10,11]. Rather, it is every individual’s right to know or
not to know [12–14].
The rise of low-cost personal air monitoring devices brings both opportunities and
challenges in communicating results. In addition to the challenges brought by the quality
of the data [15,16], it is challenging to communicate the signiﬁcance of speciﬁc parameters
that do not have established health guidelines or when health effects are uncertain [17,18].
However, risk communication principles can help to frame the messages [19].
Public understanding of science and environmental health literacy is partially ac-
quired through formal schooling, but life-long learning of science topics is also inspired by
free-choice learning due to personal interest, need or curiosity [20]. Participatory projects
offer a playground for the public to pursue individual learning opportunities and feed their
curiosity [21]. Mundane events, such as exposure to low concentrations of air pollution,
can, according to Wolff et al. [22], be easily ignored or underestimated. This phenomenon
is called probability neglect, which is a bias on people’s perception of risk vs. its proba-
bility. For this reason, there is a need to involve the public in disputes over inclusive risk
governance communication on issues that affect their everyday lives [23]. Involvement
will create heightened conceptual awareness, which can help participants make informed
decisions [24], and creating communication material that prompts emotional response can
shape participants’ perceptions [25].
According to Hubbell [26] and Keune [27], challenges in data interpretation highlight
the need for a more inclusive two-way (risk) communication between the scientists run-
ning AQ exposure campaigns and the public. In order to improve the comprehension
of reports and overcome the uncertainties related to communicating AQ information, a
human-centred design (HCD) approach can further help to meet user needs and expecta-
tions [28,29].
Scientists should not be the only ones deciding what information is provided since the
way in which participants interpret information and build contextual awareness, as well
as their priorities, skills and needs, can differ from the scientists [25,30]. Co-designing the
communication output with the participants can lead to improved environmental health
literacy, increasing the message’s effectiveness and ultimately inﬂuencing behavioural
change [31–34]. Public participation in scientiﬁc research can also enhance a participant’s
awareness and knowledge of the subject [35–38].
Using a case study example, in this paper we aimed to develop a user-centred design
(UCD) model for information design as a reference for environmental health scientists to
effectively communicate results to participants involved in citizen science. Furthermore,

3 of 18

we aimed to meet the participants’ needs and increase the participants’ environmental
health literacy by involving them in three iterative cycles of the design process through
surveys and focus group discussion, where their feedback was used to frame and evaluate
the content of a ﬁnal individual results report.

2. Methods

In this section, we discuss the study settings, participants, data collection framework
and analysis.

2.1. Study Setting, the ICARUS Campaign

The UCD study described in this manuscript is based on data collected during the EU
Horizon 2020 ICARUS project multi-sensor personal air pollution exposure monitoring
campaigns. The overarching goals of the ICARUS campaigns were to collect data on
external environmental exposure of individuals and exposure determinants by combining
location, activity and air pollution data in different microenvironments. The resulting
individual exposure was then to be communicated back to the participants at the end of
the campaigns. The participants were purposely not shown the data during the campaign
because the ICARUS project aimed to apply agent-based modelling [39], and seeing real-
time data could affect a participant’s behaviour. The project included winter (heating)
and summer (non-heating) sampling campaigns, where participants from seven European
cities (Athens, Basel, Brno, Ljubljana, Madrid, Milan, Thessaloniki) carried three personal
monitoring devices: a portable sensor for particulate matter (PPM), a smart activity tracker
(Garmin Vivosmart 3) and a silicone wristband as a passive sampling for organic pollutants.
In addition, participants had one static indoor air quality (IAQ) unit (uHoo) for collecting
the following indoor air quality parameters: carbon monoxide (CO), carbon dioxide (CO2),
volatile organic compounds (VOCs), particulate matter (PM2.5), ozone (O3), nitrogen
dioxide (NO2), temperature, humidity and air pressure. Participants also recorded their
activities, e.g., cooking, cleaning, smoking, in Time Activity Diaries (TADs) for potential
sources of air pollution [40] with one hour accuracy. In addition to the silicone wristbands,
which provide an integrated information on exposure over the seven days of sampling,
all the devices collected data with a high frequency of minute resolution or less. This
high frequency enabled deployment in everyday life conditions, although it is known that
variation in speed and sensor placement with respect to direction of movement can affect
the results [41]. More details on the campaigns can be found in [42,43].

2.1.1. Participants

The ICARUS recruitment strategy included asking primary recruits to inquire if other
people living in the same household would also like to participate. The UCD research was
conducted amongst all participants in Ljubljana, Slovenia, and who were involved in the
pre- and post-campaign surveys and were part of the focus group. The recruitment strat-
egy used in the campaigns enabled a more comprehensive array of participants’ proﬁles,
thereby extending the proﬁle of those interested in participating [44]. This meant that vul-
nerable and hard-to-reach population groups were also represented, e.g., children, elderly,
pregnant, low-income families, low educated and those with pre-existing health conditions.
The average age of all participants in ICARUS as a whole was 38, with 15% < 18 years,
73% being highly educated and 49% from middle-income families. Table 1 summarises the
participant characteristics and distinguishes between Ljubljana participants and the overall
participant pool in the seven participating cities (additional information can be found in
Supplementary Materials File S1 in Tables S1–S10).

4 of 18

Table 1. Participant characteristics.

Participants in Ljubljana
Participants in All Cities

Characteristics
Total
Percentage
Total
Percentage

Age
<18
8
11%
77
15%
18–64
60
82%
398
79%
>65
5
7%
32
6%

Pregnant
1
1%
6
1%

Gender
Male
39
53%
242
47%
Female
47
47%
269
53%
Other
0
0%
0
0%

Underlying health condition
26
36%
194
36%

Education level of adult
participants
Primary education/Not completed
secondary education
4
6%
16
4%

Completed secondary education
9
14%
101
23%
Higher education
52
80%
313
73%

Income level of adult participants
Lower 25%
7
11%
86
20%
Average (25–75%)
37
57%
183
43%
Upper 25%
16
25%
107
25%
Unknown
5
8%
54
13%

2.1.2. Research Team

The ICARUS research team undertaking the campaigns and designing the ﬁnal re-
sults report consisted of international experts from various backgrounds. The case study
researchers were mainly from natural sciences, e.g., chemistry, physics, environmental
sciences, environmental epidemiology, exposure science, environmental and chemical risk
management and geography. Several had practical expertise in social sciences and science
communication. Moreover, the team behind the ﬁnal results report also included database
management experts, who wrote the codes to generate the reports [45]. The team’s diversity
enabled different perspectives to be taken into account and sufﬁcient collaboration over
design, including, for example, communication of user needs and feedback and imple-
menting trade-offs while considering technical limitations and meeting the objective of
the report.

2.2. User-Centred Design

Individual exposure is multiplex as the concentrations of some air pollutants may vary
over small spatial and temporal scales; thus, communicating air pollution exposure to non-
experts requires a holistic approach. We combined methods and ideologies from a human-
centred design (HCD) landscape to form a user-centred design (UCD) model to design the
communication information material. For simplicity, we referred to our proposed approach
as UCD despite it having aspects from other related approaches. Our UCD followed the
activities of HCD with aspects of human–information interaction (HII) [24], six design
thinking principles [46] and practical recommendations from other case studies, e.g.,
Golumbic et al. [47]. Unlike an HCD framework, which focuses on improving interactive
products, services and systems, the human–information interaction approach focuses on
the (communication of) information itself [24]. In addition, design thinking ideology is a
user-centric approach to problem solving of complex and multifaceted issues [46].
The user-centred design was implemented as a life-cycle model (Figure 1) and incor-
porated in the project schedule with participant feedback as part of an iterative process to
improve the report’s content. The participant involvement was implemented in steps two,

5 of 18

four and six in order to deﬁne their needs, to adjust the report according to their feedback
and to validate the ﬁnal product.

Figure 1. A life-cycle model of the UCD results report in the ICARUS multi-sensor personal expo-
sure campaign.

The six applied principles of design thinking include the following: empathise, deﬁne,
ideate, prototype, test and implement [46] (bolded in Figure 1). The steps in implementing
the UCD model included:

Step (1) Deﬁning the context of use and recognising the need for UCD, taking into account
the complexity of individual exposure data;
Step (2) Identifying and understanding user needs and preferences by obtaining feedback
early on in the process through a pre-campaign survey (see Supplementary Materials
File S1);
Step (3) Discussing visualisation ideas and creating a prototype report (Supplementary
Materials File S2);
Step (4) Creating a focus group (n = 5 individuals), testing the preliminary design and facili-
tating ﬁne-tuning according to group feedback (Supplementary Materials File S2–S4);
Step (5) Adapting visualisations according to the focus group results while taking into
account technical requirements (Supplementary Materials File S5);
Step (6) Validating and assessing whether user requirements were met with an online
post-campaign survey. (Supplementary Materials File S1)

A simpliﬁed version without details of the case study is provided in the graphical
abstract for researchers to adapt.

2.2.1. Plan: Recognizing the Need

In the ICARUS campaign, data were collected at high spatial-temporal scale, e.g.,
minute accuracy, and from various sources, e.g., indoor and outdoor together with GPS
coordinates, creating a multiplex dataset. For maximising the communication output,
the information must meet individual needs, which is achieved by upfront analysis of
participants’ information needs and goals [48]. A design that complies with user needs
instead of assumed requirements was decided upon and developed using principles
from the HCD landscape. This also meant involving end-users in an iterative evaluation
process involving prototypes and producing feedback until the design met the end-user
requirements. Systems that are designed without end-user input might fail to provide
comprehensive information.
According to HII concepts, the results report needs to communicate and enable the
participants to understand the concept (e.g., background), situation (e.g., individual expo-

6 of 18

sure) and relationships and interactions (e.g., the type and level of physical activity and air
pollution levels) [24]. When the participants interconnect pieces of information, they will
become aware of the different behaviours or actions that may be affecting their exposure.
Similarly, in inclusive risk governance, a person will seek to understand the risk from
their perspective [23]. That is why the results report should be designed to address the
above elements. Displaying simple data, e.g., raw values, does not enable an inexperienced
participant to comprehend the situation, whereas providing information with more intelli-
gent output, e.g., post-processed information, can add context and help in understanding
more complex relationships [24,49,50]. According to Albers [24], a complex communication
situation should include the proper amount of information to maximise the communication
output. In addition, jargon should be avoided in communicating scientiﬁc results to the
public to ensure comprehension and readability for a wider audience [51], which is why
the comprehension of the text in the report had to be tested amongst the participants.
We decided to study user needs regarding data visualization through a pre-campaign
survey, ﬁne-tuned within a focus group and validated with a post-campaign survey. Data
visualisation refers to the representation and presentation of data to facilitate understand-
ing [52]. From existing guides, it is known that using conventional tables or lists to display
complex datasets can make it difﬁcult to detect patterns, and other data visualisation
types such as charts are preferred [25]. The visualisation solution should be trustworthy,
accessible and elegant [52]. According to Allen [25], conceiving, creating, interpreting and
responding to visualisations is a dynamic, complex space, and he suggests that visuali-
sation practices inﬂuence a participant’s engagement. Similarly, Wong-Parodi et al. [53]
emphasise that the most effective visualisations are those coupled with messages calling
for action to reduce individual risk. The above speaks for the importance of including a list
of recommended actions in the ﬁnal results report, upon which individuals can act.
Previous research [54,55] has indicated that oversimpliﬁcation of air pollution in the
form of air pollution index values might not be the most interesting for the participant
since it does not provide a sufﬁcient level of ﬁne-grained information and might not always
be representative. Alternatively, the use of low-cost personal air-quality measuring devices
provided an opportunity to delineate and visualise personal exposure levels within short
time intervals, highlighting peak acute exposure levels that occurred throughout the week.
In addition, the collected GPS and Time Activity diary (TAD) data could help identify
exposure pathways at speciﬁc times and locations and help formulate more accurate
individual exposure proﬁles.

2.2.2. Research: Pre-Campaign Survey and User Needs

Deﬁning communication value is a difﬁcult task [24]. We approached this challenge
by mapping the user needs with a pre-campaign survey (n = 82) conducted face-to face,
in an interview-like setting and recorded on a paper form, at the participant’s house. The
survey mapped the user needs and preferences about visualisation and their motivations,
risk perception and behavioural intentions. Part of the dataset was derived from surveys
analysed by Robinson et al. [43].
At the start of the campaign, participants were asked to provide suggestions on
the kind of information and visualisation they wished to receive in the ﬁnal report
(Tables S13–S14 in Supplementary Materials File S1). It was felt important to provide the
participants with the opportunity to explain their suggestions for visualisation ideas to dis-
cover features or innovative ways of displaying the data. In addition, we asked how much
they would be interested in a set of pre-described ideas of data display (Tables S15–S17,
Figure S1).
Trust is a signiﬁcant factor in communicating scientiﬁc results to the public. It includes
both trustworthiness towards the data, e.g., its uncertainty, and in the ones communicating
it [25,52]. In the light of the new European General Data Protection Regulation (EU
GDPR 2016/679) [56], we wanted to assess participants’ trust concerning personal data
management (Tables S28 and S29 in Supplementary Materials File S1).

7 of 18

The paper forms were digitalized, and the ﬁndings were analysed in Excel, where open-
ended questions were coded and suggestions listed and general statistics and frequencies
were analysed for the Likert type questions.

2.2.3. Design: Preliminary Report

The ideas for the preliminary report were drafted based on initial user needs and
collaborative efforts of the project consortium. Some visualisation ideas and decisions
were discussed over email, online conference meetings and in face-to-face project meetings.
We also included a hands-on workshop about data harmonisation, data visualisation and
data quality. Ideas from different participating cities were discussed, and it was decided
to organise a focus group to evaluate the preferences and comprehension of different
visualisation options amongst the participants.
Low-cost sensors come with a particular uncertainty, and missing data from mal-
function or other causes is an issue that scientists need to consider to not disappoint the
participants [54,57]. Adding information about technical uncertainty is considered a pos-
itive practice when communicating the results [58]. The challenges were identiﬁed, and
steps for data harmonisation, cleaning and fusion with an R script and models to identify
outliers and ﬁll data gaps were established [45].
A preliminary report was drafted and generated in Ljubljana. Pre-existing guidelines
and good practices were considered, and trade-offs were discussed while accommodating
the initially mapped user needs and visualisation suggestions from the other participating
cities. Deciding on a design was a difﬁcult task, as there is no one-ﬁts-all solution. In
addition, different participants might have a different level of numeracy, and sometimes
simpliﬁcation of the message is necessary to make sensor data more comprehensible [26].

2.2.4. Evaluation: Focus Group

A focus group is an in-depth group interview with discussion and enables a collection
of views about a speciﬁc subject of concern. It is used to assess needs, preferences and
attitudes of participants, and the results can help in decision making. An optimal number
of participants in a focus group is between ﬁve and eight [27,59]. This allows gathering
insights from all participants while maintaining control over the discussions. In larger
groups, this becomes difﬁcult and limits opportunities for those who would speak less.
Invitation to the focus group was sent to 12 participants. Following Keune’s [27] and
ISO HCD 2010 recommendations, participants for the focus group were selected to be
representative and those who also showed interest to be actively involved. Only adult
participants were invited. The focus group was organised at the onset of the SARS CoV-2
pandemic in Slovenia, causing some to decline to attend an in-person event. However, a
ﬁnal number of ﬁve in-person attendees is, according to Virzi [60], sufﬁcient to identify the
majority of usability issues. Some participants suggested providing feedback electronically
instead, and we received 19 answers to the same questions discussed during the focus
group through an online questionnaire.
A one and a half hour long focus group meeting was organised (Table 2) to ascertain
whether participants correctly perceived the draft visualisations of the results report and
provide additional user feedback. The displayed graphs and other visualisations used in the
focus group were detailed and realistic, e.g., anonymous data from actual participants were
used. Three members of the scientiﬁc project group were present at the focus group, with
one acting as the facilitator. The focus group was organised after the sensor campaign and
before ﬁnalising the participants’ results reports. The focus group discussion was recorded,
transcribed and translated into English. The main ﬁndings were implemented straight
away to improve the draft report, while details of the focus group and its ﬁndings were
summarized for this manuscript. Additional information about the organised focus group
can be found from the Supplementary Materials, including the translated transcripts with
a list of actions based on the participants’ feedback (Supplementary Materials File S3) and

8 of 18

the materials used during the focus group, i.e., PowerPoint presentation (Supplementary
Materials File S4) and the preliminary report (Supplementary Materials File S2).

Table 2. Focus group structure.

Section
Theme
Goal
Planned
Timeline in the Recording

1
Welcome and short survey
Flashback paper survey on what
participants remember about
the campaign
5 min
00:00–04:10

2
Introductory PowerPoint
presentation
A presentation about the project and
campaign, measurement uncertainties
10 min
04:10–10:15

3
Discussion Part 1
Mapping motivations and
expectations on what participants
would like to learn
10 min
10:15–11:57

4
Discussion Part 2
User needs: data aggregation in most
useful way according to
participants ideas
10–15 min
11:57–13:40

5
Evaluation
Comprehension of suggested
visualizations (paper survey)
20 min
13:40–32:29

6
Discussion Part 3
Visualization: ﬁrst suggestions and
their comprehension and suggestions
for improvements
20 min
32:29–1:07:44

7
Discussion Part 4
Impact on behavioural change and
user needs during and after
the campaign
10 min
1:07:44–1:18:39

8
Conclusions and
socialising
Preliminary observations from the
data. Final remarks and farewell
10 min
1:18:39–1:34:41

2.2.5. Adapt: Final Results Report

The design of the results report was reﬁned and improved in response to user-centred
evaluation and feedback from the focus group. Any conﬂicts were resolved considering
reasonability, technical limitations and incorrect interpretations of ﬁgures (an example
report can be found in Supplementary Material File S5). An R script was written to generate
the ﬁnal uniform reports to all participants for all participating cities [45]. The ﬁnal results
report was translated to the different languages by the local case study researchers and
sent to the participants by email as a PDF document in April 2020.

2.2.6. Validate: Post-Campaign Survey

The Ljubljana participants received an online post-campaign survey invitation together
with the ﬁnal results report email. The post-campaign survey meant that the participants
were able to assess the usability and comprehensibility of the report and provide further
feedback to improve similar reports in the future. Participants were then asked how
the results had inﬂuenced their behaviour and risk perception. Thirty-one participants
answered the survey.

3. Results

This section describes the results of the UCD steps two to six, where participant views
were used to frame and evaluate the content of a ﬁnal individual results report.

3.1. Research: Pre-Campaign Survey and User Needs

The pre-campaign survey revealed that the participants wanted both visualisations
that provide an opportunity to interpret their exposure and the inﬂuence of behavioural
choices and also a prescription of activities on how to reduce one’s exposure.

9 of 18

A total of 15% of the participants wanted to have all the possible data about their
exposure, in either raw format, charts or numerical values (Table S14 in Supplementary
Materials File S1). They also wanted a comparison with limit values (12%), comparison
with other participants in the same city (11%) and spatial (12%) and time trends (10%).
Five percent mentioned that they would like to have text results. Moreover, participants
wished to receive data evaluation, conclusions, recommendations to mitigate exposure and
information on possible adverse health effects. Nine percent of participants also speciﬁed
that they wanted to receive the results electronically, e.g., a PDF ﬁle, while Microsoft’s
Excel was suggested for raw data. Eighteen percent of participants were happy to receive
just an executive summary. While some hoped to have the raw data, others preferred
summary data or simple visualisation. Some pointed out that they would like to see any
unusual observations.
The participants were especially interested to know about their personal exposure and
the air quality in their surroundings. Some also mentioned CO2 levels indoors, and several
hoped that the results would show how clean the air is in the local area, while others
hoped the results would reveal something upon which they could act. The participants also
showed interest in air quality and health parameters. The participants were also interested
in the accuracy and reliability of the monitoring devices and what happens in the case of
“bad” data.
The following are speciﬁc quotes from the participants:
LJU_P033: “Similar to doctors reports, value ranges and limit values, data tables, textual and
charts with explanations.”
LJU_P093: “Pollution levels and physical activity displayed with time trends with short time
intervals (1s), in electronic form, in data tables.”
The participants repeatedly mentioned that they wished to see the results before
taking any action and would prefer to see the data in real-time. All the participants wanted
to receive the results report and hence pursue their right to know.
From the preliminary interest list (Tables S15–S17 in Supplementary Materials File S1),
on a scale from one to ﬁve, the participants expressed interest in Where your maxi-
mum/minimum air pollution exposure occurs (Mean 4.72) followed by During which
activity you are most/least exposed to air pollution (4.76), Suggestions to reduce your air
pollution exposure (4.55), Individual pollution concentrations (4.47), Which transportation
mode contributes the most/least to your air pollution exposure (4.39), Map of your weekly
whereabouts with indicative colour codes (4.37) and Is my weekly dose of air pollution less
or more than others who participated? (4.36).
Each participant held a prior perception of the level of credibility of the scientiﬁc
institutions that conducted the case studies and communicated the results. None of the
participants thought their data would be handled inappropriately, with 79% being conﬁdent
that the researchers handled their data appropriately, while 21% did not know or did not
answer the question (Tables S28 and S29 in Supplementary Materials File S1).

3.2. Design: Preliminary Report

Ideas for visualisations for the ﬁnal results report were prompted from all participating
cities, and some distributed preliminary results to the participants soon after the end of the
campaign. For example, in Brno, short reports, following a basic report structure providing
available data from the commercially used sensor devices, were created. They included
an introduction to the measured parameters and abbreviations, followed by tables with
mean values from the whole campaign and participants’ decile within the Brno campaign.
Each page clearly stated that the data were not certiﬁed, accredited or validated and served
only as a visual output from commercially available devices. Data from PPM devices were
provided upon request. Some of the earliest visualisations in Athens included summary
statistics and box plots for individual indoor pollutants. Data were cleaned by removing
NA values, duplicate values and other issues. Average daily and weekly concentrations of
PM from the summer and winter campaigns were also used, and different fractionations of

10 of 18

PM (PM1, PM2.5 and PM10) were displayed per participant for each microenvironment and
activity, e.g., cooking, cleaning, smoking (derived from TADs). In Basel, for example, the
preliminary report included a map of PM10 data created upon request with GPS data for
times when participants were not at home. Follow-up calls and emails from participants in
Basel and other cities demonstrated effective communication and further interest in the
topic. Individuals in different cities discussed their indoor air quality values during the
ﬁnal visit in households when devices were collected. Some participants also suggested
checking speciﬁc PPM levels for time periods where they assumed they had been highly
exposed (e.g., during campﬁre). In Milan, winter vs. summer visualisation of the average
concentrations of PM10 was used.
It was agreed to use a uniform format for the ﬁnal report for all cities. The report’s
structure was planned to include a general introduction, an overview of the air quality in
households, a personal situation exposure assessment, and generalised recommendations.
Creating a report with data displayed straightforwardly without giving absolute values
was agreed upon, and displaying daily averages were preferred. Comparison with limit
values was a subject of discussion since it could provide valuable information to the
participant, although it could confuse participants due to the uncertainties in the measured
data and the different time scales of the limit values. Uncertainties and the use of relative
vs. absolute values were discussed. In Ljubljana, previous validation studies showed that
absolute values from the IAQ sensor should not be used, while absolute values from the
particulate matter monitor could [61]. The problem with the validity of absolute data from
the IAQ turned the decision to provide heatmaps rather than measured values. Information
about inhalation rates and intake dose assessment was not considered a priority for the
report, and regarding exposure, it was decided to provide information by speciﬁc location
(e.g., home vs. commute vs. work) rather than by physical activity.

3.3. Evaluation: Focus Group

During the focus group discussions, the participants had issues deciphering some
of the suggested visualisations due to missing labels and different axis labels, which
made comparing different charts complicated. Supplementary Materials File S3 (chapter 4.
List of suggestions from the participants and actions taken based on them) contains a
more detailed description of visualisations that were difﬁcult to comprehend and taken to
improve them.

3.4. Adapt: Final Results Report

An example report can be found in Supplementary Materials File S5. The adaptation of
the results report included compromises between participants’ requirements and technical
limitations. The PM, for example, was considered an important parameter and was
presented in different charts. In the most basic form, using daily averages together with
WHO guidelines were displayed. A more ﬁne-grade visualisation was not feasible due
to space limitations and because WHO guidelines for PM2.5 and PM10 only include daily
values. In addition, charts with additional context were prepared and included speciﬁc
activities or locations of the participants and heartbeat data with a more ﬁne-grade hourly
data. Winter and summer campaigns were plotted separately.
An example of adjustments to the visualisation based on the focus group discussions
is displayed in Figure 2, while the whole ﬁnal report can be found in Supplementary
Materials File S5.

11 of 18

Figure 2. Example of adjustments to the visualisation based on the focus group discussions. Final ﬁgure caption: “Me-
teorological conditions in one household during the winter (left) and summer (right) campaigns. The top plot displays
temperature, followed by relative humidity and air pressure. Optimal ranges for all three parameters are also displayed and
coloured in yellow (summer) and blue (winter)”.

QA/QC steps to remove outliers with extremely high concentrations (over 240 µg/m3)
were performed in R for PM data following predetermined criteria of consecutively occur-
ring measurements, as reporting these types of erroneous results could have been worrying
for the participants. Conversely, removing outliers might have unintentionally underesti-
mated someone’s exposure to severely high concentrations, e.g., time spent in a nightclub
where smoking was permitted. In most cities, only a small number of the participant’s (up
to 12%) data had signiﬁcant outliers, i.e., over 10% of all measurements of PM10 were more
than 240 µg/m3, and only the participants can know what they did when the peak values
occurred. The codes were checked and revised for ﬂaws such as double reports, mixed
summer/winter seasons, wrong participant numbers, typos and the deletion of some lines.
The individual reports were still manually checked for any mistakes before sending them
to the participants. The results from the silicon wristbands were not distributed in the
ﬁnal results report as the laboratory analyses of passively sampled organic chemicals were
still ongoing.
The structure of the report (visually displayed in Figure 3) followed the planned
initial structure, and the text, e.g., in the introduction, was ﬁne-tuned collaboratively with
researchers from participating cities. The ﬁnal report (Supplementary Materials File S5)
was 11 pages long and included charts (histograms, line columns), tables and heatmap
visualisations with colour-coded additional information of activities and guideline values
or optimal ranges where applicable.

3.5. Validate: Post-Campaign Survey

The post-campaign survey validated the usability and comprehensibility of the report
amongst 31 participants.
An emotion of surprise was present in the group who evaluated the ﬁnal results report
(Tables S18–S20 in Supplementary Materials File S1). Almost half (48%) were surprised by
their data, especially about different from expected concentration values of air pollutants.
The majority (79%) indicated that the report was useful, easy to understand (79%) and
contained the right amount of information (Tables S21–S25 in Supplementary Materials
File S1). One-third (35%) of the participants also gave suggestions on how the report could
be improved (Tables S26 and S27 in Supplementary Materials File S1). Some suggested
simpler infographics for laypeople, while others would have liked more detailed ones.
Suggestions for improving the charts included a better colour scale for activities and
more charts displaying activity data. They also suggested the results should be displayed

12 of 18

spatially, a comparison with other participants, an online introductory video, a public web
page and an invitation to all participants to a dissemination event.

Figure 3. Structure of the ﬁnal results report.

The participating children received help from their parents to interpret the research
results. In some households, the results and participation had created further discussions
beyond family units. The results report was well-received both in Ljubljana and in the
other participating cities. Post-campaign communication continued in all cities, and some
participants reached out to the research groups to ask for additional visualisations, e.g.,
trajectories along their cycling trip. In some cities, e.g., in Brno, a public presentation of the
results was organised, where all participants were invited.
Due to the nature of low-cost sensors, some sensors failed to record any data while
others malfunctioned, resulting in data gaps. The result was that some participants’ reports
had missing data resulting in blank charts, which left participants feeling disappointed,
especially given all their effort. Equally, many understood the nature of low-cost sensors as
a possibility at the beginning of the campaign. Some participants, both in Ljubljana and in
the other case study cities, contacted the local researchers to ask about the missing values.
Others wanted to know, for example, if they were above or higher than the study average
or to explain to the researchers the reason for the observed peak values in their data.
Mitigation guidance was presented at the end of the report. Over half (58%) of
the participants reported having made behavioural changes, and 36% thought their air
pollution exposure was higher than expected.

13 of 18

4. Discussion

Deciding on a universal design for a ﬁnal results report is a challenging task. Indi-
vidual characteristics inﬂuence how participants interact with health information, making
it difﬁcult to meet everyone’s needs [62]. Information exists within a continuum, and
individuals interpret and reﬂect on the information based on their own experiences, feel-
ings, assumptions and beliefs [24,25]. This was also emphasised from the participants’
side during the focus group discussion: “It was also interesting to see how some of us
understood, while others did not. You could see how all of us look at things differently.”
The involvement of the participants in the three report design stages enabled us to ﬁne-
tune the details and make sure the ﬁnal report was ﬁt-for-purpose and comprehensible to
the majority of participants. Another reason for using a common approach in the reporting
on the European scale was to create a harmonised analysis of the data itself. Involving
participants in the design provided meaningful input to the content and provided a user
perspective. Adding another cycle before distributing the ﬁnal report would most likely
further increase the comprehensibility. An additional step would be to target different
sub-groups speciﬁcally, e.g., children, elderly, health-suppressed individuals, participants
with low socioeconomic status (SES) or the highly educated, by using personas to divide
the subgroups and adjust and enhance the communicated message accordingly. In addition,
to improve the report using UCD, including a science communication expert to assist in
designing the communicated results would be beneﬁcial [63]. This inclusion of an expert
would also contribute towards higher environmental health literacy [64].
The focus group enabled us to explore the report’s content in depth through group
discussions, e.g., comprehension of suggested visualisation and possible misunderstand-
ings, feedback for improvements, and reﬁning user needs at the end of the project. The
discussion also reﬂected their environmental health literacy. A focus group method en-
abled us to obtain a common impression and in-depth information in a short time. The
involvement of the participants enabled us to frame and formulate risk information about
their exposure to be communicated in a way that a participant could comprehend.
The participants’ needs, feedback, and suggestions reﬂect the users’ capabilities, char-
acteristics, and experience, agreeing with ISO recommendations. The detailed user studies
were conducted in Ljubljana, but given that the report’s reception in other participating
cities was positive, the design was well suited to the community that participated all across
Europe. Hence, similar design aspects could be implemented elsewhere.
Effective and efﬁcient communication methods based on data from low-cost sensor
devices is an ongoing debate. The study advances the current practice in environmental
health communications where results of an exposure study are communicated retrospec-
tively to the participants by providing insights and evaluations of user needs through an
UCD process. Careful planning, time and effort is needed to perform a UCD study to meet
the user needs while adapting to the challenges and limitations of the technology and in-
formation design. We illustrated increased understanding of user needs and demonstrated
an approach to support and validate it.
Being trustworthy is also a factor. The majority of the participants expressed conﬁ-
dence that we would handle data appropriately, while the rest were unsure or did not
answer the question. None explicitly expressed “worry”.
The report was considered lengthy at 11 pages and was one of the issues discussed
while preparing the report. However, the participants conﬁrmed that the amount of
information was “just right”, which is appreciated, especially at a time when people are
experiencing information overload [65]. Despite this, some participants preferred timelier
reporting.
The ﬁnal results reports were provided almost a year after the campaign had ﬁnished.
While this can be unfavourable, they would have been less relevant for the participants
if delivered earlier and without going through a UCD process. If data were shown in
real-time, or the report was sent earlier, we could have increased the communication value,
as communication needs to be relevant and on time [24,66]. Thus, this would increase their

14 of 18

intention to change behaviour [43]. A step forward would be to create an online version of
the results report, allowing participants to change variables to suit their contextual needs,
facilitate comprehension and nurture curiosity. The number (n = 31) of the post-campaign
surveys reﬂects how some interest was lost compared to the pre-campaign survey (n = 82).
In most cases (i.e., in 28 households), only one person from the household answered the
post-campaign survey instead of the whole family, which can explain this difference.
Using hourly and daily averages instead of higher time resolution visualisation, we
could not provide detailed information about each activity, location and time. The ﬁnal
interpretation of the results was left to the participants, who had information about their
speciﬁc activities if they still remembered. Automating the information content related
to individuals spatial location and activity mode using data mining techniques, which
classiﬁes relative location and activity using supplementary information available, could
further improve the interpretation of the results and remove the burden of ﬁlling out time
activity diaries and remembering details [67].
Involvement in the process leads to greater understanding, and consequently, ap-
propriate action [27], e.g., as many as 58% reported behavioural change in the Ljubljana
case study. Sensitive individuals, especially those with underlying health conditions, re-
ceived an opportunity to examine possible triggers if peak values were present during
their study period. It is considered good practice to communicate uncertainties, e.g., sensor
performance or outliers that over- or underestimate a participant’s exposure.
Collecting data on their immediate environment and receiving results about their
living environment must be more motivating than campaigns that aim to collect air quality
monitoring data on the city level. Robinson et al. [54] concluded that participants in an
air quality study are more motivated to learn about their immediate environment and
hence more likely to change their behaviour when provided with more targeted results
about their living environment. Instead of the mass communication of aggregated results,
the individuals received only their results, although some would have liked to see their
situation compared to the other participants.
The WHO 24 h mean guideline values for some of the used AQ parameters were
updated after the project had ended, e.g., PM2.5 was lowered to 15 from 25 µg/m3 and
PM10 from 50 to 45 µg/m3 [68]. Future studies could study the risk perception of exposure
to air pollutants in the light of measured AQ values and the new WHO guideline values.

5. Conclusions

This work describes and proposes a model of user-centred design (UCD) of a ﬁnal re-
sults report and demonstrates a deliberate, collaborative science communication effort. The
participants of the multi-sensor ICARUS campaign in Ljubljana, Slovenia, were included
in the design of a ﬁnal results report during three stages of the design process. The report
was individualised, self-descriptive and intuitive, ﬁt for purpose, met user expectations
and provided an opportunity to learn something new.
The UCD model is a result of lack of existing UCD models for results reporting in
environmental health studies. The developed UCD model is a combination of principles
and practices from the HCD landscape, design thinking and HII, the latter focusing on
communicating complex information where the user makes decisions about a complex
situation. The UCD approach was incorporated into the project schedule and involved
collecting information on user needs and gained feedback about preliminary design solu-
tions from an end-user perspective to improve the ﬁnal design and evaluate and validate
whether user requirements were met. The information presented was subjected to a series
of trade-offs, to be understandable by the general public, yet not overly simpliﬁed, which
would underestimate the complexity of the information, and hence to take into account the
underlying situation, people’s needs and the way they come to understand the information
provided. Using a UCD approach, we co-created usable content, enabling participants to
comprehend the complex topic of personal exposure that they could use to make informed
decisions, both being essential aspects of environmental health literacy.

15 of 18

By asking participants to provide input, we were able to better meet the participants’
needs, which probably inﬂuenced the high acceptance of the information. By involving the
participants in co-designing the communication output, we increased the inclusiveness
of the project from traditionally contributory type ones. We recommend others to use
the UCD approach to democratise science and to involve the participants in co-creating
complex information.
The report provided both options to examine the results in light of established air
quality standards and display individual levels of exposure for the study period. By pro-
viding several visualisations, we addressed multiple goals and the motivational drivers
of the participants before their involvement. Carrying sensors in places where ofﬁcial
air quality monitoring does not extend, e.g., at homes and in private cars, enabled the
participants to understand personal exposure. The communication was effective, since it
prompted a change in behaviour in the majority of the participants. This ﬁnding shows
that lived experiences and co-created communicated material increases environmental
health literacy by increasing the interest, awareness and understanding of the particular
topic leading to taking action [32,69]. It also conforms with other literature on behavioural
change [53,70], which also emphasises that information about a risk to air pollution ex-
posure on its own is not as powerful. By providing each individual with a set of sensor
devices, we enabled them to experience the air quality ﬁrst-hand. Projects involving partic-
ipants in collecting data should use the opportunities modern technology provide to grant
the participants access to real-time (instantaneous) data in addition to online visualisation
and self-exploration of data.

Supplementary Materials: The following are available online at https://www.mdpi.com/article/10
.3390/ijerph182312544/s1, Supplementary Materials File S1: Data analysis, Supplementary Materials
File S2: Printed materials, Supplementary Materials File S3: Transcript of the voice recording and
summary of changes, Supplementary Materials File S4: Focus group PPT, Supplementary Materials
File S5: Example report.

J.A.R.; funding acquisition, D.A.S.; investigation, J.A.R., R.N., T.K., T.M., D.P., A.S., D.S., D.V., B.F.,
O.M., C.D., O.S., S.G.D.S.-A., J.V., A.G., M.G.P., D.C., I.P., S.K., D.A.S. and D.K.; methodology, J.A.R.;
project administration, A.G. and D.A.S.; resources, J.A.R., R.N., T.K. and D.K.; supervision, D.K.;
validation, J.A.R. and D.K.; visualization, J.A.R.; writing—original draft preparation, J.A.R.; writing—
review and editing, J.A.R., R.N., T.K., D.S., D.V., O.M., C.D., O.S., M.G.P. and D.K. All authors have
read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.

Funding: This work has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 Programme for
research technological development and demonstration under grant agreement No 690105 (Integrated
Climate forcing and Air Pollution Reduction in Urban Systems (ICARUS)). This work reﬂects only
the authors’ views, and the European Commission is not responsible for any use that may be made of
the information it contains. Funding was received from the Young Researchers Program and P1-0143
program “Cycling of substances in the environment, mass balances, modelling of environmental
processes and risk assessment”, both funded by the Slovenian Research Agency. The authors thank
Research Infrastructure RECETOX RI (No LM2018121) ﬁnanced by the Ministry of Education, Youth
and Sports, and Operational Programme Research, Development and Innovation-project CETOCOEN
EXCELLENCE (No CZ.02.1.01/0.0/0.0/17_043/0009632) for supportive background.

Institutional Review Board Statement: The study was conducted according to the guidelines of the
Declaration of Helsinki, and ethical approval for the ICARUS project in Slovenia was obtained from
the National Medical Ethics Committee of the Republic of Slovenia (approval nr. 0120-388/2018/6
on 22 August 2018.

Informed Consent Statement: Written informed consent has been obtained from all subjects involved
in the study to publish this paper.

Data Availability Statement: Data available on request due to privacy restrictions.

16 of 18

Acknowledgments: The authors gratefully acknowledge the partners involved in designing and
carrying out the ICARUS measurement campaign and all participants in the seven case study cities
(Athens, Basel, Brno, Ljubljana, Madrid, Milan and Thessaloniki). We want to thank speciﬁcally Nika
Moˇcnik and Tjaša Števanec for their help in the Ljubljana campaign. We also thank the anonymous
reviewers for providing feedback that helped improve and clarify this manuscript.

Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest. The funders had no role in the design
of the study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or
in the decision to publish the results.