Technology and Health Care 30 (2022) 981–992
981
DOI 10.3233/THC-213511
IOS Press

Implementing an interprofessional
user-centered design approach to develop a
bedside leg exercise device

Renzo Rostettera, Beatrice Jennib, Sabrina Eggmannc, Jan T. Meyerd and Kai-Uwe Schmitta,e,∗

aDepartment of Health Professions, Bern University of Applied Sciences, Bern, Switzerland
bDepartment of Intensive Care Medicine, University Hospital Bern, Bern, Switzerland
cDepartment of Physiotherapy, Inselspital, University Hospital Bern, Bern, Switzerland
dRehabilitation Engineering Laboratory, Department of Health Sciences and Technology, ETH Zurich,
Zurich, Switzerland
eDepartment of Nursing, Insel Gruppe, University Hospital Bern, Bern, Switzerland

Received 25 September 2021
Accepted 4 December 2021

Abstract.
BACKGROUND: Early mobilization is important to improve critically ill patients’ outcomes, but barriers to its implementation
are common. A suitable in-bed device to exercise patients’ legs might facilitate early mobilization.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to develop an in-bed leg press that would facilitate early mobilization and enhance
strength training of patients in acute care settings.
METHODS: A user-centered design approach was applied to develop the device. The process was assessed by different
instruments: the system usability scale (SUS) questionnaire, the Kano model questionnaire and interviews with end-users.
RESULTS: Through several iterations of a user-centered design process, the prototype of an in-bed leg press was developed
and tested. The assessment, based on SUS, Kano and interviews, indicates high usability and demonstrates the advantages of a
user-centered design process.
CONCLUSIONS: An interprofessional user-centered design approach was successfully implemented to develop a medical
device. The early involvement of end-users resulted in a design that already shows a high degree of production readiness. The
resulting device fulﬁlled all core requirements from a therapeutic point of view and included key features related to its practical
use.

Keywords: Early mobilization, rehabilitation, user-centered design, user involvement, leg exercise

1. Introduction

Early mobilization is recommended in critically ill adults to counter physical or psychological com-

∗Corresponding author: Kai-Uwe Schmitt, Academic-Practice-Partnership of the Bern University of Applied Sciences and
Insel Gruppe (University Hospital Bern), Murtenstr. 10, 3008 Bern, Switzerland. Tel.: +41 31 848 37 10; E-mail: kai-uwe.
schmitt@bfh.ch.

0928-7329/$35.00 c⃝2022 – IOS Press. All rights reserved.

982

plications [1]. However, there are many barriers that limit early implementation in acute care settings,
for example, lack of staff or equipment [2]. These barriers prolong immobility unnecessarily, which is
associated with muscle weakness and short-term functional disability [3]. Following a critical illness,
patients are often too weak to stand on their legs and risk further injury from falls [4]. Commonly, inten-
sive functional rehabilitation and early mobilization start as soon as cardiorespiratory stability has been
achieved using a stepwise progression from manually assisted in-bed exercises to out-of-bed mobility
training, such as sitting on the edge of the bed [5]. While endurance training can be facilitated with
in-bed cycling ergometers [6], a market analysis indicated that an in-bed device for easy implementation
of resistance training of the lower extremities is currently lacking. There are, for example, complex
devices for mobilization or neurorehabilitation that require the patient to be moved out of bed into the
device, and there are leg presses for sports exercises, but there was no medical in-bed leg exercise device
commercially available. Clinical staff conﬁrmed this lack of such a device to further optimize early
mobilization.
An in-bed leg press device that is suitable to exercise critically ill patients must fulﬁl various re-
quirements. First, the device should allow safe implementation in the acute care setting, such as an
intensive care unit (ICU) or a step-down unit. This means the device must not interfere with other medical
equipment and it should be certiﬁed as a medical device. Second, physiological movement for optimal
and potentially assisted strength training should be supported. Third, the device must be usable in bed so
that training may start as early as possible, i.e. devices that require the patient to be moved out of bed
were not deemed acceptable. Fourth, the device must adhere to infection control standards. Finally, an
in-bed leg press should be easily transported and installed to enhance applicability in practice.
Often it seems that the development of a medical device is initiated by results from fundamental
research usually conducted in a laboratory setting. The design starts with new insights from research
and tries to translate those into clinical practice. This inherits the risk that the ﬁnal design will not meet
the needs of end-users, e.g. the clinical staff. In contrast, involvement of end-users in the development
phase encourages a strong focus on the usability and acceptability of the device [7]. Implementing a
user-centered design (UCD) approach has the potential to achieve high usability and acceptability by
involving the future users right from the beginning [8,9].
The aim of this study was to develop an in-bed leg-press device to facilitate strength training. The device
must be suitable for early mobilization in acute care settings given that the need for such a device was put
forward by ICU staff. The focus was set on the implementation of an interprofessional, user-centered
design process. It was the intention to demonstrate that early involvement of end-users is beneﬁcial.

2. Methods

The need for a new device to facilitate early mobilization of the lower extremities was recognized by
physiotherapists and nurses in the acute care setting. Therefore, a user-centered design approach was
chosen to develop a new in-bed leg press. A mixed-methods approach was used, combining quantitative
and qualitative measurement instruments to evaluate the process and to analyze the resulting strengths
and weaknesses.

2.1. User-centered design approach

A user-centered design (UCD) approach refers to a process of designing a device from an end-user
perspective whereby end-users are actively involved from the beginning of the process. According to ISO

983

Fig. 1. The user-centered design (UCD) process implemented in this study.

9241-210:2019 [10], the UCD process consists of three main stages that are repeated until a solution is
achieved, with all steps involving the participation of the end-users:

– step 1: speciﬁcation of user requirements;
– step 2: development of corresponding solutions;
– step 3: evaluation of the solutions with respect to the deﬁned requirements.
In this study, the UCD was performed in two iterations or phases. In phase 1, brainstorming sessions
were conducted involving health care professionals (physiotherapists, nurses), researchers and (biomedi-
cal) engineers to specify and prioritize the user requirements (step 1). Following these sessions, different
technical solutions were analyzed and eventually a functional model was developed (step 2). This model
was assessed by the end-users in hands-on tests (without patients) and discussions (step 3).
In phase 2, the three steps were repeated in order to design a prototype that was ﬁt for use in a clinical
environment. A more advanced usability test that consisted of two parts was introduced in this iteration
(step 3). All participating physiotherapists were instructed in person for 30 minutes on how to use the
prototype. In addition, a pocket card with instructions was available with the leg press. In the ﬁrst part,
physiotherapists used the device in their clinical practice for approx. four weeks on the ICU or step-down
unit. The device was used with patients who were deemed suitable by the physiotherapists; since the
usability of the device was of primary interest, the physiotherapists were free to include any patient that
they assumed could beneﬁt from using the device as part of the early mobilization scheme. There were no
speciﬁc inclusion criteria with respect to the diagnosis of the patients. Subsequently, their experiences
were evaluated using standardized assessment tools. For the second part, the prototype was improved
based on the physiotherapists’ feedback and an updated version was tested for a further four weeks by a
second, distinct group of acute care physiotherapists. As before, in this test the physiotherapists decided
which patients would use the device. These tests were again followed by an evaluation process using the
same standardized tools to determine usability, desirability and feasibility. In summary, the UCD process
consisted of different phases and iterations such that user feedback was integrated thoroughly. Testing
the device with acute care patients was part of this process. Figure 1 summarizes the UCD approach
implemented in this study.
The responsible ethics committee of the canton of Bern was approached and it ruled that the study did
not fall under the Swiss Human Research Act (Req-2020-01353). The use of the prototype in the Depart-
ment of Intensive Care Medicine was approved by the internal technical commission of the University
Hospital Bern. The device was also assessed, approved and frequently checked by representatives of the
Department of Infection Control.

2.2. Measurement instruments

Feedback after phase 1 was documented and used as input for the development of the prototype. The
usability study performed in phase 2 was evaluated using the system usability scale (SUS) questionnaire,
the Kano model and interviews. This publication focusses on the phase 2 usability assessment.

984

Table 1
The questions used to structure the interviews

Interview guide
Main questions:
1. What is your experience from using the leg press with your patients?
2. Was there anything that you found bothersome?
3. How do you regard the leg movement that is enabled by the device?
4. What do you think about the different exercise options?
5. How do you assess the foot pedals?
Follow-up questions:
1. How did you experience the possible/maximum travel distance of the pedals?
2. How do you rate the possible/maximum exercise load?
3. Can the load be adjusted as needed?
4. Was the adjustment of the angle of the foot pedals sufﬁcient?
5. Is there a need for further adjustments of the pedals?
6. Did you ﬁx the device on the bed using the corresponding straps?
7. How do you rate the overall weight of the device?

The SUS questionnaire is designed for measuring an application’s usability; it consists of ten questions
related to the user-friendliness of a product [11,12]. The German translation of the SUS was used.
Each question is answered on a 5-step Likert scale (from disagree to fully agree). The ﬁnal score is
calculated from the sum of the single values (1–5) and multiplied by 2. Consequently, the SUS can
result in a maximum score of 100, which is the best possible score. Applying the SUS at different
stages of a development – here it was used to assess the prototype and its improved version – allows
comparison between different designs. The two SUS measurements in this study were compared statisti-
cally. Data were checked for normal distribution using the Shapiro-Wilk test. A t-test was performed in
case of a normal distribution, otherwise the Wilcoxon test was applied. The signiﬁcance level was set
to 5%.
The Kano model also utilizes a questionnaire to obtain a differentiated view of a product’s functionality
and performance [13]. This Kano questionnaire must be created for each speciﬁc application. The
model deﬁnes three dimensions that must be included in the questionnaire: (i) must-be requirements,
(ii) one-dimensional requirements, and (iii) attractive requirements. The must-be requirements do not
improve a product in the customer’s perception but lead to dissatisfaction if missing. The one-dimensional
requirements increase customer satisfaction linearly. The attractive requirements relate to the excitement
the product induces in the customer; it is because of such features that a customer decides to choose a
product. A pair of questions is formulated for each feature and answer options use a 5-interval Likert
scale (from like to dislike). In the pair of questions, the ﬁrst question asks if the device has the certain
feature (a functional form of a question) while the second question asks if the product does not have
the feature (a dysfunctional form of the question) [14]. The results of the Kano model are presented as
percentage of agreement to each question. Thus, it can be identiﬁed whether the users regard a certain
feature as a must-be, a one-dimensional or an attractive requirement, respectively.
As a third measure, an interview was conducted with each physiotherapist who had tested the prototype
or the improved prototype in phase 2 (Fig. 1): the interview (duration approx. 30 min.) explored the user
experience. It was based on a self-developed interview guide (Table 1) and comprised 5 main questions
(open-ended, as narrative prompt) and 7 follow-up questions [15]. During each interview, a mind map
summary including the main topics was created and validated by the interviewee [16]. Finally, the mind
maps were compiled into a single overview and a thematic analysis was performed to identify relevant
topics.

985

Fig. 2. Bedside leg press. Functional model positioned in a hospital bed (phase 1, left), ﬁrst prototype (phase 2, right).

3. Results

3.1. Technical development

Figure 2 illustrates the functional model (phase 1) and the ﬁrst prototype (phase 2). In phase1 of the
development, the key requirements of an in-bed leg press for patients in critical care were established and
implemented into a functional model. Eventually, the functional model allowed for exercises with one or
two legs in three different training modes: alternate pedaling, single leg pedaling and isometric training
against the system’s resistance. The model makes use of a pneumatic system that enables regulation of
resistance through valves. Such a mechanism also ensures a high level of patient safety as the device stops
immediately if no force is applied. The device is a self-contained system and does not require electricity
or air pressure connections. Furthermore, it is portable and lightweight such that one person can easily
carry and position the device in bed.
After assessing the functional model, the physiotherapists concluded that the concept fulﬁls the relevant
requirements for early mobilization of the legs. Consequently, in phase 2, a prototype was developed, i.e.
the device was re-engineered to enable a test in a clinical setting. For example, the prototype’s pedals
were changed to allow adjustment of the dorsiﬂexion angle in three different positions. A casing was
added to cover moving parts as an aspect of safety, but also for reasons of hygiene as it must be possible
to easily disinfect the surface of the prototype.
As part of phase 2, the prototype was used by physiotherapists and then improved further. Figure 3
summarizes the changes introduced after the ﬁrst round of the practical tests. This improved prototype
was then used in the second round of tests and concludes the technical development.

3.2. Testing and evaluating the prototype

A total of 9 physiotherapists participated in the study and tested the in-bed leg press in the ICU and
step-down unit of the Department of Intensive Care Medicine at the Inselspital, Bern University Hospital,
Bern, Switzerland.
All participating physiotherapists ﬁlled in the SUS questionnaire. As shown in Fig. 4, the mean SUS
score of Group 1 was 68/100. After modifying the leg press, the mean score increased to 73/100. Data
were normally distributed (Shapiro-Wilk test, p = 0.487), but the difference between Group 1 and Group
2 was not statistically signiﬁcant (t-test, two-sided, signiﬁcance level 5%, unpaired, unequal variances,
p = 0.58).
The results of the Kano questionnaire are summarized in Table 2. As this questionnaire aims to
categorize the different basic features of the device, the results of both groups were cumulated. Easy

986

Fig. 3. Improvements introduced to the prototype between the ﬁrst and second rounds of the tests in the intensive and intermediate
care units.

Fig. 4. The scores of the system usability scale (SUS). The score increased after modifying the prototype (i.e. from Group 1 to
Group 2, statistically not signiﬁcant).

987

Table 2
Results of the Kano model. Each feature is assigned to one category only. In line with the deﬁnition of the
model, the feature “can be ﬁxed in bed”, which received even scores in two categories, was categorized a
“must-be requirement” [13,14]

Feature
Scores given in [%]
Must-be
requirement
One-dimensional
requirement
Attractive
requirement
Optional
requirement
Easy to handle
78.0
11.0
11.0
0.0
Easy to clean/disinfect
67.0
22.0
11.0
0.0
Portable
56.0
0.0
11.0
33.0
Adjustable foot pedals
56.0
0.0
44.0
0.0
Straps to secure the feet
56.0
22.0
11.0
12.0
Can be ﬁxed in bed
33.5
33.5
11.0
22.0
Handy device
11.0
67.0
22.0
0.0
Enables mobilization of the legs
33.0
56.0
0.0
11.0
Quick to install in bed
33.0
56.0
0.0
11.0
Easy to install in bed
33.0
56.0
0.0
11.0
Force feedback for the patient
0.0
0.0
89.0
11.0
Step counter as feedback for the patient
0.0
0.0
78.0
22.0
Foldable foot pedals
11.0
11.0
11.0
67.0

handling, quick cleaning, being portable, providing footrests that are adjustable and allow ﬁxing of the
feet as well as offering an option to restrain the device in bed were regarded as must-be requirements.
Note that the feature related to restraining the device in bed received equally high scores in two categories.
In line with the Kano theory, this feature is therefore regarded as a must-be requirement. It emerged
that the perception of the prototype along with type of movement and quick and easy installation were
regarded as one-dimensional requirements. A method of feedback for the patient (such as a display
showing the force or a step counter) was mentioned as a requirement that increases the attractiveness of
the device.
The interviews highlighted three main categories, i.e. aspects considered most relevant by the physio-
therapists: (i) quality of the exercise, (ii) installation and design of the device, (iii) hygiene.
The patient’s leg movement was perceived as physiological and relevant for early mobilization, with
a clear focus on increasing leg muscle strength. In particular, the guided movement was considered
important and well-suited for the target population. The pedal travel was rated as sufﬁcient by six
therapists while three users felt that it could be slightly longer, allowing larger movement. Pushing
the foot pedal was judged as easier for the patient than pulling it (e.g. in a single leg training). Four
therapists mentioned that extremely weak patients could have difﬁculty stabilizing their knees, potentially
still requiring assistance from the therapists. The choice of three different training modes was regarded
as appropriate. Setting the different modes and adjusting the resistance was perceived as simple and
intuitive. One user commented: “. . . also the nursing staff could use the leg press with patients. . . ”. Two
therapists reported that “one of my patients really enjoyed training with the leg press”. In Group 1 it
was mentioned that some form of motivating feedback would be interesting for the patient. Group 2,
using the improved prototype, had the option to apply such a patient information system. One therapist
reported that “the idea is great for mentally awake patients”, but that the handling of the additional parts
(such as a cable-connected display) takes too much time to install and that different solutions should be
considered.
Installation covers the process of positioning the leg press and the patient before the exercise can begin.
Placing of the device in bed and the positioning and securing of the feet on the pedals were reported to
be easy, quick and intuitive. The total weight of the leg press was rated as acceptable: the device was

988

easy to carry and to store on the ward. Three users in Group 1 observed that the leg press moved in bed
during exercise for some patients. The improved prototype used by Group 2 provided an attachment and
this was commented on positively. Further, it was appreciated that no connections (e.g. to electricity or
compressed air) are needed.
Regarding the design of the prototype, it was noted that “it is a visually pleasant device and it is not
scary to use with patients”. The inclination of the foot pedals was found to be easily adjustable. The shape
of the pedals was deemed suitable for different foot sizes and the fastening straps were reported to be
a good ﬁt. The heel area, however, was found to be potentially uncomfortable. Three users in Group 1
recommended that the pedals could be positioned at a steeper angle (90◦). This option was implemented
in the improved prototype and Group 2 had the option of using a 90◦position. However, all but one user
in Group 2 refrained from using it as they felt the position was too steep. Two physiotherapists in Group
1 requested more labels, for example, on the buttons on the device. This was introduced in the update of
the device but was not commented on by Group 2. Three users remarked that “the nurses were also very
interested and thought the bedside leg press is practical”.
With respect to hygiene, all physiotherapists commented on the importance of the device being quick
and easy to disinfect after use. The users’ expectations in this regard were fulﬁlled by the prototype.

4. Discussion

This study implemented a UCD process to develop a medical device. The starting point was the demand
for an in-bed leg press for early mobilization in acute care settings. Since the demand was formulated
by clinical staff in these units, their motivation was a driving force in the design process and they were
involved throughout the process. This ensured that end-user needs were a guiding principle. The technical
solution had to be as simple as possible. In particular, ease of handling was deemed a prerequisite
to ensure the device will eventually be used in clinical practice. It is worth noting that there was an
interprofessional interest in such a device. The nurses involved in this project were well aware of the
complications following a prolonged period of bed rest (i.e. functional disability due to muscle weakness)
and pointed out that such a device motivates patients and also enhances their own body perception. The
UCD process, especially as it was interprofessional, afforded sufﬁcient consideration to these views.
However, as the primary users are expected to be physiotherapists, only physiotherapists tested the device
with patients at this stage. Furthermore, the design team included researchers from relevant ﬁelds and
engineers, which contributed to the quality of the development. The support of an industrial designer
proved to be valuable, resulting in a prototype with a close-to-product look. An advantage of this was that
we were also able to gain clinically relevant insights related to infection control. The high quality of the
ﬁrst prototype ensured that the testing focused on the relevant features in clinical practice and resulted in
speciﬁc suggestions for improvement.
The process was evaluated by three measures: the SUS questionnaire, the Kano model and interviews.
As expected, the application of the SUS questionnaire proved to be straightforward. Similarly, other
studies have shown that SUS can be used for different types of system usability evaluation and can
provide interpretable results even in trials with few participants [17]. In this project the German version
of the SUS was used. Although this version is not validated, its use is assumed acceptable according to
Gao et al. [18] and it is important to provide questionnaires in a language with which the participants are
familiar. The in-bed leg press achieved in both applications a SUS score that can be rated as an “OK to
good” usability according to Bangor et al. [12]. Despite not being statistically signiﬁcant, the results of
the SUS score demonstrated an increase that seems to be linked to the improvement of the prototype. As

989

the modiﬁcations of the prototype were minor, the small increase of the score makes sense. The SUS
seems sensitive enough to capture such incremental changes, which particularly holds true as the two
groups were comprised of different therapists.
The SUS score in absolute numbers and its interpretation as “OK to Good” are more difﬁcult to assess.
The highly positive and enthusiastic views expressed in the interviews contrast with the SUS score to
some extent. In the interviews, the participants mentioned that the leg press is simple and intuitive to use
and in fact they did use the device correctly after only a brief introduction. Thus, a high SUS score was
to be expected. However, it remains unclear whether participants generally responded more positively
in an interview and/or rated the device more critically when using a given scale. There are indications
that extreme responses are avoided in 5-point Likert scales [19]. Overall, SUS proved to be a helpful
assessment tool in the UCD and allowed us to quantify the usability of the new device in a standardized
manner.
In contrast to SUS, the Kano model requires more preparation because it addresses individual features
of the speciﬁc device. As a result, the features are categorized based on the user assessment and thus the
relevance of the features is prioritized. The application of the Kano model to the leg press conﬁrmed
several key features of the device (e.g. related to the exercise, handling, portability, attachment to the
hospital bed, cleaning and foot pedals). These features must be offered otherwise users perceive the leg
press as incomplete or poor [14]. As it is shaped to the speciﬁc device, the Kano model also highlights
practical aspects. In our case, this related to, for example, the installation. The installation in bed must
be quick and easy for the users (given that the device must be placed in bed with patients who have
limited capacity to cooperate). It is remarkable, however, that the attachment to the bed was not clearly
categorized as a must-be requirement. Apparently, the device can also be used without attaching the
corresponding straps (its own weight allows for a stable positioning for some patients and/or certain
exercises); not using them might save time on installation and is thus more practical. Similarly, the
foldable foot pedals were classiﬁed as an optional requirement. During the development process, it was
deemed a relevant aspect to provide foldable pedals to reduce the size of the device for storage. In practice,
however, the pedals were apparently often not folded because this was not necessary for stowing. The
infotainment system, with a step counter and a pressure sensor, was clearly classiﬁed as an attractive
requirement. The Kano model as applied to Group 1 identiﬁed an option for further development, which
was then implemented in the updated prototype. In summary, the Kano model offered the possibility to
categorize different features and therefore added value to the development process. The results allow
for the prioritizing of the various features, which is important for the ﬁnal design as well as for future
developments to improve the device.
Interviews are a commonly used qualitative method, particularly in medical research. In contrast to
questionnaires, the interviews represent users’ views “unﬁltered”. They can be regarded as the benchmark
for other instruments, particularly if these are not fully validated. Since the interviews in this study were
structured and based an interview guide, it ensured that all interviewees were presented with the same
questions. This meant the interviews were comparable and allowed prioritizing of the statements despite
the number of participants being limited. All physiotherapists agreed that the leg movement encouraged
by the device is physiological and that a guided movement of the leg is important. The in-bed leg press
therefore seems feasible. The three available training modes were regarded as being well suited for
early mobilization. In addition, the training with the leg press and the corresponding leg movement,
respectively, felt familiar to some patients from everyday activities. Physiotherapists reported that some
patients really enjoyed the training, which in turn motivated the physiotherapists to use the leg press. This
was a motivating stimulus for all involved.

990

The interviews with Group 1 raised the suggestion that a steeper angle for the foot pedals would be
helpful. The optimum angle of the foot pedals depends on how the patient is positioned in bed whereas the
position of the patient depends on their stature. The iterative UCD allowed for adjustment of this feature
and then checking of its impact with Group 2. The user feedback was registered and evaluated within
the design cycle. After the second series of tests the angle of the foot pedals was no longer criticized.
However, the interviews also revealed that some features were controversial among the physiotherapists.
The shape of the heel section of the foot pedals was reported to be uncomfortable by some patients. The
foot pedals were produced by 3D-printing, which created the ﬂat and hard surface, and patients can suffer
from sore feet [20] or decubitus if they use the device for too long. Hence, the argument seems plausible.
At the same time, some physiotherapists preferred the current solution and suggested using a small gel
cushion in the heel area to increase comfort, or to provide patients with socks. Even wearing shoes is
possible in the current design. This illustrates that a UCD does not necessarily lead to one optimum design
but must synthesize different views. Ideally – as in our case – this is not related to core requirements but
to implementation of minor aspects.
With regards to limitations, it must be noted that the study was performed during the COVID-19
pandemic. It can be assumed that the pandemic had an inﬂuence on the number of eligible patients in the
ICU. For practical reasons, the number of users in the ﬁrst and second round of tests was not the same
because participation depended on who was available in the acute care setting during the given period.
However, the instruments applied here are supposed to be robust enough to cope with these limitations.
According to Nielsen et al., a usability test performed by only ﬁve users should be able to identify up to
80% of the potential issues of a device [21]. Thus, the number of participants in our study is regarded
as sufﬁciently high; other UCD evaluations with fewer participants also showed meaningful results for
device improvement [17].

5. Conclusion

This study demonstrated that a user-centered design approach can be implemented successfully in the
development of a medical device, such as the development of an in-bed leg press. The early involve-
ment of the interprofessional end-users resulted in a prototype that showed a high degree of production
readiness. The resulting device fulﬁlled all core requirements from a therapeutic point of view and
included key features related to its practical use. Instruments such as SUS and the Kano model allowed
us to measure aspects of usability, desirability and feasibility during the design process, and also to
document improvements based on end-user feedback. The application and evaluation of both ques-
tionnaires is efﬁcient, but it is recommended to complement the assessment with interviews. In this
project, the interviews provided further insights that proved to be valuable for the design process and this
further strengthened the level of identiﬁcation that the health care professionals held towards the new
device.