Research and Applications

User-centered design of a scalable, electronic health
record-integrated remote symptom monitoring interven-
tion for patients with asthma and providers in primary
care

Robert S. Rudin
1, Sofia Perez,2 Jorge A. Rodriguez
,2,3 Jessica Sousa,1 Savanna
Plombon,2 Adriana Arcia
,4 Dinah Foer,3,5 David W. Bates,2,3 and Anuj K. Dalal,2,3

1Health Care Division, RAND Corporation, Boston, Massachusetts, USA, 2Division of General Internal Medicine, Brigham and
Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA, 3Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA, 4School of Nursing,
Columbia University School of Nursing, New York, New York, USA, and 5Division of General Internal Medicine and Division of Al-
lergy and Clinical Immunology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA

Received 7 April 2021; Revised 6 July 2021; Editorial Decision 7 July 2021; Accepted 13 July 2021

ABSTRACT

Objective: To determine user and electronic health records (EHR) integration requirements for a scalable re-
mote symptom monitoring intervention for asthma patients and their providers.
Methods: Guided by the Non-Adoption, Abandonment, Scale-up, Spread, and Sustainability (NASSS) framework,
we conducted a user-centered design process involving English- and Spanish-speaking patients and providers af-
ﬁliated with an academic medical center. We conducted a secondary analysis of interview transcripts from our
prior study, new design sessions with patients and primary care providers (PCPs), and a survey of PCPs. We de-
termined EHR integration requirements as part of the asthma app design and development process.
Results: Analysis of 26 transcripts (21 patients, 5 providers) from the prior study, 21 new design sessions (15
patients, 6 providers), and survey responses from 55 PCPs (71% of 78) identiﬁed requirements. Patient-facing
requirements included: 1- or 5-item symptom questionnaires each week, depending on asthma control; option
to request a callback; ability to enter notes, triggers, and peak ﬂows; and tips pushed via the app prior to a clinic
visit. PCP-facing requirements included a clinician-facing dashboard accessible from the EHR and an EHR inbox
message preceding the visit. PCP preferences diverged regarding graphical presentations of patient-reported
outcomes (PROs). Nurse-facing requirements included callback requests sent as an EHR inbox message.
Requirements were consistent for English- and Spanish-speaking patients. EHR integration required use of cus-
tom application programming interfaces (APIs).
Conclusion: Using the NASSS framework to guide our user-centered design process, we identiﬁed patient and
provider requirements for scaling an EHR-integrated remote symptom monitoring intervention in primary care.
These requirements met the needs of patients and providers. Additional standards for PRO displays and EHR
inbox APIs are needed to facilitate spread.

Key words: remote symptom monitoring, electronic health record integration, user-centered design, intervention design, applica-
tion programmer interfaces

V
C The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the American Medical Informatics Association.

2433

Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, 28(11), 2021, 2433–2444

doi: 10.1093/jamia/ocab157
Advance Access Publication Date: 18 August 2021

Research and Applications

INTRODUCTION

Roughly 60% of people in the United States have 1 or more chronic
diseases. Healthcare for these individuals accounts for 90% of all
healthcare expenditures.1,2 While chronic diseases typically require
continuous management, delivery of healthcare is episodic: patients
are left to independently manage symptoms between time-limited
visits with their providers.3 Digital health tools that are integrated
with the electronic health record (EHR)4 offer promising and scal-
able solutions.5,6 Smartphones, in particular, can serve as a platform
for digital health interventions: smartphone adoption is above 81%
in the US and higher in other countries.7 The increasing number of
patients with multiple chronic comorbidities8 underscore the ur-
gency to scale and spread digital remote monitoring interventions.
The COVID-19 pandemic has heightened this need, as care is in-
creasingly delivered remotely,9 particularly for chronically ill, el-
derly, and other vulnerable patients who are disproportionately
impacted.10–13 Such interventions may prevent emergency room and
urgent care visits by facilitating compliance with condition-specific
guidelines.
Self-management tools that do not connect patients to their pro-
viders face challenges with attracting and retaining users.14 Integra-
tion into clinical workflow via the EHR represents a critical step to
enable more robust adoption and is supported by the US Federal
Health IT Strategic Plan which calls for the use of “digital engage-
ment technologies beyond portals to connect patients more easily
with their providers.”15 To date, there are few studies of integrated
remote symptom monitoring interventions: most have targeted on-
cology and surgical patients on a standardized care pathway or clini-
cal protocol.16 Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder17 and use of
PROMIS measures in the ambulatory pediatric settings18 have also
been studied. Furthermore, to be effective and scalable for patients
with chronic conditions, clinically integrated interventions require
more than summative evaluations: attention to rigorous design
based on the real-world needs of patients, caregivers, and providers
is paramount.19 Determining requirements for effective digital
health interventions remains a major challenge.20 The lack of atten-
tion to the design and development of these interventions may ex-
plain the poor track record of broad adoption of digital health
innovations into routine care.21

We designed a clinically integrated remote symptom monitoring
intervention with the intent of broad scale and spread. We selected
asthma as a model because of its high prevalence (8% of the US pop-
ulation), disease burden, and healthcare costs, all of which are
largely preventable with appropriate management and treatment.22–

25 Additionally, in asthma, clinical guidelines based on clinical trial
evidence are well-established and recommend symptom monitoring
between visits through patient-reported outcomes (PROs).
As part of our prior feasibility study,26,27 we developed and
tested an initial prototype of this intervention for asthma patients in
pulmonary subspecialty clinics to understand clinical workflows and
key technology features required for patients with poorly controlled
asthma. Our original intervention consisted of a smartphone app
that prompted patients to report asthma symptoms every week, an
electronic provider view showing the reported PRO data, and appli-
cation workflows. If patients reported worsening asthma symptoms,
the app prompted them to request a phone call from a nurse in their
clinic. While the app prototype was not integrated into the EHR,
PRO data were manually inserted into physician notes to test the
utility of EHR-integrated PRO reporting during the clinic visit. We

demonstrated high patient adherence and retention, low provider
burden, as well as other benefits.26

For our current study, we adapted this intervention to the pri-
mary care setting, where most asthma patients receive routine
care.28–30 In contrast to sub-specialty care, the care of asthma
patients affiliated with primary care clinics requires attention to a
breadth of health issues, different clinical workflows, variability in
asthma knowledge among the care team, and variability in level of
disease severity. Within PCP panels, asthma patients are relatively
fewer in number, and many have less severe asthma but can still ex-
perience exacerbations and benefit from monitoring. Furthermore,
by adapting our original intervention for primary care, we envi-
sioned developing a model of a clinically integrated, between-visit
remote monitoring intervention that addresses user needs and has
potential for broad scale and spread. If successful for asthma, this in-
tervention could be replicated for other diseases (eg, rheumatoid ar-
thritis,
depression)
and
for
patients
with
multiple
chronic
conditions.31–34

OBJECTIVE

Our objective was to determine software requirements, defined as
“software capabilit[ies] needed by a user to solve a problem or
achieve an objective,” 35 for users (patient, primary care provider,
nurse) and for integration of third-party applications with the
EHR—both of which are necessary to create a remote symptom
monitoring intervention that has potential for scale and spread
across the primary care setting for asthma patients. For this study,
user requirements included functional requirements for the technol-
ogy (patient app and provider dashboard), workflow needs of nurses
and PCPs, and high-level user interface design needs for the purpose
of collecting PRO questionnaire data and monitoring asthma symp-
toms between visits according to clinical guidelines.22,23 We also de-
termined
EHR
integration
requirements,
a
type
of
technical
“interface requirement” which describes how a third-party applica-
tion that satisfies user requirements would need to interact with the
EHR.36

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Overview and framework
To elicit user requirements for the intervention, we conducted a sec-
ondary analysis of interview transcripts from our prior feasibility
study. We then employed user-centered design (UCD) methods: de-
sign sessions, surveys, stakeholder meetings, and iterative prototyp-
ing.37,38 To ensure the user requirements could be supported by the
technology, we sought to determine EHR integration requirements
as part of the design process. We developed the patient-facing mo-
bile app and clinician dashboard while planning to integrate the
technology with our institution’s EHR (Epic Systems, Inc.).
To ensure scalability, we used the Non-Adoption, Abandon-
ment, Scale-up, Spread, and Sustainability (NASSS) framework to
formulate pertinent research questions.21 NASSS is an evidence-
based framework specifically designed to go beyond adoption to in-
clude scale, spread, and sustainability of health technology innova-
tions. Empirical application of NASSS shows that innovations with
more complexity are less likely to be mainstreamed.39 We therefore
used NASSS to anticipate potential complexities, and identify the
simplest, and thus, most scalable, requirements along each dimen-

2434

sion and at each stage of our UCD process (Table 1) and analysis
(Table 3). We designed the intervention with the NASSS framework
in mind from the beginning and used it throughout.

Setting and participants
Our study was approved by the Institutional Review Boards of Mass
General Brigham (MGB) and the RAND Corporation and was per-
formed between January 2019 and November 2020. The study was
conducted at 5 primary care clinics affiliated with Brigham Health,
an academic health system in Boston, Massachusetts. All clinics
were members of the Primary Care Practice-Based Research Net-
work and used a single EHR (Epic Systems, Inc.). Clinics ranged in
number of physicians (8 to 37 per clinic), physician clinical effort
(part-time vs full-time), patient populations (majority Spanish vs
English-speaking), and clinic type (teaching vs non-teaching).

Data collection and analysis
As part of our UCD process, we elicited patient and provider
requirements sequentially using the 3 methods described below. Be-
cause the requirements for each user type and for EHR integration
were interdependent, we considered all of them during each stage of
data collection and analysis.

Secondary analysis of exit interviews from prior feasibility study
At the conclusion of the prior feasibility study, we conducted inter-
views with participating patients and providers about their experi-
ence with the intervention.26,27 For the current study, we re-
reviewed transcripts of these interviews to identify new technical
requirements and user interface enhancements that would improve
upon the original intervention and would be appropriate for primary
care. Two research team members independently reviewed tran-
script excerpts to identify new and relevant features. From these
data, we assembled a preliminary list of user requirements. We then
assessed each requirement based on the interview data and NASSS
domains for inclusion in subsequent design sessions.

Design sessions and stakeholder meetings
We conducted a series of in-person design sessions with patients and
providers. We aimed to recruit a diverse range of patients and pro-
viders in terms of age, gender, race, and ethnicity. One or 2 research
team members conducted each design session, lasting approximately
60 minutes for patients and 30–60 minutes for providers. All design
sessions were audio-recorded. Participants were shown wireframes
developed using an app prototyping tool (Fluid UI) for user interface
design40 and were encouraged to “think aloud” to describe their
reactions to questions about each app feature.41 We alternated de-
sign sessions with patients and providers to ensure we reconciled
both perspectives. For Spanish-speaking patient participants, 1 or 2
native Spanish speakers conducted the design sessions. We aimed to
keep the reading level for the patient participants at the 6th grade
level and assessed patients’ comprehension during design sessions.
We gathered additional input through informal meetings with clinic
medical directors, nurses, and 2 nurses in system leadership posi-
tions. Provider design sessions and meetings with clinic medical
directors included questions about workflow and EHR integration.
We met weekly with a user-experience expert to advise on interface
considerations. We continued recruiting until we no longer identi-
fied any new requirements for features those users considered to be
critical (saturation).

Audio recordings were independently reviewed by 2 research
team members. We used conventional content analysis methods to
identify user reactions which fell into the following categories: spe-
cific functionality, usability issues, and suggestions for changes to
app wording, functionality, or workflow.42 After the team members
reviewed the recordings, they recorded a bulleted list of findings
within each of these categories in Microsoft Word documents, dis-
cussed and resolved any differences considering relevant NASSS
domains, and applied changes to the wireframes for future design
sessions.

PCP survey
To quantify the scope and prevalence of the broad range of preferen-
ces identified in PCP design sessions, we developed a survey for
PCPs who treat asthma patients from the 5 study clinics. We drafted
survey items based on findings from the design sessions and refined
the items through cognitive testing with 3 practicing PCPs. Survey
question topics included preferences for reminders that PROs were
available in the EHR, graphical presentation of PROs, and antici-
pated benefits of the intervention. We distributed the survey using
REDCap.40 PCPs were offered a $25 gift card upon completion. We
calculated aggregate results of discrete items. For open-ended ques-
tions, 2 research team members independently reviewed and coded
all responses into 2 categories: provider notification of asthma data
within workflows and visual display of asthma data. The research
team members then discussed each response individually and se-
lected representative quotes that explained quantitative survey find-
ings.

Software development, enterprise data service
provisioning, and EHR app user interface integration
We used an agile software development approach to translate user
interface and EHR integration requirements that emerged from our
UCD process to ensure that our application would be delivered
within the constraints of our study period and MGB’s emerging gov-
ernance process for digital health.43 We met regularly with our app
developer (First Line Software, Inc.) and MGB’s EHR governance
teams to determine the most feasible strategies for implementing our
technical and functional requirements. We identified key EHR appli-
cation programming interfaces (APIs) that were required to pull cer-
tain data elements into the application; initiated the enterprise data
service provisioning process for requesting APIs; identified graphical
user-interface constraints for provider access to third-party applica-
tions via the EHR; and finally, iteratively refined the user interface,
developed using React Native, an open-source mobile application
framework.44 To ensure security of the protected health information
(PHI) collected by the app, the application was hosted inside the
health system’s firewall on a secure server and underwent a rigorous
security review as required by our institution’s Research Information
Security Office.

RESULTS

We analyzed 26 exit interview transcripts (21 patients, 5 providers)
from our prior feasibility study, conducted 21 new design sessions
(15 patients, 6 providers), and analyzed results of 55 survey
responses from 78 PCP (71% response rate), all of whom were
physicians. The demographic characteristics of these participants
are summarized in Table 2. Prior feasibility demographic data was
reported previously.26

2435

Table 1. The Non-Adoption, Abandonment, Scale-up, Spread, and Sustainability (NASSS) framework as applied to an asthma symptom
monitoring intervention in primary care

Domain and characteristics of scalable inter-
ventions
Pertinent research questions for identifying
requirements
Methods used to identify requirements for
asthma symptom monitoring intervention in
primary care

1. CONDITION: Well-characterized, well-un-
derstood, and predictable; few sociocultural
factors or comorbidities signiﬁcantly affect
care

•
Which kinds of symptoms are amenable to
between-visit symptom monitoring?
•
What sociocultural factors or comorbidities
inﬂuence propensity to use intervention?

•
Determine inclusion/exclusion criteria (eg,
exclude patients with COPD) through input
from clinical experts
•
Analyze data from prior feasibility study
•
Use UCD to identify relevant factors that af-
fect the intervention (eg, level of asthma
control, race/ethnicity, language, health lit-
eracy, education)
2. TECHNOLOGY: Direct measurements of
medical condition; minimal knowledge or
support required to use the technology

•
Which patient-generated measures most di-
rectly measure medical condition?
•
What technology is already used by
patients/providers and can be leveraged?
•
What functionalities require minimal train-
ing?

•
Use standard PRO measures
•
Integrate with EHR and clinical workﬂows
•
Use UCD with patients and providers to en-
sure intervention works with smartphones
and EHRs
•
Consult with usability experts
•
Use simple language with attention to health
literacy to ensure technology is as easy to
use as possible
3. VALUE PROPOSITION: Clear business case
for developer with return on investment (sup-
ply-side value); technology is desirable for
patients, safe, effective, and affordable

•
What are potential business models to scale
technology?
•
What app functionality will be most effec-
tive for a substantial number of patients?

•
Use standards-based data types and APIs
and keep requirements minimal to reduce
need for large investment in development
and costs to adopt
•
Make intervention desirable for patients
(using UCD), feasible to implement (engage
stakeholders), and consistent with estab-
lished evidence-based medical guidelines
that recommend symptom monitoring
•
Do not require deployment of a new device
or other hardware
4. ADOPTER SYSTEM: Minimal changes re-
quired in terms of staff roles or expectations
of patients/caregivers

•
What workﬂows and functionality would
maximize use in the setting of interest (eg,
primary care)?

•
Use UCD and discussions with clinic leader-
ship to ensure workﬂow and technology ﬁts
within existing routines (eg, doesn’t require
separate login, callback requests routed to
appropriate staff)
•
Design app in English and Spanish
5. ORGANIZATION: Minimal changes re-
quired in team interactions or care pathways;
minimal work needed to establish shared vi-
sion, monitor impact

•
How do physicians and nurses interact?
•
How are care pathways implemented using
the EHR?
•
What protocols exist for making changes to
work processes?

•
Meet with clinic physician and nurse leader-
ship to understand existing team interac-
tions and identify minimal changes needed
to implement intervention
•
Work with clinic/hospital leadership to de-
velop or enhance care pathways consistent
with existing protocols (eg, nurse-driven
asthma triage protocol)
6. WIDER CONTEXT: Financial and regula-
tory requirements already in place; support-
ive professional organizations

•
What kinds of related interventions are al-
ready supported by professional bodies?
•
How can the intervention align with antici-
pated changes in ﬁnancial incentives?

•
Ensure intervention is consistent with
asthma guidelines (eg, from National Heart
Lung and Blood Institute)
•
Work with clinic/hospital leadership to de-
sign intervention to help clinics succeed un-
der emerging value-based payment methods
(eg, reduce need for emergency visits)
7. ADAPTATION OVER TIME: Strong scope
for adapting and embedding the technology
as local need or context changes

•
How can new PROs and other EHR data be
added to the app and available at the point
of care?

•
Design technology in modular fashion to al-
low new PROs to be added and displayed
along with other relevant data pending
UCD results

Abbreviations: COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; EHR, electronic health record; PRO, patient-reported outcome; UCD, user-centered design.

2436

Patient-facing, PCP-facing, and nursing-facing requirements in-
formed by the corresponding NASSS domain(s) are described in Ta-
ble 3. Given the interdependencies and interactions among the 3
types of users, requirements based on each user’s experience were
reconciled with the perspectives of other users. For example,
requirements for patient-facing components were identified based
on input not only from patients but also from PCPs and nurses. We
note divergences in requirements within and among the 3 user
groups (eg, different preferences among PCPs regarding PRO dis-
plays). Specific EHR integration requirements (eg, EHR inbox mes-
saging), were necessary to support certain critical user requirements
(eg, callback requests routed to a triage nurse). Many of the require-
ments were determined by a combination of results from the prior
study, design sessions, and survey results.

Patient-facing requirements
Results from the UCD process and application of NASSS translated
into requirements for the patient-facing app, which were largely
consistent for English and Spanish-speaking patients. Feasibility test
data and design sessions suggested strong user support for adminis-
tering the questionnaires on a weekly basis with 48-hour deadlines
(eg, “I think it’s great that you give that amount of time. I just did it,
because once it pops up, I just do it just to get it off my. . . to do list.”
[Test Patient exit interview]). However, for patients with well-
controlled asthma over several weeks or months, feasibility test and
design session participants suggested that completing all 5 questions
was too burdensome. Consequently, we designed a modification to
allow patients without symptoms during the preceding week to com-
plete a single question, addressing whether patients had any relevant
symptoms, instead of the entire 5-item PRO questionnaire. An affir-
mative response prompted the 5-item PRO questionnaire (Figure 1).
Patients participating in design sessions viewed this feature favor-
ably: “I like the option of putting ‘no’ and then you’re not going to
answer all these other questions.” (Design Patient)
Secondary analysis of our prior feasibility study data demonstrated
support for an app feature allowing patients to request callbacks for
deteriorating PROs: “I would always answer ‘yes’ [when the app
prompted me to request a call] . .. after a couple of hours, someone
from the staff would call me to see how I was doing and if I needed to
go in to see the doctor” (Test Patient exit interview). However, the
“mandatory callback” feature, in which patients with poor asthma
control are automatically called by a nurse, were perceived as too bur-
densome to nurses and low-value by patients: “it was just annoying,
because I’m dealing with asthma. .. I’m going to call my doctor. I
don’t want you [the app] to call my doctor for me” (Test Patient exit
interview). Specifically, patients and the nurse participant from our
prior feasibility study suggested removing the mandatory callback re-
quirement and only including the optional feature which allowed
patients to decline to request a callback. Therefore, we removed this
feature and did not assess it further in design sessions.
Other patient-facing requirements included: ability to record
notes (prior feasibility study test patients, design sessions); triggers
and peak flow measurements to engage some patients with poor
asthma control (prior feasibility study test patients, design sessions);
previsit reminders to discuss asthma data with providers at upcom-
ing clinic visits (design sessions); and educational information—vid-
eos, brief tips about asthma, and general medical care (design
sessions). The latter requirement was also reflected in feedback dur-
ing design sessions from PCPs who supported empowering patients
through education, which could then be reinforced during clinic vis-

its. PCPs provided guidance on high priority education topics for
patients to view on the app, including how to use an inhaler and
how to distinguish rescue from controller inhalers. Two Spanish-
speaking patients in our design sessions requested that the app of-
fered faster response times for requested calls. One suggested allow-
ing the app user to enter a level of urgency for the call. However,
this request could not be reconciled with existing clinics workflows
for responding to patient queries.

PCP-facing requirements
We identified 2 PCP-facing requirements from design sessions and
the PCP survey (Tables 3 and 4). The first requirement was a dash-
board containing patients’ asthma data that would be accessible
with minimal effort from the patient’s chart in the EHR. An interac-

Table 2. Characteristics of study participants

Design session participants
Patients
N ¼ 15

Age (years)
< 30
2 (13)
31-45
6 (40)
> 45
7 (47)
Ethnicity
Hispanic or Latinx
5 (33)
Not Hispanic or Latinx
10 (67)
Race
White
10 (67)
Non-White Native American, Black or African
5 (33)
American
Gender
Male
4 (27)
Female
11 (73)
Language
Spanish
6 (40)
English
9 (60)
Level of Education
Did not ﬁnish high school
1 (7)
High school diploma or GED
1 (7)
Some college but no degree
3 (20)
2-year college degree
3 (20)
4-year college degree or more
7 (47)
PCPs
N ¼ 6
Gender
Male
3 (50)
Female
3 (50)
Number of Years since Residency (years)
< 6
1 (17)
6-15
3 (50)
> 15
2 (33)
PCP survey participants
N ¼ 55
Gender
Male
25 (45)
Female
30 (55)
Number of Years since Residency (years)*
< 6
8 (15)
6-15
17 (31)
> 15
27 (49)
Number of half day primary care sessions per week
<3
28 (51)
>4
27 (49)

*Incomplete participant values recorded.

2437

tive graphical display of PRO data (Figure 2) was iteratively devel-
oped with input from PCPs. In this display, survey responses were
almost evenly divided regarding preferences for whether higher
numbers of the graph should mean better asthma control (47%, eg,
“I’m trained to think about asthma in terms of ACT scores, so to me
a higher number is better”), or worse asthma control (40%, eg, “I
usually think about asthma control in terms of how frequent and se-
vere are symptoms–so the higher [the score] ¼ red ¼ bad–fits my
general mindset”).

Design sessions with providers yielded several enhancements to
the PRO dashboard: an auto-generated text summary of the
patient’s recent asthma data that could be incorporated into notes,
and point-of-care access to evidence-based guidelines for asthma
management (a statement summarizing asthma control goals and a
link to more detailed guidance—the statement was developed by a
pulmonologist with expertise in asthma from our institution and in-
corporated guidelines from the National Heart, Lung, and Blood In-
stitute, the Global Initiative for Asthma, and recent asthma

Table 3: User requirements for a scalable remote monitoring intervention in primary care

User requirement
NASSS framework domain applied to clinically integrated intervention

Patient-facing requirements
Either a weekly 5- or 1-item questionnaire depending if symptoms were
present in the preceding week with data viewable as a graph
Domain 1. Condition: Adjusting number of items based on symptoms
allows for patients with mild intermittent, mild persistent, moderate
persistent, or severe persistent asthma to be included, simplifying re-
cruitment in the primary care setting
Domain 2. Technology: PRO questionnaire directly measures asthma
symptom control and requires minimal training
Domain 4. Adopter System (Patient): 5 or 1-item per week PRO ques-
tionnaire is acceptable to patients with poorly controlled (5-item) and
well-controlled (1-item) asthma, which also could be completed by the
patient’s caregiver
Domain 6. Wider Context: PRO-based symptoms monitoring is consis-
tent with established clinical guidelines
Patient requested callback from nurse
Domain 4. Adopter System (Patient): An option for patient-requested
callback on demand desired by patients to facilitate clinical contact.
Automatic callbacks based on PROs alone likely unhelpful to patients
and burdensome to providers.
Educational videos and text within app, with reminders after weekly
questionnaires
Domain 4. Adopter System (Patient): Reinforces education received dur-
ing clinic visit.
Domain 4. Adopter System (PCP): Saves PCPs clinic visit time explaining
to patients.
Domain 6. Wider Context: Content of education promotes established
clinical recommendations.
Peak ﬂow values, weekly notes, and triggers entered into app and view-
able in the app and EHR
Domain 3. Value Proposition: Strongly desired by some patients with se-
vere asthma. Engages patients by consolidating asthma-related data in
a single location.
Domain 4. Adopter System (Patient): Few patients may use these fea-
tures, so there should be no expectation for using them.
Previsit tips sent to patients as push notiﬁcation, includes reminder to
take their phone to their PCP appointment and discuss their condition
Domain 3. Value Proposition: Tips highly valued by patients, enhancing
engagement by prompting discussion with clinicians about patient
responses to PRO questionnaires.
Domain 4. Adopter System (Patient): Minimal additional task for
patients, similar to routine reminders of upcoming scheduled clinic
appointments.
PCP-facing requirements
PRO dashboard accessible in 1 click within a patient’s chart, including a
link to updated guidelines
Domain 4. Adopter System (PCP): Dashboard accessible from chart
requires minimal additional work to view the asthma PRO data.
Domain 6. Wider Context: Reinforces guidelines by facilitating access to
them within EHR in context of asthma PRO data
Previsit EHR inbox reminder sent to inform PCPs that patient is using
app
Domain 4. Adopter System (PCP): EHR inbox the most preferred
method for reminders of PRO data, compatible with existing work-
ﬂows
Nurse-facing requirements
Callback requests initiates message to EHR inbox monitored by triage
nurses
Domain 2. Technology: Minimal training required
Domain 4. Adopter System (nurse): Aligned with current nurse roles and
workﬂows (ie, similar to responding to a patient phone call)
Nurse-driven triage protocol available when patient requests callback
Domain 5. Organization: Aligned with existing care pathways, enabling
nurses to handle additional clinical situations with minimal additional
burden
Domain 6. Wider Context: Reinforces guidelines by incorporating them
into nursing working ﬂow and responsibilities

Abbreviations: EHR, electronic health record; NASSS, nonadoption, abandonment, scale-up, spread, and sustainability; PRO, patient reported outcome.

2438

literature). In free-text comments and in the design session, PCPs
suggested additional types of EHR data that could be incorporated
into the display to make it more useful (eg, current asthma medica-
tions and refill data, recent ED visits or hospitalizations, name of
asthma specialist treating patient). However, other respondents pre-
ferred to access these data through current EHR locations (eg, “I
don’t need other data. I have a routine for following/checking other
data that works for me.”)
The second requirement was previsit reminders: all 6 PCPs in de-
sign sessions endorsed the idea of having the app remind patients to

bring their phones and medications to their visits. Of the 55 pro-
viders who responded to the survey, 53 (96%) wanted to be
reminded to check the PROs. Of other options offered, 35 (64%)
PCPs preferred to receive an EHR inbox message as a previsit re-
minder; 23 (42%) preferred in-person reminders from a nurse or
medical assistant; and 17 (31%) wanted to receive a clinical decision
support alert (ie, “Best Practice Alert”) during the encounter. In
written survey comments, 3 PCPs suggested adding the reminder in
the “huddle note” (ie, a short note within the daily clinic schedule
view in the EHR).

Table 4. Results of PCP survey about intervention requirements

No. (%)

Survey Respondents (PCPs)
55
Preferred method of being reminded of PRO data*
In-basket** message (in Staff
35 (64)
Message folder)
Email to your Partners email
2 (4)
Account
Interruptive (pop up) alert in
17 (31)
Epic (also called BPA)
Have a medical assistant tell me
23 (42)
None
Preferred category of patients about which to be reminded of PRO data
(select 1)
All patients with the app (even those with no completed question-
naires, eg, to see non-adherence)
6 (11)

Only patients with some PRO data
Only patients with reported worse asthma control since last visit
16 (29)
Other
27 (49)
Never (I don’t want to be reminded)
4 (7)
2 (4)
Preferred timing of reminder PRO data (check all that apply)
Day before visit
23 (42)
Day of visit
19 (35)
When I open the patient’s chart
33 (60)
Other times
8 (15)
Never (I don’t want to receive a reminder)
1 (2)
Preferred graph (select 1)
Graph 1 (higher means better asthma control)
26 (47)
Graph 2 (higher means worse asthma control)
22 (40)
I don’t have a preference
7 (13)
Usefulness of generated text (select 1)
Yes, useful often
25(45)
Yes, useful sometimes
22(40)
No, not useful
5(9)
Not sure
3(5)
Anticipated beneﬁts of intervention (check all that apply)
Improve asthma control
36 (65)
Reduce asthma emergencies (eg, ED visits)
25 (45)
Give patients faster access to care
21 (38)
Make patients feel more connected to their care team
38 (69)
Make patients more aware of their asthma
44 (80)
Give me better data for treatment decisions
42 (76)
No major beneﬁt
2 (4)
Change in interest in participating in digital remote monitoring interven-
tions in the era of COVID-19
I am much more interested/I am more interested
32 (58)
I have the same level of interest
21 (38)
I am less interested/I am much less interested
1 (2)

*Counts are provided for response of “Would be Nice” or “Want This.” Other response options were “I don’t want this” and “No Preference.”
**In-basket refers to the EHR inbox.

2439

Nurse-facing requirements
We identified 2 requirements for nurses to be able to feasibly re-
spond to callback requests in their existing workflows. First, nurses
in all 5 clinics required all patient callback requests to be sent in the
form of EHR inbox messages to the individual nurse or nurse pool
assigned to the requesting patient and affiliated with the clinic. Be-
cause nurses’ workflows were centered around responding to EHR
inbox messages, nurse managers suggested that other methods for

delivering the requests (eg, email) would not be reliable. Nurses
requested that these messages include the patient’s responses to the
recent questionnaire, directions for how to access the asthma data
within Epic, and other key information to assist with prioritizing the
callback request (eg, if they had already called the clinic about their
asthma).
Second, nurse leaders suggested that a prespecified nurse-driven
clinical protocol designed specifically for asthma would be most ef-

Figure 1. Example screenshots of patient-facing app. The app prompts patients through push notiﬁcations to answer 1 or 5 questions depending on their previous
week’s responses. Patients with poor or worsening asthma control are offered the option to request a callback from a nurse in their clinic.

Figure 2. Asthma dashboard in Electronic Health Record. All PRO data, notes, and triggers entered by the patient are available with 1 click from the patient’s chart.
An auto-generated text summary of the patient’s PRO data and link to current guidelines (developed by an asthma expert based on guidelines and asthma re-
search) is shown. EHR is from V
C 2021 Epic Systems Corporation, used with permission. Dashboard was developed by the research team.

2440

fective for triaging callback requests. Otherwise, nurses would de-
fault to referring patient-reported issues they identify to the PCP
rather than addressing these issues themselves, creating an inefficient
workflow.

EHR integration requirements
We identified 3 EHR integration requirements (Figure 3). First,
PCPs indicated that the asthma PRO dashboard must be easily ac-
cessible from patients’ charts before or during a visit. To address
this, we were required to register the third-party application as an
“extension.” The PRO dashboard could then be added to the main
navigation bar for all PCP users, and individual PCP users also had
the option of customizing their patient chart view to include the
PRO dashboard as a default tab (Figure 2). When selected, the PRO
dashboard application reads credentials of the current PCP user (eg,
username) and selected patient (eg, MRN) from the EHR, rendering
the appropriate patient’s dashboard in context of the current PCP
user and selected patient. The PRO dashboard automatically
authenticates the current PCP user using our institution’s Single
Sign-On (SSO) process, thereby eliminating a second login step.
Second, a data services API was required to send EHR inbox
notifications to nurses and PCPs for patient callback requests and
previsit reminders, respectively. Since a standards-based API that
supports EHR inbox messaging did not exist, we used a custom API

built by our institution that allows a third-party app to send an
EHR inbox message to any specified EHR user or pool of users.
Third, to send previsit tips to patients and reminders to PCPs, the
application required access to visit schedules and the identity of the
PCP. While visits schedules and PCP identity could be accessed via
Fast
Health
Interoperability
Resources
(FHIR)
APIs
(“Appointment” and “Care Team” resources, respectively), we ini-
tially decided to use our institution’s custom APIs (given our soft-
ware
vendor’s
experience)
while
exploring
the
feasibility
of
transitioning to FHIR APIs supported by US Core profiles as part of
our scale and spread efforts.

DISCUSSION

Using the NASSS framework to guide our UCD process, we identi-
fied user and EHR integration requirements for the design of a scal-
able, remote symptom monitoring intervention for primary care.
Patient-facing requirements included allowing patients with no ac-
tive symptoms to answer only 1 item per week instead of 5; allowing
patients to view educational videos and enter notes, triggers, and
peak flows; and sending relevant visit-related tips to encourage the
patient to discuss their asthma with their PCPs. PCP-facing require-
ments included allowing the dashboard to be viewed in the EHR
with 1 click from the patient’s chart and sending the PCP an EHR

Figure 3. Asthma App Technical Architecture and EHR Integration. Three information ﬂows (A, B, and C) are shown with dark blue, orange, and tan, respectively.
(A) PROs and other data entered into the app by the patient are made available to the provider in a dashboard in the EHR along with auto-generated text that can
be pasted into a note. PRO data are stored in the app server but currently not written back to the EHR database. The dashboard is accessible to the provider using
Single Sign On and does not require a separate login. (B) If symptoms meet certain criteria, the patient will have the option to request a nurse callback. This re-
quest is sent through the app server to the appropriate nurse or nurse pool’s EHR inbox. (C) Upcoming visit information is read from the EHR database on a daily
basis. This information is fed through the app server, which sends information to both patients and providers before a visit. Patients receive tips for their visit,
reminding them, for instance, to bring their phone and discuss their asthma with their providers. Providers receive EHR inbox messages reminding them to check
the dashboard for PROs and other information gathered by the app regarding their patients.

2441

inbox message preceding patient visits. Nurse-facing requirements
included receiving requests for callbacks via EHR inbox message,
and a clinical triage protocol for handling such calls. While we were
able to integrate the application’s PRO dashboard into our institu-
tion’s EHR for clinician access, requirements for sending EHR inbox
messages could not be addressed with current open standards, re-
quiring us to use our institution’s previously developed custom APIs.
By applying research methods in each NASSS domain, we were
able to identify requirements that would be pertinent to the potential
broad use of our original intervention for asthma in a primary care
setting once adapted. We were able to reconcile requirements eli-
cited from English- and Spanish-speaking patients, PCPs, and
nurses. Inconsistencies in PCP preferences may reflect variations in
PCP workflows identified in prior studies.45,46 Several preference
variations could be addressed through configuration options. For
example, most PCPs preferred receiving an EHR inbox message re-
minder regarding available asthma data, while others preferred an
alert or to be told by clinic staff. “Alert fatigue” may be the reason
most prefer not to receive an alert.47–50 PCPs differed regarding the
dashboard’s purpose, whether to solely display asthma PROs or to
serve as a comprehensive dashboard for all asthma-related data in
the EHR. While clinicians may distrust data sourced from third
party apps, this may become less of a problem as these users become
accustomed to integrated apps. The most striking variation we
found was divergent preferences among PCPs for the direction of
better or worse asthma control on the dashboard, suggesting the
need for more standardized presentations to enable consistent com-
munication among patients and providers.51–54

Our study addresses a notable gap in prior literature by identify-
ing requirements for a scalable digital remote monitoring interven-
tion for adult asthma patients that may have relevance to other
clinical domains. As care is increasingly delivered remotely, which
has accelerated due to the COVID-19 pandemic, such requirements
are likely to become more important.9 By applying NASSS frame-
work
domains—especially
technology,
value
proposition,
and
adopter systems for patients and providers—we were able to priori-
tize scalability throughout our requirements elicitation process. Our
effort is distinct from other reported efforts at developing clinically
integrated remote monitoring interventions, which lack prioritiza-
tion of requirements,55 require additional clinical staff, such as care
managers, to monitor data,56 or require a device (eg, for measuring
inhaler usage).57 These alternate approaches may encounter scalabil-
ity issues, such as extra complexity due to prioritizing less important
requirements, or costs challenges for using devices where they aren’t
necessary. Furthermore, we provide new knowledge regarding how
a third-party application can be integrated into an EHR with pa-
tient- and provider-facing components to enable the use of PROs for
between-visit monitoring, complementing our previous work in the
hospital setting.6,58–61 Even with recent advances, FHIR standards
could not address all of our requirements for this application, sug-
gesting a need for additional standards, specifically for sending mes-
sages to EHR inboxes.

Limitations
Our study has several limitations. First, our remote monitoring in-
tervention is restricted to a single condition. Additional UCD is re-
quired to understand requirements for other medical conditions (eg,
mental health, rheumatological diseases). Second, clinical users were
affiliated with 1 academic health center that used a single EHR
(Epic Systems, Inc.). Requirements may vary for other health sys-

tems and EHR vendors. As described in the NASSS framework,
organizations with lower capacity to innovate may have more com-
plex requirements. Also, organizations without a clearly defined
governance process for integrating third party apps into the EHR
will likely encounter challenges. Third, our app is dependent on
smartphone ownership and use by patients. Although a growing ma-
jority of patients have smartphones, some may have difficulty using
them (though many may have a caregiver who uses a smart-
phone).7,62–64 Fourth, the PRO data was stored in the app server
and not written back to the EHR database. However, institutions
are currently considering how to integrate and utilize high-value pa-
tient-generated data into the EHR.65 Finally, EHR functionality and
clinician use of EHRs are evolving. As PRO functionality within na-
tive EHRs is increasingly adopted, user requirements for clinicians’
engagement with these data may change, and future validation and
replication of our findings is necessary.

CONCLUSION

We determined user and EHR integration requirements for a clini-
cally integrated remote symptom monitoring intervention for
asthma using PROs. The requirements reflect the NASSS framework
and are designed to scale across primary care. This study demon-
strates how third-party apps can be used for PRO-based between-
visit monitoring in a real-world clinical setting with the goal of max-
imizing use, usability, and scalability in parallel with native EHR
functionality and patient portal offerings.6,58–61,66–68 We identified
gaps in current technical and graphical standards that would facili-
tate spread of this intervention. Although we focused exclusively on
asthma, these findings may generalize to other chronic conditions
that benefit from routine symptom monitoring using standardized
PROs, such as rheumatologic disease, mental health illness, and irri-
table bowel disease.69 Similar requirements elicitation approaches
also have the potential to develop scalable interventions for moni-
toring overall health of patients with multiple chronic conditions,
such as captured by global health PROs which measure general
physical, mental, and social health.70–73 With further testing, itera-
tive development, and continued attention to scalability, the rapidly
evolving efforts of digital remote monitoring between visits may be
achievable at the population level for patients with chronic condi-
tions.