Original Paper

A Precision Medicine Tool for Patients With Multiple Sclerosis
(the Open MS BioScreen): Human-Centered Design and
Development

Erica Schleimer1, BSc; Jennifer Pearce2, MPA; Andrew Barnecut1, BA; William Rowles1, BA; Antoine Lizee1, MSc;
Arno Klein3, PhD; Valerie J Block1, DPTSc; Adam Santaniello1, BSc; Adam Renschen1, BA; Refujia Gomez1, BSc;
Anisha Keshavan1, PhD; Jeffrey M Gelfand1, MD, MAS; Roland G Henry1, PhD; Stephen L Hauser1, MD; Riley
Bove1, MD, MMSc

1Department of Neurology, UCSF Weill Institute for Neurosciences, San Francisco, CA, United States
2Plain Language Health, San Francisco, CA, United States
3Child Mind Institute, New York, NY, United States

Riley Bove, MD, MMSc
Department of Neurology
UCSF Weill Institute for Neurosciences
675 Nelson Rising Lane
San Francisco, CA, 94158
United States
Phone: 1 14155952795

Abstract

Background: Patients with multiple sclerosis (MS) face several challenges in accessing clinical tools to help them monitor,
understand, and make meaningful decisions about their disease course. The University of California San Francisco MS BioScreen
is a web-based precision medicine tool initially designed to be clinician facing. We aimed to design a second, openly available
tool, Open MS BioScreen, that would be accessible, understandable, and actionable by people with MS.
Objective: This study aimed to describe the human-centered design and development approach (inspiration, ideation, and
implementation) for creating the Open MS BioScreen platform.
Methods: We planned an iterative and cyclical development process that included stakeholder engagement and iterative feedback
from users. Stakeholders included patients with MS along with their caregivers and family members, MS experts, generalist
clinicians, industry representatives, and advocacy experts. Users consisted of anyone who wants to track MS measurements over
time and access openly available tools for people with MS. Phase I (inspiration) consisted of empathizing with users and defining
the problem. We sought to understand the main challenges faced by patients and clinicians and what they would want to see in
a web-based app. In phase II (ideation), our multidisciplinary team discussed approaches to capture, display, and make sense of
user data. Then, we prototyped a series of mock-ups to solicit feedback from clinicians and people with MS. In phase III
(implementation), we incorporated all concepts to test and iterate a minimally viable product. We then gathered feedback through
an agile development process. The design and development were cyclical—many times throughout the process, we went back to
the drawing board.
Results: This human-centered approach generated an openly available, web-based app through which patients with MS, their
clinicians, and their caregivers can access the site and create an account. Users can enter information about their MS (basic level
as well as more advanced concepts), visualize their data longitudinally, access a series of algorithms designed to empower them
to make decisions about their treatments, and enter data from wearable devices to encourage realistic goal setting about their
ambulatory activity. Agile development will allow us to continue to incorporate precision medicine tools, as these are validated
in the clinical research arena.
Conclusions: After engaging intended users into the iterative human-centered design of the Open MS BioScreen, we will now
monitor the adaptation and dissemination of the tool as we expand its functionality and reach. The insights generated from this

J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 7 | e15605 | p. 1

approach can be applied to the development of a number of self-tracking, self-management, and user engagement tools for patients
with chronic conditions.

(J Med Internet Res 2020;22(7):e15605) doi: 10.2196/15605

KEYWORDS
human-centered design; mobile phone; personal health record; participatory medicine; visualization in eHealth; human factors

Introduction

Background

Delivering actionable clinical tools into the hands of patients
and clinicians represents a major unmet need for the delivery
of precision medicine for complex diseases such as multiple
sclerosis (MS). MS is a chronic, inflammatory, and
neurodegenerative disease characterized by onset typically
during young adulthood, a protracted and heterogeneous course,
variable impairments across multiple functional domains, and
variable response to medications [1]. Digital tools help to track
this heterogeneity and inform decision making [2] These include
digital tools that create research cohorts and registries (eg,
iConquerMS [3] and The North American Research Committee
on Multiple Sclerosis [4]) and help patients connect with one
another and collect and share information (eg, PatientsLikeMe
[5], SmartPatients [6], and Facebook groups [7]). In health care
settings without a single-payer system or a national electronic
health record (EHR), there is a further need for a data collection
system to allow patients to collect essential information about
their MS course as they navigate multiple providers and EHRs
over time. Within this landscape, we aimed to create a freely
available platform through which patients can enter basic MS
measurements, visualize their course, and access actionable
research tools curated by clinicians to inform their decision
making.

Open MS BioScreen

In 2013, the University of California, San Francisco (UCSF)
Multiple Sclerosis Group announced the UCSF Multiple
Sclerosis BioScreen [8]. The MS BioScreen is a data
infrastructure platform that gathers all relevant MS data from
different sources, including clinical, imaging, and biomarker
information; visually represents the disease course of an
individual with MS from a front-end interface; and frames this
course within the context of a large cohort of patients treated
according to contemporary standards. The goal is to inform
more precise clinical decisions and by providing clear
information and decision aids, to empower patients to participate
more actively in their clinical care. This work received key
support from the Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute
and the Conrad N. Hilton Foundation. However, this first
prototype was developed as a clinician-facing, tablet-based tool
and hence was not accessible beyond the limited group of
patients followed at UCSF. Due to the limitations of tablet
storage and connectivity, the MS BioScreen was not used after
the pilot phase.

To expand the reach of our precision medicine solution, we
aimed to develop the Open MS BioScreen [9]: a publicly
available web-based app, free of commercial interest, that allows
users within or beyond highly specialized academic care settings
the opportunity to enter data on their condition; obtain a richly
contextualized, digestible, and actionable predictive output; and
participate in a shared decision-making process. We included
open in the title as a key concept because the platform is freely
available for anyone in any location to create a profile and enter
their MS measurements, without requiring a fee or any user
validation process.

Here, we describe the human-centered design approach that we
applied throughout the development process, an approach that
focuses on the usability and needs of those the tool is meant to
serve in addition to the specific theoretical framework that was
applied as an underpinning to the platform content.

Methods

Human-Centered Design Approach

App development of the Open MS BioScreen began in March
2017 and is ongoing. We applied the concept of human-centered
design [10,11], an approach that focuses on the usability and
needs of those the tool is meant to serve. We included a variety
of key stakeholders: individual patients, patient support groups,
clinicians, technology consultants, and institutional groups, and
we integrated their feedback continuously throughout the
development of the app. In the context of chronic disease, the
application of human-centered design represents an opportunity
to address key underlying provider and patient gaps that obstruct
improved health outcomes. As previously described [11], to
bridge the knowing and doing gap between evidence-based
provider recommendations and patient implementation, solutions
must wield individualized and actionable goals that can be
addressed within real-world limitations. Without involving key
stakeholders 
in 
the 
development, 
promising
technology-leveraged management platforms have difficulty
achieving clinical improvement (eg, type 2 diabetes [12] and
cardiac rehabilitation [13]). In contrast, tools incorporating
human-centered design demonstrate positive effects for specified
outcomes across diverse populations [14], including caregivers
of patients with Alzheimer disease [15], patients managing
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease [16], and in pain
management [17].

As outlined in Figure 1, we applied the three phases of
human-centered design [11]: (1) inspiration (empathize and
define), (2) ideation (ideate and prototype), and (3)
implementation (test and iterate).

J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 7 | e15605 | p. 2

Figure 1. The human-centered design process for Open MS BioScreen.

Team and Stakeholders

The Open MS Bioscreen team at UCSF includes a clinical lead
(RB), developer (ES), back-end data consultants (AS and AR),
technical consultant (AL), radiology consultant (RH),
compliance and logistical assistant (WR), designer (AB),
students, and research assistants. This group leveraged the
expertise of the broader group of UCSF-based MS researchers
(the UCSF Expression, Proteomics, Imaging, Clinical [EPIC]
longitudinal study [18,19]) as well as team experience with
other tools developed through the UCSF MS BioScreen project,
namely, Sutter Health MS Share [8] and UCSF BRIDGE [20].

Health Literacy Expert

A health literacy consultant with expertise in chronic conditions,
including MS, was engaged to provide individual feedback on
solution design and patient interview protocols as well as guide
content creation using input gleaned from patient focus groups.

Key Stakeholders

Patients With Multiple Sclerosis
Through convenience sampling, we identified 50 adults with
MS who participated either in individual interviews with patients
identified by participating clinicians or approached by the study
team in the clinic waiting room and at an MS fundraising walk
(n=15, often accompanied with a partner, friend, or caregiver)
and focus groups (3 groups comprising 6, 8, and 21 people; 2
community-based [National Multiple Sclerosis Society, NMSS,
support groups] and 1 UCSF-based). An additional 24
participated in the validation of patient-reported MS duration
and treatment and provided individual feedback.

Clinicians
Through convenience sampling, we identified 6 UCSF-based
MS consultants, as well as 2 external neurologists (1 MS and
1 general), who were included through phases I and II.

Advocacy Group
Representatives from the NMSS, a primary organization for
MS advocacy and research in the United States, were consulted
in phase 1 (N=1) and phase 3 (N=3) to advise on the overall
goals of the Open MS BioScreen, clarity and relevance of the
content to MS patients, and any ethical or other considerations
anticipated.

Industry Representatives
This convenience sample of representatives who had approached
the MS BioScreen team during the development phases included
representatives from 2 biotech companies seeking to develop
patient-facing technical solutions for the delivery of MS
precision medicine (1 pharmaceutical and 1 biotechnological)
as well as 3 experts in the delivery of advanced magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) solutions to patients. The role of input
from these representatives was to better delineate the value
proposition of an openly accessible, freely available platform
within the context of current digital health efforts; however, the
platform was not designed to collect data of commercial
relevance.

Theoretical Underpinning

Although the design process was iterative and human-centered,
we identified a priori several key underpinnings of the platform,
namely, Open MS BioScreen should comprise 5 features: (I)
profile, (II) measures, (III) patient-reported expanded disability
status scale (prEDSS), (IV) course, and (V) decision aids, as
outlined in Figure 2. Finally, the user can represent a patient, a
patient’s proxy (friend, spouse, partner, child, and caregiver),
or a clinician [21].

Feature I allows a user to create a profile about themselves. The
profile contains required information: month and year of birth
and age of onset of MS. In addition, users can add optional
information: gender, MS type, city, country, education,
employment, race, smoking history, and spinal tap results.

Feature II is used for patient-reported basic MS measures. Users
can enter in their standard disability scores (expanded disability
status scale, EDSS) [22] results and date of results. Relapse
dates can be reported and stored. Additionally, users can enter
their MS medication types and dates.

Feature III focuses on 1 specific measure, the prEDSS
questionnaire. The prEDSS feature allows a user to answer a
series of questions to generate a prEDSS score and visualization
and can be used when patients do not have access to a clinician’s
objective EDSS score.

Feature IV is a data visualization component that brings in data
from features I-III. The patient course is plotted in a single
interactive view, allowing the user to see all their MS

J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 7 | e15605 | p. 3

measurements plotted along with their prEDSS scores. Users
can optionally display their course in context with our
contextualization cohort to see how their MS course compares.

Feature V is a set of many evolving features. Here, we take
relevant and new MS research findings and translate them into

interactive and actionable features that serve as decision aids
regarding if and when to start MS therapies and how to balance
the risks and benefits of treatment approaches. We also link it
to other tools that could be useful.

Figure 2. Open MS BioScreen features. EDSS: expanded disability status scale; prEDSS: patient-reported expanded disability status scale.

Phase I—Inspiration: Empathize and Define

The goal of this phase was to define the problem we were trying
to solve. To accomplish this, between September 2016 and
March 2017, one-on-one in-depth in-person interviews were
conducted with clinicians, MS patients (and their friends,
families, and caregivers), and industry and advocacy experts.
Interview transcripts and questionnaire responses were then
reviewed and parsed into key insights (Tables 1 and 2).

We gathered information from clinicians, patients, partners and
through market research.

1.
Clinician interviews: We interviewed 1 MS expert (2 hours)
and shadowed 5 others in the clinic (one 4-5 hour session
each) to observe the interaction and document the
information provided. As part of the observation, we talked
with the patients to develop an understanding of them, their
MS, and how they stay informed. Following the clinical
observations, all interviews focused on the tools available
to clinicians to monitor their patients (eg, what types of
patient-centered data were missing from the clinical EHR?),
decision support tools available to them in routine clinical
encounters (eg, contextualization or predictive algorithms
readily available and would they be useful), and unmet
needs (eg, what types of visualizations would help them
communicate risk with patients?).

2.
Patient interviews: In total, 12 individual patients were
interviewed using semistructured questionnaires, developed
with input from the health literacy expert. Interviews lasted
30-60 min and asked patients general questions about their
MS and their use of tools to understand and track their
condition outside of clinical encounters (Multimedia
Appendices 1 and 2).
3.
Interviews with technology and advocacy partners: These
general interviews lasted 30-120 min and were related to
the availability of other tools on the market, relative
strengths, and unmet needs.
4.
Comparative analysis of existing technological solutions:
Here, our team researched other technical solutions
available to patients with MS and their clinicians to track
their own course and access relevant algorithms and
visualizations that empowered them to participate in their
own care. To accomplish this, we used the Google search
engine, the iOS App Store, and the Google Play Store and
used the search terms “multiple sclerosis”
or
“MS” and the terms “symptom tracker,” “monitor,”
“tracker,” and “algorithm.” From these results, rather than
reporting an exhaustive list, we selected tools intended to
highlight desired features, possible redundancies/overlap,
as well as technological or other pitfalls of existing tools.

J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 7 | e15605 | p. 4

Table 1. Patient interview insights.

Patient input
Insight

Clarity
•
Does not want to be inundated with information
•
Wants to reclaim control of their disease—too little clarity, not enough power in their hands
•
Currently feels like there are no clear answers given, feels alone in trying to understand
•
Wants information that is easy to understand and translate between centers
•
Can be medically illiterate at times—feels they have a lot of misconceptions

Data collection and visualization
•
Tracks in everything in a notebook—filled with other information
•
Wants to see scores

Personalized
•
Tracking their own progress and treatment efficacy, balanced with their own preferences and needs

Trajectory
•
Wants to know if they are getting better or worse
•
Wants to know 5-year outlook
•
Constantly playing mind games to stay positive

Comparison
•
Would like to see other patient data without communicating with them
•
Wants to meet other people with the same progression
•
Wants to gain more perspective about other people with MSa

Treatment
•
Wants to know that the treatments they are getting are useful or the best for their disease

Resources
•
Wants more information about specific areas of interest—genetics, therapies, and education about MS
•
Wants lots of educated opinions

Time with specialist
•
Prefers time spent with doctor to time spent researching on their own
•
Does not know what to contact their neurologist about
•
Will not go to the doctor until it is unbearable
•
Wants a printout from every visit

aMS: multiple sclerosis.

J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 7 | e15605 | p. 5

Table 2. Comparative analysis of existing technological solutions: illustrative examples.

How strengths and limitations
shaped our phase II process
Limitations
Strengths
Tool evaluated

UCSFa MSb BioScreen [8]
•
Enabled patient-entered da-
ta
•
iOS app
•
Integrates clinical, MRI, and
biomarker data in 1 coherent view
•
Not real time; depends on data
extracted from study registry
•
Web-based platform prefer-
able
or EMRc

Data living in Advancing Patient-
Centered Excellence (UCSF Epic-
based EMR)

•
Build a patient-facing app
•
As of 2019, no existing algo-
rithms to extract all key data
available from a patient’s en-
tire MS history (in the United

•
Clinician-validated
•
Common EMR system allows for
aggregation of patient data across
multiple sites and institutions
States)
•
Difficult for the layperson to
identify salient metrics

MyMSandMe [27]
•
Web-based platform prefer-
able
•
No longer supported on iOS or
Android platforms
•
Patient engagement resource with
an active forum
•
Medication diary

myMS [28]
•
Genetics not yet actionable
•
iOS app
•
Connect to 23andMe genetics
•
Contextualization of personal data
•
Web-based platform prefer-
able
•
Significant involvement with
a private company (23andMe)
•
Ability to self-report metrics
•
Fewer metrics, more rele-
vant to patient clinical pic-
•
Ability to view MRIsd in-app
•
Tasks and questionnaires available
in-app
ture
•
Enable patient-determined

EDSSe

Specific activity or symptom track-
ers (eg, Fitbit)
•
Agility—allow inclusion of
data derived from these
trackers without needing to

•
Limited lifecycle
•
Ubiquitous
•
•
Passive data collection and
friendly user interface encourage
Cost
•
Do not integrate with other
clinical data
integrate with any 1 device
or vendor
personalized goal setting and en-
gagement

PatientsLikeMe [5]
•
Remain clinically focused
to aid key decision-making
•
Heavily funded by pharmaceu-
tical industry
•
Free to use
•
Widely used
points in MS history
•
No specific clinical decision
support aides

Swedish MS registry [29]
•
Longitudinal visualizations
•
Not available in the United
States
•
Presents clinically meaningful
data in a user-friendly interface
•
Clinicians/providers contribute
validated data to individual pro-
files

Floodlight [30]
•
In the future, enable integra-
tion with wearables
•
Data sent to pharmaceutical
company
•
Validated metrics of MS-related
function
•
Enable manual entry of MS
functional composite met-
•
•
Not available for all smart-
phone platforms
Smartphone app

rics

Aby [31]
•
Links to various sources of
clinical expertise
•
Data sent to pharmaceutical
company
•
Connect with MS experts
•
Guided PTf programs
•
Apple Health integration

BeCare Link [32]
•
Enable patient-determined
EDSS and relapses
•
Testing can take several hours
•
Tracks symptoms over time by
recording a host of unsupervised
•
No clinical or clinician-validat-
ed data from the EMR
tests (25’ walk, TUGg test, vibra-
tory sensitivity, etc)
•
Reports proprietary EDSS and

MSFCh

aUCSF: University of California, San Francisco.

J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 7 | e15605 | p. 6

bMS: multiple sclerosis.
cEMR: electronic medical record.
dMRI: magnetic resonance imaging.
eEDSS: expanded disability status scale.
fPT: physical therapy.
gTUG: Timed Up & Go.
hMSFC: multiple sclerosis functional composite.

Phase II—Ideation: Ideate and Prototype

At the completion of phase I, in January 2017, and as detailed
below in the Results section, we defined the problem that we
wanted to solve as: “People with MS are faced with a lot of
variables, numbers, and changes, and it is hard to keep track of
everything.” In phase II, our goal was to develop mock-ups.
Therefore, we began to come up with solutions to this problem:
how best to allow users to enter and visualize all their data and
incorporate research findings and additional resources together
in a cohesive and actionable way, using tools that are
sustainable, low cost, and would not require payment on the
part of patients. We met weekly to discuss how best to collect
and visualize patient data. Phase II meetings lasted for an hour
and focused on determining the user interface for data collection
and visualization. Methods for idea generation included
brainstorming options, whiteboarding, and searching for ways
other people visualized similar problems. Phase II meetings
started in January 2017 and lasted until March 2017.

The most promising ideas were moved to the prototype, using
tools including Balsamiq [23] for creating wireframes and

Invision [24] for creating click-through mock-ups. These
wireframes and mock-ups were then shown, in a second round
of interviews, to clinicians and patients with MS for further
feedback. At this stage, the health literacy expert was re-engaged
to specifically explore the pros and cons of various components
of the prototype (eg, color range, explanation of disability, and
degree of precision regarding predictive models).

These were shown both to individual patients after their clinical
appointment (n=4) as well as to an MS support group (n=11)
and patients participating in an MS fundraising walk (n=6).
Demographic information was not always collected, but the
cohort included both ambulatory and nonambulatory patients,
patients seen both within our academic institution and from the
broader Northern California community of people living with
MS, and also explicitly included patients who self-identified as
racial and ethnic minorities. We used the same initial questions
as in Textboxes 1 and 2 as well as additional questions from
Table 1. After each set of interviews, we incorporated patient
feedback into the mock-ups.

Textbox 1. Clinician interview insights to include in the app.

Include in the app

•
How patients compare with those of similar demographics

•
Potential treatments

•
Data as a function of time

•
Better metrics of progression

•
Simple visualizations

•
Tool to promote communication

•
Clarity about the design process

Textbox 2. Clinician interview insights to exclude from the app.

Exclude from the app

•
Information above a high-school level

•
Too many numbers or laboratory test data

•
Physician feelings and analyses

•
Default contextualization (patients should have an option to view how they are doing compared with others)

•
Unfiltered scores that patients can misunderstand

•
Overly specific information, such as specific risk scores, given the imprecision in data used to generate algorithms

J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 7 | e15605 | p. 7

Phase III—Implementation: Test and Iterate

Our goal in phase III was to develop a minimally viable product
(MVP). Therefore, once our phase II mock-ups were refined
based on user input; we went through an agile development
process to build Open MS BioScreen. We met weekly to review
progress of the app and determine how to keep in line with
feedback from patients and providers. Phase III meetings were
conducted from March 2017 to July 2017. Meetings lasted for
1 hour and focused on app demos and feedback. Open MS
BioScreen was built in Ruby [25], a programming language,
using a Ruby on Rails development framework, jQuery, and
d3.js for the front end. In this phase, the tool itself was submitted
for approval by the UCSF institutional review board (IRB), an
Information Technology security risk assessment, and privacy
legal and risk review. Once we had a final product, we again
brought the app to an MS support group, to 15 individual
patients, and to advocacy group consultants, to gather and
incorporate feedback into the app.

To evaluate the accuracy of basic data entered by participants,
in pilot testing, we asked 24 patients who were long-time
participants in the UCSF EPIC study [18,19] to enroll in Open
MS BioScreen and create a basic profile. After signing a written
informed consent for an IRB-approved research protocol,
participants enrolled and entered their MS duration, data, and
treatments. We then compared these entries to study
clinician-entered data available in the EPIC study.

Ethics Approvals

Funding for this project was provided by the Conrad N. Hilton
Foundation. All procedures performed in studies involving
human participants were in accordance with the ethical standards
of the UCSF IRB and with the 1964 Helsinki declaration and
its later amendments or comparable ethical standards. Electronic,
implied informed consent was obtained from all individual
participants included in the study under UCSF IRB no.
17-22732.

Results

Phase I—Inspiration: Empathize and Define

Clinician Interviews

Clinicians provided a range of responses regarding key features
that would be provided in a tool that engaged patients with MS,
allowed them to track their condition in a manner useful to them,
share what they track with clinicians, and use visualizations to
become more informed participants in their care process
(Textboxes 1 and 2). To summarize clinicians’ insights, patient
data had to be presented in an understandable format, without
excessive details or over-reliance on specific risk ratios or
numbers, given the limitations in the data used to generate risk,
and the need for visualizations to be inherently meaningful to
patients without clinician interpretation or input.

Patient Interviews

During this phase, 12 patients were interviewed. To summarize
their responses, they articulated a need for clarity, simple

tracking and display of key MS data, ability to personalize how
they viewed their MS course and what factors went into the
contextualization algorithm, and positive emphasis on their
trajectory and algorithms. For example, if the contextualization
algorithm showed that their MS was worsening at a faster rate
than others, then a pop-up might encourage them to return to
their physical therapist or discuss their optimal MS management
with their clinician. These are detailed in Table 1.

Comparative Analysis of Existing Patient-Facing Tools

The comparative analysis approach allowed us to identify a
number of tools with rich information (illustrative examples
given in Table 2) and to use their relative strengths and
limitations to inform our own subsequent ideation process. Some
of these tools evolved since our original phase I in 2016 and
have since been summarized elsewhere [2,26].

On the basis of this analysis, we were able to define several key
features for our own ideal platform, namely: (1) web-based and
platform-agnostic, that is, not dependent on the life cycle of any
other individual technology piece; (2) limited imprint from the
pharmaceutical industry; (3) reliable over time without requiring
daily input; and (4) clinician-derived informational modules.

Phase II—Ideation: Ideate and Prototype

Mock-Ups

The priorities identified in the empathize and define phase were
used to develop an initial series of mock-ups and click-through
presentations of the app (Figure 3). The longitudinal view of
the patient course (middle panel, left image) was designed based
on the longitudinal view of the original tablet-based MS
BioScreen, whereas other features were new. This prototype
was then presented to users for feedback on the design and
usability of the Open MS BioScreen.

The upper panel demonstrates various iterations of the landing
page, which were designed to allow the user to navigate the site
with clarity. The middle panel demonstrates a series of iterations
of the longitudinal disease contextualization, which was
designed to allow the patient to visualize and interpret their
clinical course while minimizing the potential for distress. The
bottom panel demonstrates iterations of the patient’s global
neurological functioning, which was designed to allow patients
to enter information about the various functional domains
affected by MS (eg, vision, cognition, and walking) and their
severity (mild, moderate, or severe), and to visualize these
globally. We initially anticipated that patients would want to
see their functional domains represented as a sort of avatar, but
patients reported that they preferred to have their functional
representation alongside, rather than showing their symptoms
on a figure. The questions comprising the tool were derived
from the prEDSS initially developed by Goodin et al [33],
expanded to enable greater sensitivity to changes in cognition
and upper limb function over time, and iteratively tested and
refined through a series of validation studies (reported
separately, manuscript under review). Here, as part of our design
work, we specifically iterated visualization of the final prEDSS
score but not the questions or scoring.

J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 7 | e15605 | p. 8

Figure 3. Phase II: Ideation. Evolution of Open MS BioScreen mock-ups. Top panel: landing page. Middle panel: longitudinal disease course visualization
and contextualization tool. Bottom panel: assessment and representation of global neurological function.

Patient Interviews

With the prototypes, we interviewed another 21 patients.
Targeted interviews lasted approximately 15 min each and asked
patients to reflect on the clarity of the information, impact
(educational or emotional) of the information and visualizations
provided, ease of navigation and of data entry when appropriate,
and missing aspects of the tool. We recorded all feedback, and
then, we developed codes for the responses using a grounded
theory approach [34]. The authors (RB and JP) read through all
transcripts and identified open codes based on line-by-line
analysis of emerging themes. The authors then discussed
relationships among open codes and created selective codes, or
themes, of larger concepts.

Patient insights were primarily clustered around 6 themes:

1.
Information: not knowing which information is important
2.
Education: feeling like their doctors are not telling them
the whole story

3.
Data: wanting more tracking options and the ability to see
their own data
4.
Emotion: expressions of fear and discretion
5.
Clarity: wanting clearer labels and explanations of the tool
6.
Perception: wanting the tool to present an action-oriented
rather than a pessimistic view of MS progression

Phase III—Implementation: Test and Iterate

Once phase II was complete, app development of the MVP
occurred between March 2017 and September 2017,
incorporating insights from phases I and II (Table 3) and turning
these into a web-based prototype (Figure 4). We then conducted
an additional round of interviews with our 4 stakeholder groups:
patients, clinicians, advocacy, and industry representatives. We
compiled all the interviews into actionable insights that we
incorporated into the MVP (Table 4). This MVP was launched
in February 2018 [9].

J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 7 | e15605 | p. 9

Table 3. Insights derived from 21 patients who viewed mock-ups.

Quotes
Examples
Insight

Information: Patients do not know
which information is important
(18/21, 86%)

•
•
“If I talk to any other doctor, they don’t know about my specific clinical
trial.”
Sharing information across
specialties
•
•
Understanding their course
“We don’t know which level we're at—so it's important that now that
we know how to treat it, now that we have the chance to take better
drugs, it's very lucky.”

Education: Patients feel like their
doctors are not telling them the whole
story (12/21, 57%)

•
•
“I didn't know I was secondary progressive until I decided to read all
of the informational packets they give you at the appointment. I said
‘Wait, when did that happen? Nobody told me!’“

Knowing when their diagno-
sis changed
•
Understanding the land-
scape
•
“The judgements about who is getting better and who is getting worse,
and which drugs are working—because there's no way to truly com-
pare.”

Data: Patients want more tracking
options and ability to see their own
data (19/21, 91%)

•
•
“I want a tool that will benefit real people”
Tracking things that are rel-
evant
•
“There's so many aspects—travel, activity, medicines. I want to see
that.”
•
Comparing their data with
other relevant data
•
“I'm not curious about other people—usually the information is not
relevant because it's so so different for everyone. But this [support
group] is a great group, I just wish we were larger.”

Emotion: Patients express fear and
discretion (9/21, 43%)
•
•
“I don’t want to know if it’s getting worse.”
Wanting to not progress or
hear about progression
•
“Sometimes I don't want to know—because I grew up with my father,
watching his stages.”
•
“Loved to read, prayed that her vision wouldn't go even if she would
be in a wheelchair ”and the lord granted my wish, I'm in a wheelchair,
I can read, but I don't read, really anymore. I lost the concentration of
what I was reading—I can't remember it.”

Clarity: Patients want clearer labels
and explanations of the tool (6/21,
29%)

•
•
“How is this graph made?”
Understanding the parts of
the graph
•
“What is this plotting?”
•
Clarifying the content and
labels of the graph
•
“What do these terms mean?”
•
“It's unclear because there's a chance I'm in one part of the graph, and
a chance I'm in another.”
•
“Lack of experience, makes it hard to know where to go.”

Perception: Patients want the tool to
present a positive view of multiple
sclerosis progression (13/21, 62%)

•
•
“I am living with it, I am not suffering.”
Tracking full course
•
•
Understanding treatments
and options
“Then they say ‘so and so died from MS,’ and it's like 'Yeah, it's not
the MS that kills us, it's the different things that the MS is affecting,
but that's only if we sit on our butt and don't do anything.'”
•
“’You'll never be normal’ But I persevered, and it was important to be
able to track all my shots, my own things to look out for—I'll know
what the things are that I need to do, so I don't fall off the wagon.”
•
“We don't know which level we're at—so it's important that now that
we know how to treat it, now that we have the chance to take better
drugs, it's very lucky.”
•
“I haven't been seeing anything progressing—but getting better.”

J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 7 | e15605 | p. 10

Figure 4. Phase III: Implementation screenshots of Open MS BioScreen’s initial minimally viable product. Top panel: landing page and initial data
entry tools. Middle panel: the longitudinal multiple sclerosis course visualization tool, without a contextualization tool. Bottom panel: the patient-reported
expanded disability status scale tool, whose development occurred as part of Open MS BioScreen and whose formal clinical validation is reported
separately (manuscript under review).

J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 7 | e15605 | p. 11

Table 4. Examples of actions taken during phase III (implementation) based on patient insights generated in phase 2.

Page
Actions
Insights

Information, Emotion, Clarity
•
•
Tagline on first page
Better explanation of our tool, its origins,
and its cost

Information, Education, Clarity
•
•
Chevron design on the front page
Better explanation of how the tool works
•
Bring down perceived barrier for cognitive-
ly impaired patients

Information, Data, Clarity
•
•
Get Started button
Easy entry into the tool
•
Clearer navigation

Information, Education, Clarity, Percep-
tion
•
•
Tutorial page
Explanation of how to use the tool
•
Provide guidance to the capabilities of the
tool

Information, Education, Emotion, Percep-
tion
•
•
Edited headers on the Disclaimer page
Clear disclaimer

Information, Education, Clarity
•
•
Questions and Answers page
Frequently asked questions and glossary
•
Definitions and explanations page

Information, Education, Data, Clarity,
Perception
•
•
About Us
Information about how this tool uses patient
data, and where it came from
•
Better explanation of our mission
•
Better awareness campaign

Information, Education, Data
•
•
Contextualization introduction page
Explanation of what is being tracked

Information, Education, Data, Clarity
•
•
Enter your information page
Simple data entry
•
Preset options so patients will not have to
think of what fields would be useful

Information, Education, Data, Emotion,
Clarity, Perception
•
•
Clearer design, iterated by patient interactions
More intuitive charts
•
Icons that reflect the words they represent
•
Clearer marking for parts that are important
to bring to clinic
•
Explain what it means to “progress”

Information, Education, Data, Clarity,
Perception
•
•
Labels at the top of the screen
Clarity about the difference between your
data and the contextualized data of others
•
More explanation about the cohort being compared
•
Clarity about how the curves are generated
•
Careful wording about “similar patients”
•
Filters for demographics

Education, Clarity, Emotion
•
•
Educational modules
Education about complex topics—EDSSa,

HIPAAb algorithms, and cohorts

Information, Education, Data, Emotion,
Clarity, Perception
•
•
Clearer design, iterated by patient interactions
Clear labels and instructions for the patient-
reported EDSS section

Information, Education, Data, Emotion,
Clarity, Perception
•
•
All pages
Clearer language
•
Blue-on-white visualization of symptom
severity
•
Print-friendly interface

aEDSS: expanded disability status scale.
bHIPAA: Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act.

J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 7 | e15605 | p. 12

Comparison of Basic Clinical Data Collected Through
Open MS BioScreen Against Study Clinician–Entered
Data

In our pilot testing of 24 patients who were EPIC study
participants (median EDSS 2, IQR1-4), we compared patient-
and study clinician–entered responses for 3 basic clinical data:
MS duration, MS type, and MS disease-modifying therapy
(DMT). We found that the mean difference between the
patient-reported and study-recorded year of MS onset was −0.29
years (SD 3.16). The MS type included 16 relapsing-remitting
(RR), 4 secondary progressive (SP), 2 primary progressive, 2
clinically isolated syndrome (CIS); 83% (20/24) agreed on MS
type, with EPIC patient-reported mismatches as follows: SP-RR,
SP-RR, RR-SP, and CIS-RR. There was also 83% (20/24)
concordance on the most recent DMT; in all residual cases, the
patient indicated a newer approved DMT relative to the
self-injectable recorded in the database.

Focus on Accessibility

We prioritized accessibility in a number of ways. We included
open in the title as a key concept because the platform is freely
available for anyone in any location to create a profile and enter
their MS measurements, without requiring a fee or any user
validation process. Throughout the design process, we worked
with end users to make Open MS BioScreen easy to use for
different technical skill levels. Open MS BioScreen is currently
an English language app, but users could use a web-based
translation to view the site in another language, and patients
with cognitive or physical limitations can request assistance
from a proxy user.

Added Functionalities

In addition to incorporating user feedback into the MVP, we
also built Open MS BioScreen in such a way that we could

easily edit existing functionality or add new features. We
focused on three initial types of tools, as illustrated in Figure
5.

As an example of a tool that allows patients to record and track
their wearable device data in an effort to address the known
limitations of existing tools such as the EDSS [36], we built a
tool that allows users to manually enter their step count (as
reported by any commercially available wearable device) and
to compare their count with disability level- and walking
speed–matched patients from a research cohort of 100 UCSF
patients with MS followed for over 1 year [13,14,35]. Aside
from the data type check, there is no data validation done on
the Open MS BioScreen side.

As an example of a tool designed to provide personalized
guidance to patients with MS at various points over their life
course, we built My MS Paths, a visualization narrating specific
decisions and challenges that patients may encounter.

As an example of a clinical decision support tool developed and
validated by other investigators but felt to provide significant
value to patients with MS, we created a series of links on Open
MS BioScreen to sites that allowed patients to calculate their
risk, for example, of developing a fatal brain infection,
progressive 
multifocal 
leukoencephalopathy, 
while 
on
natalizumab treatment [37].

Again, we worked with end users and our development team
to design and build these features. Due to our flexible platform
and agile development process, we were able to go live with
features as soon as the research was published; this allows
patients to have access to actionable research immediately. At
the time of manuscript submission, additional features are in
development.

J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 7 | e15605 | p. 13

Figure 5. Additional features developed after the Open MS BioScreen live data. The top panel depicts the step count comparison tool that allows
patients to enter their daily step count and compare this with others from a cohort of patients with multiple sclerosis (MS) at their phase of the disease
[35]. The middle panel depicts My MS Paths, a visualization narrating specific decisions and challenges that patients may face over their lifetime living
with MS. The bottom panel shows links to algorithms and clinical decision support tools developed by other investigators that provided complementary
information and for which links were provided on Open MS BioScreen.

Discussion

Strengths and Limitations

We detail a human-centered approach undertaken to engage
stakeholders in the iterative development of an on-demand tool
designed to expand patient access to clinically actionable
research insights generated by MS researchers and academics.
A major limitation of the original MS BioScreen tablet-based
app was that it did not take into account many of these
principles, and as a result, it was not accessible, agile, or
designed with user (patient and clinician) experience in mind.
Here, we prioritized the patient and clinician’s experience,
carefully assessing for similar tools that might be available
commercially or not-for-profit, and returned to stakeholders at
each step of the development process to ensure that the end
result was understandable and actionable. We were able to

achieve the 4 main features articulated during our ideation
process, features that to our knowledge were not all present in
any existing tool reviewed: (1) web-based and platform-agnostic,
that is, not dependent on the life cycle of any other individual
technology piece; (2) limited imprint from the pharmaceutical
industry; (3) reliable over time without requiring daily input;
and (4) clinician-derived informational modules.

The current platform provides a number of benefits to patient
users. It allows patients to enter and track regular changes in
their MS course, including important treatment changes,
relapses, and changes in clinical function. As these data are
available live in Open MS BioScreen, as opposed to a health
system’s electronic medical record, patients can easily maintain
continuity over time, across providers and health systems. This
is beneficial in health care settings such as the United States,
where, in contrast to countries such as Sweden that benefit from
a central, integrated MS registry [29], patients must navigate a

J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 7 | e15605 | p. 14

number of platforms and systems—with the potential for data
loss, data duplication, and burdensome navigation of EHRs to
synthesize the relevant MS-related information as patients
transition between specialists and care settings. Of note, within
UCSF, we have built a platform, BRIDGE, that launches directly
from the EHR (bridge.ucsf.edu). Open MS BioScreen also
allows patients to access narrative visualizations through which
they can explore current and next phases in their clinical
trajectory with MS, such as how to select an initial DMT, how
to interpret and respond to a diagnosis of clinical progression,
and how to approach upcoming life transitions (eg, pregnancy,
menopause, or healthy aging). It also allows them to develop
personalized action plans based on other patients living with
MS (rather than the general population), taking into account
realistic goal setting for their daily activity levels. The next
phase of development is to measure and monitor the uptake of
the tool in response to planned dissemination efforts and to
continue to fine tune features based on user input.

The current platform also prioritizes certain clinician and
researcher needs. First, Clinicians meeting a patient with
long-standing MS must often spend valuable encounter time
reviewing copious historical and administrative records to
extract key MS-related clinical information. Second,
Neurologists who are not MS experts also benefit from
benchmarking a given patient’s current function against the
UCSF MS research cohort, a form of virtual cohort to inform
expectations about patient course. Third, patients who are more
informed about treatment decisions, such as weighing risks and
benefits of therapies or what to expect at various life stages, are
better able to participate in the clinical decision-making process.
Over time, the research community will benefit from these data
(which patients explicitly consent to be shared in a deidentified
manner), to monitor trends in patient-related function,
information-seeking, adaptation, and interpretation of data from
wearable technology, and eventually MRI analytics. One
obvious limitation, for both clinicians and researchers, is that
there is no formal validation process for user-entered data,
although our pilot testing for 24 participants suggests reasonable
agreement between patients and clinicians regarding key MS
metrics.

Conclusions

A major recommendation from patients, industry, and advocacy
stakeholders was the need to incorporate a greater number of
patient-generated data, such as ambulatory activity and MRIs.
Unfortunately, the field of commercially available wearable
devices is rapidly evolving in terms of both device engineering
as well as regulations surrounding devices and data use. Given

this landscape, rather than invest substantially in developing
Application Programming Interfaces with selected vendors and
industry partners (who may or may not retain market share) to
synchronize data from wearables, we focused instead on a
simpler, more agile MVP. We, therefore, designed a simple,
device-agnostic solution that enables patients with MS to enter
data about their daily step count obtained from any number of
commercial activity trackers and to obtain contextualizations
of their ambulatory activity according to their own age and
ability level. Our initial platform will allow for agile and
responsive development and flexible adaptation of clinically
actionable algorithms and tools developed by other research
groups. This will be instrumental in ensuring that Open MS
BioScreen allows patients to monitor their own course and make
informed decisions based on current advances in clinical
research.

As with any digital tool, there are a number of sustainability
concerns that will be navigated, for which we have created a
dissemination and sustainability roadmap. Dissemination and
adaptation of digital tools represent a significant next phase in
Open MS BioScreen development. Planned analysis of this
dissemination plan includes a 2-year analysis of Google
Analytics user activity data to track the dissemination and
adaptation of this platform by patients living outside the UCSF
research space. We will also include direct user feedback
through the platform itself as well as through an additional cycle
of interviews with users after the completion of the next modules
(MRI data). These planned sources of feedback will allow us
to expand within the inevitable biases of any specific academic,
clinical, or geographic setting. Although we took care
throughout our design process to interview a range of patients
and clinicians both within and outside the UCSF MS group,
there are likely residual biases that will be addressed through
this planned feedback process. Financially, beyond the current
philanthropy (Conrad N. Hilton Foundation) funding cycle, the
dissemination results will allow us to determine if the platform
is best maintained within an academic setting or would benefit
from the adaptation by a nonprofit partner.

To date, there have been limited descriptions of human-centered
design in MS care [2,38-42]. The insights gained from our
extensive human-centered design process described here can
inform approaches for developing a number of tools that enable
tracking, communicating, and eventually improving function
in patients with chronic conditions characterized by variable
course, functional impairments, and a strong focus on quality
of life.