Annotator-Centered Design: Towards a Tool for Sentiment 
and Emotion Annotation 

Thomas Schmidt, Marco Jakob and Christian Wolff1 

Abstract: We present a first prototype of the tool SentiAnno, which is an annotation tool specifi-
cally designed for sentiment and emotion annotation in structured written texts. To design this 
tool, we employ the user-centered design (UCD) framework and adapt it by focusing on the anno-
tator, thus phrasing our development approach annotator-centered design. In iterative steps, we 
gather requirements and feedback from annotators as soon as possible in the development process 
via various usability engineering methods. We propose that this design process is especially bene-
ficial for challenging and subjective annotation tasks like sentiment and emotion annotation of 
literary texts. We describe our first iterations and present results of the current prototype. We show 
how we were able to create functionalities facilitating the annotation process by applying this 
annotator-centered design approach. 

Keywords: Annotation, Annotation Tool, Sentiment Annotation, User-Centered Design 

1 
Introduction 

Annotation is one of the most important tasks in various areas of Digital Humanties 
(DH) like computational linguistics (cf. [PX10]) and digital editions [BV07, Ba12]. 
While there are tools that can perform automatic annotations for different tasks like part-
of-speech tagging, manual annotations are equally important and very common in DH 
research projects. When deciding upon the annotation tool to use in a project, researchers 
can select upon a plethora of general-purpose tools (cf. [DB04]) or tools that are rather 
focused on DH-specific tasks [KG12, Bö15, Yi13]. Especially in the realm of semantic 
annotation, tools that are designed for a specific task are not uncommon. Examples for 
this are coreference [Re18] or sentiment annotation [ÖK18]. However, when designing 
annotation tools, it is often done without a specific development framework that inte-
grates the potential user. Furthermore, when developing annotation tools but also when 
performing annotation projects, one rarely finds that feedback and opinions by the anno-
tators about the annotation process and tools are gathered. Most of the times, annotators 
are presented with an annotation scheme, manual or guidelines developed by one or 
multiple experts to perform the work. Nevertheless, the annotators rarely have influence 
on scheme design, tool selection or tool development. While there are studies evaluating 
the usability of annotation tools, they are most of the times done heuristically by an 
expert [Ga04, SP05, Bu12, BMB17]. Few studies perform usability tests with potential 
annotators and if done so it is oftentimes focused on more administrator-specific func-
                                                          

cba doi:10.18420/inf2019_ws08

Draude, Lange, Sick (Hrsg.): INFORMATIK 2019 Workshops,
Lecture Notes in Informatics (LNI), Gesellschaft für Informatik, Bonn 2019
77

tionality [DGS04, HP15] and is mostly done for the purpose to select a tool before the 
start of the project. In contrast to this, we propose to integrate annotators’ requirements 
and feedback into the tool development process in order to design more annotator-
friendly annotation tools. We refer to this process as annotator-centered design follow-
ing the concept of user-centered design. We suggest that by putting the focus on the 
annotator and by integrating usability engineering methods into an iterative design pro-
cess, we can not only improve and design better annotation tools but also constantly 
correct and adjust the annotation scheme and overall process. Furthermore, we propose 
that this annotator-centered design process is especially fitting for the use case of chal-
lenging and subjective semantic annotations like coreference or sentiment annotation in 
literary texts. Annotation in these contexts has been shown to be very tedious and diffi-
cult and yields rather low agreement levels among annotators [SBD18, KK18], which is 
very problematic for the effective acquisition of annotated corpora. Annotator-centered 
design might improve upon those problems not only because usability problems with 
tools are addressed earlier and can be adjusted, but because the theoretical foundation 
and the annotation scheme are often not fully defined in advance and feedback by the 
annotators might improve the clarity of the scheme and annotation guidelines. 

In the following, we present how we employed this annotator-centered design process 
for the implementation of an annotation tool for the specific task of sentiment and emo-
tion annotation of structured literary texts. We describe the overall idea, the methods we 
employed so far, as well as how they influenced the design process. We present the cur-
rent prototype of our tool SentiAnno and especially highlight some of the functionality 
and design solutions that were inspired by early feedback of potential annotators. 

2 
Approach 

User-centered design describes a multistep iterative process to design more user-friendly 
products [Vr02]. Some of the main features of user-centered design that we want to 
integrate in our design approach, the annotator-centered design, are:  

(1) The acquisition of requirements and feedback of potential user groups in early stag-
es of development and throughout the process. Though annotation tools also have an 
administrative context, we regard potential annotators as the main user group.  

(2) The iterative aspect of user-centered design: We want to evaluate our solutions as 
early as possible with potential annotators, adjust the tool and reevaluate it, thus cre-
ating a constant development cycle.  

(3) Methods from usability engineering to gather feedback and to evaluate the tool:  
prototype mock-ups, questionnaires, interviews, contextual inquiries and focus 
groups. Finally, we want to add another feature to the user-centered design approach 
that is more specific to the research task in annotation projects in DH, thus renaming 
the process annotator-centered design.  

78 Thomas Schmidt, Marco Jakob, Christian Wolff

(4) We want to use results of the iterative process like feedback and evaluation results 
not only on tool improvement but also for possible improvements of annotation 
schemes, manuals, guidelines and the overall theoretical foundation of the annota-
tion concept. 

We have employed the annotator-centered design process for the development of the 
annotation tool SentiAnno. Our goal is to acquire a corpus for sentiment and emotion 
analysis in dramatic texts, a research area that has gained a lot of attention in the DH in 
recent years [Mo11, NB13, SB18, SBW19], for evaluation and machine learning pur-
poses. We are focused on sentiment and emotion annotation for German dramatic plays 
by Gotthold Ephraim Lessing. In the following, we will describe our first studies inte-
grating methods of the annotator-centered design approach. 

For the start of our project, we conducted a small-scale sentiment and emotion annota-
tion study with six annotators of differing expertise (cf. [SBD18] for more information 
about this study). Annotators had to annotate the speeches (single utterances of a charac-
ter) of plays by Lessing. For our pilot studies, we used Microsoft Word as annotation 
tool. We presented the speeches and annotators had to mark the annotation in cells of 
tables following each speech. 

To gather first feedback by annotators, they had to complete a questionnaire about the 
challenges and difficulties of the annotation and reported about the time needed for the 
annotation. While reports about major problems with the tool were rare, we gathered a 
lot of feedback about problems with the annotation scheme and manual, which we had 
derived from similar annotation projects in the context of product and movie reviews. 
Based on the feedback we adjusted the annotation scheme, simplified it and allowed 
annotators to mark what the reference of a specific sentiment is. Furthermore, annotators 
reported that they were oftentimes very unsure about annotations what also hindered 
their annotation flow. Therefore, in our future scheme we also integrated the possibility 
to mark the certainty of an annotation. 

We conducted another annotation study (this time with students of German literary stud-
ies) with the adjusted annotation scheme and a more precise manual (for more infor-
mation about this study cf. [Sc19]). Once again, annotators had to complete a question-
naire. Furthermore, we also conducted a focus group with the annotators after the anno-
tation process, a method well known in usability engineering, allowing us to get into 
more personal interaction with annotators. Results of this study showed that the annota-
tion of certainty facilitated the process a lot since now annotators did not feel frustrated 
if they were unsure about an annotation but could simply mark their uncertainty. How-
ever, while agreement levels were higher than in the first study (mostly due to the more 
precise manual and simplified annotation) the reported difficulty with various aspects 
like language remained. Furthermore, critique concerning Microsoft Word was expressed 
since it does not look motivating and oftentimes annotators simply forgot to annotate 
speeches. It was at this point that we shifted our focus more towards tool development.  

To start the development process, we first conducted two contextual inquiries with pre-

Annotator-Centered Design: Towards a Tool for Sentiment and Emotion Annotation 79

vious annotators. A contextual inquiry is also an established method in usability engi-
neering. The idea is to observe the users during their everyday practice with a tool, in our 
case while performing regular annotations. We also instructed the annotator to “think 
aloud” to gather more information about what they are doing and why. We were able to 
acquire enough feedback and ideas to develop a first prototype. Before starting the real 
implementation, we first developed mock-ups via the mock-up-tool Pencil2 and dis-
cussed these mock ups with the previous mentioned annotators of the contextual inquiry. 
Based on this feedback, we adjusted our mock-ups and developed our first prototype of 
SentiAnno, a tool specifically designed for structured sentiment and emotion annotation 
of text. We will refer to the feedback and data we gathered from annotators in section 3 
to illustrate design decisions concerning the prototype. 

3 
Prototype 

In the following section, we describe the current state of the prototype, focusing espe-
cially on features that were designed based on feedback and results employing the anno-
tator centered-design process. Therefore, there is a lot of additional functionality we do 
not outline in detail like import/export-functions and other administrator-specific func-
tions. SentiAnno is currently a web-based annotation tool working with TEI-annotated 
XML files. 

One of the first design decisions we made was concerned with the annotation scheme: 
As seen in section 2, this scheme is still under development and constantly changing. 
Therefore, the administrator is capable to design various types of annotation schemes 
with various scales (figure 1). Furthermore, annotators informed us that they had diffi-
culties assigning sentiment and emotion classes as nominal selections. Thus, we inte-
grated the possibility to define sliders on which annotators can make more vague selec-
tions. Sliders are rather uncommon in regular annotation tools but have been proven 
helpful for our annotators in making very uncertain vague annotations. Additionally, we 
also implemented the possibility to make annotations via open text fields, which allows 
the annotator to give more precise feedback or report problems when necessary. 

                                                          
2 https://pencil.evolus.vn/ (note: all URLs mentioned in this article were last visited June 20, 2019) 

80 Thomas Schmidt, Marco Jakob, Christian Wolff

Fig. 1: Different styles for annotation schemes. 

Figure 2 shows the overall view during the annotation process.  

 

Fig. 2: Annotation view. 

Annotators can click on a speech to annotate this speech. On the left side as well as on 
the upper screen annotators are informed about their progression. On the left side the 
structural units of the play are filled out with green color the further an annotator pro-
gresses. Being informed about the progression is one of the main requirements reported 
by annotators during our pilot studies. Speeches that are already annotated are marked in 
a brighter background than speeches that still must be annotated. The currently selected 
speech is illustrated in bold font. All these features help the annotator to know where 
they are and what is left to do. On the left side, annotators can also use the structural 
progress information to jump from unit to unit e.g. jumping to the last act or a specific 

Annotator-Centered Design: Towards a Tool for Sentiment and Emotion Annotation 81

scene. On the right side, annotators can use functions to zoom into the text or filter the 
speeches e.g. filtering speeches that have already been annotated. Annotators recom-
mended this feature, so they do not accidently miss out annotations. Annotators can also 
skip speeches for later time via this function. Summing up, annotators have now the 
freedom to do the annotations in the order they prefer. 

When starting the annotation of a speech a new window appears where annotators can 
perform the annotation according to the previously defined scheme (figure 3). 

 

Fig. 3: Selecting an annotation. 

One feedback we also address is that annotators wanted to always see the speech when 
choosing the annotations. This was not always possible using Microsoft Word. There-
fore, if annotators move the mouse away from the annotation scheme, the scheme be-
comes transparent displaying the speech again. Furthermore, annotators do not have to 
leave the annotation screen to select the next speech but can simply jump to the next 
speech with a button press thus the annotation flow is only interrupted if wanted and 
annotators can work much faster. 

One of the major issues reported especially when dealing with non-experts (i.e., annota-
tors with no background in German literary studies) were problems concerning the un-
derstanding of the language. Therefore, we implemented a function to right click on a 
word to receive information about the meaning of the word and possible synonyms. This 
function is implemented by including a thesaurus. For example, in figure 4 you see what 
annotators receive when right clicking on the word “Putz” (an old German word for 
appearance, “Aufmachung”): 

82 Thomas Schmidt, Marco Jakob, Christian Wolff

Fig. 4: Similar terms for the word “Putz”. 

Since SentiAnno is designed as a web-based tool, annotators certainly can also look for 
such information on the web. However, we think it is better for the annotation workflow 
to stay in the annotation tool. The prototype is available online.3 

4 
Future Work 

We are currently planning to continue the annotator-centered design approach. We start-
ed first evaluations of our tool via usability studies comparing the performance, usability 
and user experience systematically to other standard annotation tools. Based on this 
feedback, we want to continue to improve our tool according to the requirements of 
annotators. We also plan more large-scale annotation studies implementing methods like 
diary studies to gather feedback about the annotation process and tool when used for 
longer phases. We were able to prove the benefit of the annotator-centered design ap-
proach concerning the tool design but also the annotation scheme and the theoretical 
foundations, which are still developing. Overall, these improvements will facilitate the 
gathering of well-annotated corpora enabling advancements in the research area of sen-
timent analysis in literary texts much faster. We hope that our work motivates other 
developers to integrate similar ideas to improve the usability and user experience of tools 
in DH.