RESEARCH/Original Article

The EU-project United4Health: User-centred
design of an information system for a
Norwegian telemedicine service

Berglind Smaradottir1, Martin Gerdes1, Santiago Martinez2

and Rune Fensli1

Abstract
Introduction: Organizational changes of health care services in Norway brought to light a need for new clinical pathways. This
study presents the design and evaluation of an information system for a new telemedicine service for chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease patients after hospital discharge.
Methods: A user-centred design approach was employed composed of a workshop with end-users, two user tests and a field
trial. For data collection, qualitative methods such as observations, semi-structured interviews and a questionnaire were used.
Results: User workshop’s outcome informed the implementation of the system initial prototype, evaluated by end-users in a
usability laboratory. Several usability and functionality issues were identified and solved, such as the interface between the initial
colour scheme and the triage colours. Iterative refinements were made and a second user evaluation showed that the main
issues were solved. The responses to a questionnaire presented a high score of user satisfaction. In the final phase, a field trial
showed satisfactory use of the system.
Discussion: This study showed how the target end-users groups were actively involved in identifying the needs, suggestions
and preferences. These aspects were addressed in the development of an information system through a user-centred design
process. The process efficiently enabled users to give feedback about design and functionality. Continuous refinement of the
system was the key to full development and suitability for the telemedicine service. This research was a result of the inter-
national cooperation between partners within the project United4Health, a part of the Seventh Framework Programme for
Research of the European Union.

Keywords
Health information systems, human-computer interaction, usability, telemedicine, user-centred design

Date received: 15 August 2015; Date accepted: 8 October 2015

Introduction

In Norway, the Coordination reform1 focuses on strate-
gies for increased continuity of care in the National
Health Services. One key consequence is the need for
eﬀective technological solutions that support new clinical
pathways and facilitate coordination, collaboration and
information ﬂow between health care providers across
organizational
borders.
In
this
context,
the
project
United4Health
(U4H),2
framed
inside
the
Seventh
Framework
Programme
for
Research
(FP7)
of
the
European Union (EU), develops and evaluates telehealth
solutions for chronic disease patients. The Norwegian
contribution to the U4H project was the development of
a collaborative telemedicine system for remote monitoring
of
chronic
obstructive
pulmonary
disease
(COPD)
patients after hospital discharge. A municipal partner
established a telemedicine service where COPD patients
performed daily routines of self-reported symptoms at
home,
sending
measurement
readings
of
pulse
and

peripheral capillary oxygen saturation (i.e. pulse oximetry
or SpO2) and questionnaire answers on a tablet device3

over a mobile network. For information management and
communication eﬃciency, an information system (IS)
was built to support the new telemedicine service (see
Figure 1). The IS was designed for sustainable operation
and implementation within the secured Norwegian Health
Network (NHN).4 The details of privacy and security are
further
described
elsewhere.5
In
order
to
achieve

1Department of Information and Communication Technology, Faculty of
Engineering and Science, University of Agder, Norway
2Department of Psychosocial Health, Faculty of Health and Sport Sciences,
University of Agder, Norway

Berglind Smaradottir, Department of Information and Communication
Technology, Faculty of Engineering and Science, University of Agder,
Post Box 422, N-4604 Kristiansand, Norway.

Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare
2016, Vol. 22(7) 422–429
! The Author(s) 2015
Reprints and permissions:
sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/1357633X15615048
jtt.sagepub.com

acceptable levels of eﬀectiveness, eﬃciency, and satisfac-
tion,
a
user-centred
design
(UCD)6–8
process
was
employed for the development of the IS. This paper pre-
sents the results from the UCD process of the IS develop-
ment, with the aim of validation from operational and
qualitative usability perspectives. The following research
questions (RQs) were addressed:

RQ1: How can a functional collaborative information
system be developed taking into account user needs and
requirements of a telemedicine service?
RQ2: What lessons and methodological procedures from
this study are transferable to the development of other
clinical systems?

Methods

Qualitative methods were used for data collection and
analysis. The UCD process was divided into two phases:
(a) workshop with representatives of the end-user groups
to gather user requirements and (b) iterative development
of the IS including user evaluations, interviews and a ﬁeld
trial. The UCD process had a total duration of six months

during the years 2013–2014 and involved 24 end-users, see
Table 1 for distribution of the participants. The work-
shop, user evaluations and interviews were audio-visually
recorded, with a total of 20 hours verbatim transcribed by
the researchers. Transcripts were coded into categories
and a qualitative content analysis9 was made with the
software QSR NVIVO v10.

Workshop with end-users

The workshop aimed to understand the context of use and
gather user requirements for the design of the IS.
Workshop attendees (n ¼ 7) were representative of the
end-user groups: two nurses, two technicians, two mem-
bers of the union for cardiac and pulmonary patients
(average age of 69 years) and one project manager.
During the workshop, attendees deﬁned the optimal
workﬂow for the telemedicine service, described their pre-
ferred way of interacting with the IS and suggested ideas
for the user interface layout.

Iterative development

The initial design of the IS was based on the outcome of the
end-user workshop. An interaction designer created the ini-
tial graphical user interface (GUI), inspired by the results of
the project eHealth-extended Care Coordination.10 An
industry partner (Devoteam AS in Grimstad, Norway) in
the U4H project implemented the functionality of the IS.
The security network infrastructure of the Centre for
eHealth and Healthcare Technology at the University of
Agder, Norway, was used as a test bed.

User test 1 and 2. Two user tests based on a think aloud
protocol11–15 were carried out with end-users to evaluate
the usability of the system and propose potential reﬁne-
ments for further development iterations. The user tests
took place in the Usability Laboratory at the Centre for
eHealth and Healthcare Technology, a facility with three
separate test rooms and one observation room. The details
of the infrastructure are described elsewhere.16 In user test
1 (n ¼ 15), 11 nurses, two physicians and two technicians

Figure 1. The telemedicine service information flow. Tranmission of measurements through a Virtual Private Network (VPN) tunnel.

Table 1. The end-user participation in the UCD process.

End-users
n ¼ 24
Workshop
n ¼ 7
User test 1
n ¼ 15
User test 2
n ¼ 9
Field trial
n ¼ 11

Nurse 1

Nurse 2
Nurse 3

Nurse 4–6 (n ¼ 3)

Nurse 7–12 (n ¼ 6)

Patient 1

Patient 2

Patient 3–7 (n ¼ 5)

Physician 1–2 (n ¼ 2)

Project manager
Technician 1–2 (n ¼ 2)

423

participated in the execution of a role-play scenario.17 The
scenario was designed by the research team and included a
simulation of the proposed telemedicine service workﬂow
using the developed technology where the interface design
and functionalities were tested (see Table 1 for participant
distribution). After user test 1, two weeks were spent reﬁn-
ing the IS. In user test 2 (n ¼ 9), ﬁve nurses, two techni-
cians and two members of the union for cardiac and
pulmonary patients simulated the steps of the telemedicine
service workﬂow and tested the functionality of the second
version of the IS. To complete the feedback, the question-
naire System Usability Scale (SUS)18 was individually
ﬁlled in after both user tests. In addition, two post-test
semi-structured group interviews (n ¼ 15, n ¼ 9) were
made with the aim of discussing the ﬁndings from the
user tests regarding GUI and functionality of the IS.
The participants were shown the IS on a large screen
during the interview session, allowing to see the GUI in
detail.
For the telemedicine service, nurses were assigned a key
role regarding data management in the IS, which was
reﬂected in the participant distribution in the user tests,
shown in Table 1. The representatives for COPD patients
had the key role as advisors regarding the patient role in
the telemedicine monitoring scenario. In addition, they
provided data for the test and transmission to the IS,
which contributed to a realistic test scenario. Four
people from the research team had roles as moderators
and observers during the user tests. In addition, two devel-
opers from the company were present as observers in user
tests and interviews.

Field trial. The last step in the iterative development was to
run a ﬁeld trial for the continuous functioning of the IS
and identiﬁcation of usability issues. Five nurses utilizing
the service at a telemedicine centre established by a muni-
cipality partner participated in the ﬁeld trial, see Table 1
for participation of the nurses in earlier phases. Six rep-
resentatives of voluntary COPD patients were enrolled
and used a tablet application at home for a week to
daily send data. Every day, nurses used the IS to evaluate
the participants’ data and, in addition, a videoconference
call was made. During the ﬁeld trial, a usability evaluation
with a think aloud protocol evaluating the daily tasks of
the nurses in the IS was conducted in the workplace envir-
onment followed by a post-test interview. At the end of
the ﬁeld trial, the COPD patient participants were visited
at home for an evaluation and interview focusing on the
tablet device in the telemedicine scenario, further pre-
sented elsewhere.19

Ethical considerations

This study was approved by Norwegian Social Science
Data Services (project number: 35356). All participants
received oral and written information about the project
and
conﬁdential
treatment
of
the
collected
data.
Participation
was
voluntary
and
participants
could

withdraw at any time without reason. The participants
representing COPD patients were informed that the
main aim of the project was the development and func-
tional evaluation of the technology and not a medical
follow-up. All participants gave explicit written consent.

Results

The results are presented following the stages of the UCD
process: workshop with end-users; the iterative develop-
ment divided into user test 1, user test 2, SUS question-
naire and ﬁeld trial.

Workshop with end-users

The workshop results are categorised by context of use,
telemedicine scenario workﬂow and user interface design.

Context of use. The overall aim of the new IS was to create
a platform that supported the information ﬂow and col-
laborative work between the user groups involved in
remote monitoring of COPD patients; nurses at hospital;
technical department at hospital for conﬁguration of
patient tablet devices for remote communication with
the IS; telemedicine service nurses for management of
patient data and patient follow up. In addition, patient’s
GP and hospital physicians would have access granted to
IS data of those patients they were responsible for.

The workflow of the telemedicine scenario. The workﬂow for
the telemedicine scenario contained two diﬀerentiated
phases, the administrative and the practical. The adminis-
trative phase started at the hospital lung ward, where a
COPD patient would soon be discharged for home and
asked for consent to participate in telemedicine monitor-
ing. The hospital nurse would register the new COPD
patient and notify the technical department at the hos-
pital. The technical department created a new user in the
IS (with the data ﬁelds name, birthday, address, mobile
telephone number, tablet ID and JabberID for videocon-
ference external to the system; privacy and security details
are described)5 and prepared a suitcase with the remote
monitoring equipment inside. In the practical phase, a
hospital nurse provided user training to the patient
before hospital discharge. The patient was instructed
how to connect the equipment and take physiological
measurements for transmission to the IS. Later on, the
hospital nurse established the medical baseline reference
values for calculation of triage with measurements made
on the day of discharge. In the triage, patient data were
diﬀerentiated by a colour scheme: green colour for data
within the pre-deﬁned values, yellow colour when data fell
outside those values meaning ‘attention required’, and red
colour when data fell far from the values resulting in a
‘immediate attention and alert triggered’ state. The cut-oﬀ
values alerts were deﬁned in the common U4H protocol
for COPD and represented deﬁned percentage deviations
from the baseline reference values. In addition, three

424
Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare 22(7)

questions in the questionnaire related to dyspnoea,
sputum volume and sputum colour were ﬁlled in with
values
representing
patient’s
own
symptom
sensing
(normal, worse, much worse). These questions align with
the recommended symptoms to be evaluated when decid-
ing whether antibiotics should be given or not.20

At the time of discharge from hospital, two documents
were transferred to the IS by the hospital nurse: nurse’s
and doctor’s discharge letters. After the patients went
home, physiological measurements (SpO2 and pulse)
were sent daily together with the questionnaire on self-
reported symptoms. A nurse used the IS for continuous
management and evaluation of patient data for the patient
follow-up. During the ﬁrst 10 days, a daily videoconfer-
ence initiated by the nurse was made. The next 20 days,
patient data were transmitted and evaluated. In the case
that any of these data alerted the professionals (e.g. yellow
or red colour in the triage), the nurse would contact the
patient.

User interface design. For the user interface design, support
for certain administrative functions, such as creating a
new user, establishing reference values for each patient
and Personal Identiﬁcation Number (PIN) management
were requested. Related to the functionality of the IS,
users requested to get an informed overview of patients’

names and measurements related visible at one glance.
Individual patient selection was assigned for accessing
patient’s health record with historical data, visualised on
a line chart. The patient’s overview had to distinguish
between short-term and long-term follow-ups. According
to legal security and privacy requirements on information,
all health care professional actions would need to be regis-
tered and logged in the system database.

User test 1

User test 1 was executed with the ﬁrst version of the imple-
mented IS, the initial GUI is shown in Figure 2.
The results are based on the ﬁndings in the user test in
laboratory and group interview. They are presented
divided into two subcategories: graphical user interface
design and suggestions about functionality.

Graphical user interface design. Related to the GUI, nine
usability issues were identiﬁed. The major one was that
the colour scheme selected for patient list overview and
headings could interfere with the coloured evaluation of
triage calculated from the patient data (e.g. colours yellow
and green were used in the triage but also in the patient list
overview). A grey-scale colour scheme for the GUI was
instead suggested. The patient overview presented was

Figure 2. The graphical user interface (GUI) of the first information system (IS) implementation. (a) Patient list overview; (b) individual
patient’s overview. SpO2 represents peripheral capillary oxygen saturation.

425

satisfactorily accepted by users because – as they argued –
it showed the relevant information associated rather each
patient and only minor changes were required regarding
element labelling. Patient names marked with a red tri-
age value were suggested to be placed at the top of the
patient overview and an additional column was needed to
mark patients already followed-up in the current day.
Clicking with the mouse anywhere inside the GUI in the
patient’s name row was suggested as a way of accessing the
corresponding patient ﬁle. In the contact information sec-
tion, patient’s name had to be clearly visible on top of the
record and there had to be suﬃcient space to include mobile
telephone numbers of patient and relatives, being very
useful, e.g. in case of a videoconference error.

Functionality of the IS. The user interaction with the IS
during the performance of the tasks was generally success-
ful, with minor technical problems related to transmission
of patient data and videoconference’s quality.
The users made nine suggestions about the functional-
ity. Triage was automatically calculated, but it should also
incorporate the option to manually override it by a health
care professional after patient follow-up (e.g. manually
change the ﬁnal triage colour from yellow to green after
supervision). In this case, a journal note made with the
new triage colour would automatically update triage
colour in the patient view.
The nurses asked for an electronic appointment book-
ing system, in order to set up videoconference sessions
with patients and avoid overbooking. They requested an
overview of all patient measurements of the same day
when a certain day was selected because the IS did only
show one measurement per day. A notiﬁcation was sug-
gested when new patient data was received by the IS,
instead of having to actively press the refresh button to
see
the
latest
measurement
value.
In
the
heading
Documents, users requested to see by default the last ﬁve
documents, with the possibility of maximizing the list to see
the remaining ones. Search for a speciﬁc patient had to be
possible by birthday and social security number, in add-
ition to by name. Users suggested having a unique storage
for journal notes to sign at the end of the day, instead of
having multiple journal notes from the same day. When
users logged out, they asked for a notiﬁcation, such as
‘You have unsigned journal notes’, as a reminder when
there still were notes to be signed. The option to create a
journal note should be always available even when having
unsigned notes associated to the same patient.
In the group interview after the test, the users’ com-
ments about the IS use were positive overall: We learned a
lot about it, it was useful.. . . It is a fantastic feeling to be
able to come with feedback and know they can lead to
changes. I miss that with other systems that we have.

User test 2

User test 2 showed that most of the suggestions and prob-
lems from the previous evaluation were solved and

incorporated in the IS. For instance, the transmission of
patient data was successful in all cases and manual insert-
ing of triage values as a coloured journal note was suc-
cessfully tested. The new interface colour scheme, see
Figure 3, was evaluated as appropriate providing a
better overview in the patients’ view. In the group inter-
view, users highlighted their satisfaction with the function-
ality for inserting triage colour by making a correctly
coloured journal note.

The SUS questionnaire

The results of the SUS questionnaire18,21,22 from the user
tests are presented in Table 2. When comparing the SUS
scores of user test 1 and user test 2, the scores improved in
nine out of 10 questions, and the other question kept the
same score in both tests. The results of the second test
showed that the median of satisfaction ratings were on
the range of ‘Agree’ or ‘Strongly agree’ for all the answers
to the positively enunciated questions, and in the range of
‘Disagree’ or ‘Strongly disagree’ for all the answers to the
negatively enunciated questions.

Field trial

In the ﬁeld trial, the nurses’ overall rating concerning the
IS was satisfactory. Font size was evaluated as suﬃcient,
the choice of colours as appropriate and the critical infor-
mation was placed on top in patients’ overview as
requested. The patient‘s record provided a useful overview
of patient’s data, where historical data were represented as
triage colour scheme drawn in the calendar. At the bottom
of the interface there was a line graph representing pulse
oximetry measurements. The navigation in the IS was
reported as easy, even though there were some technical
problems due to data transmission into the IS. In the
interviews nurses commented: I think this system is easy
to use. With small adjustments this will be a good tool to
support the workﬂow.. . . The IS seems to work well and
gives a good overview, most of it is self-explained.. . . The
ﬁeld trial has been very useful in order to identify errors that
can occur when using the equipment.

Discussion

In this paper, a UCD process of an IS for a collaborative
telemedicine service has been presented. A UCD process
involves end-users throughout the entire development
cycle of an intended technological solution. Telemedicine
services often involve multiple user groups, making user
participation in the design and evaluation crucial in order
to understand the clinical context and user interactions.
UCD has proven to be an eﬀective approach for gathering
user requirements23 increasing level of user acceptance7

and reducing development time because usability prob-
lems can be identiﬁed before deployment.6

The RQs were answered based on the results of this
study. About the RQ1, which asked about how to take

426
Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare 22(7)

Figure 3. The graphical user interface (GUI) of second information system (IS) implementation. (a) Patient list; (b) individual patient’s overview.
FTO represents full telemedicine monitoring during the 10 first days and ETO limited telemedicine monitoring for the next 20 days (i.e
transmission of patient data, but videoconference only in case of yellow or red alert).

Table 2. System Usability Scale (SUS) questionnaire scores.

Question

User test 1
User test 2

M
IQR
M
IQR

1. I think that I would like to use this system frequently.
3
1.5
4.5
0
2. I found the system unnecessarily complex.
2
1.0
2.0
1.0
3. I thought the system was easy to use.
3.5
1.0
4.5
1.0
4. I think that I would need the support of a technical person to
be able to use this system.
3.0
1.0
2.5
2.0

5. I found the various functions in this system were well integrated.
3.5
0.5
4.5
1.0
6. I thought there was too much inconsistency in this system.
2.5
1.5
1.5
0
7. I would imagine that most people would learn to
use this system very quickly.
4.0
0.5
4.5
0

8. I found the system very cumbersome to use.
2.5
1.0
1.0
0
9. I felt very confident using the system.
3.5
1.0
4.0
2.0
10. I needed to learn a lot of things before I could
get going with this system.
3.0
1.5
1.5
0

M: median; IQR: interquartile range.
Questionnaire responses on a five-point Likert scale from one (strongly disagree) to five (strongly agree).

427

into account user needs and requirements in the new
system, the study showed that the UCD approach success-
fully included user needs in the design and development.
The workshop with end-users eﬀectively outlined the clin-
ical context of use and user requirements regarding GUI,
interaction and functionalities. User evaluations during the
iterative development were carried out both in laboratory
and real settings of the telemedicine service. The evaluations
in the laboratory were performed in a high ﬁdelity simula-
tion task environment which enabled users to give useful
feedback about GUI design and interactions with the
system. These ﬁndings are in line with the use of a simula-
tion laboratory in health for education,24 training25 and
research purposes,26 where the task environment provides
controlled complexity to experimental tasks performed by
human participants in research.27 In addition, the ﬁeld trial
allowed analysis of the IS in real settings, providing both
real-time evaluation and continuous observation of long-
term technology use in working environment.
Several lessons were learned during the UCD process
that can be transferable for the development of other clin-
ical systems (RQ2). Firstly, the creation of clinical systems
requires active involvement of all target user groups in the
design and continuous evaluation of the solution and,
when possible, in a high-ﬁdelity simulation environment
that realistically recreates the context of use. Due to the
workshop with end-users, constructive comments were
gathered regarding data visualisation, such as a historical
overview of the triage using a line-graph that helped to
detect trends in data. In addition, the user evaluations
between the iterations usefully informed IS reﬁnements,
such as using a grey-scale colour scheme to not interfere
with the colours used in the triage. Secondly, interoper-
ability problems,28,29 are common within clinical environ-
ments, so the execution of the ﬁeld trial provided valuable
insights into the interactions between the technologies
involved, and a continuous long-term feedback of users’
interactions with these technologies. There were some
limitations associated to this study, such as a reduced
number of end-users and a simulated test environment.
However, the laboratory setting allowed creating realistic
scenarios for the validation of the system under controlled
conditions, and the ﬁeld trial gave the opportunity to test
the system in real clinical settings and realistic conditions
including mobile data transfer from patients in home
environment. These tests were carried out with represen-
tatives of the end-user groups intended to use the tele-
medicine system. Based on the comments gathered from
health professionals involved in the clinical workﬂow after
system implementation and deployment, these factors
were assumed to suﬃciently compensate the limitations
mentioned above.
This study was framed inside the EU FP7 project U4H.
The implemented IS has been deployed in three telemedi-
cine centres that provide services to 23 municipalities of
Norway, being ready to be adapted to other services
within the secured NHN. Future research would cover
increased
complexity
of
autonomous
reasoning
and

decision support and the inclusion of other clinical patient
groups.