Original Paper

Improving Patient Experience and Primary Care Quality for
Patients With Complex Chronic Disease Using the Electronic
Patient-Reported Outcomes Tool: Adopting Qualitative Methods
Into a User-Centered Design Approach

Carolyn Steele Gray1,2, MA, PhD; Anum Irfan Khan1, MSc; Kerry Kuluski1,2, MSW, PhD; Ian McKillop3, PhD,
FRSPH; Sarah Sharpe1, MSc; Arlene S Bierman1,4, MD, MS, PhD; Renee F Lyons1,2, PhD; Cheryl Cott5, DipPT, BPT,
MSc, PhD

1Institute for Health Policy, Management and Evaluation, Dalla Lana School of Public Health, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada
2Bridgepoint Campus, Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Sinai Health System, Toronto, ON, Canada
3School of Public Health and Health Systems, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada
4Li Ka Shing Knowledge Institute, St. Michael’s Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada
5Department of Physical Therapy, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada

Carolyn Steele Gray, MA, PhD
Institute for Health Policy, Management and Evaluation
Dalla Lana School of Public Health
University of Toronto
155 College St
Suite 425
Toronto, ON, M5T 3M6
Canada
Phone: 1 416 461 8252 ext 2908
Fax: 1 416 461 0656

Abstract

Background: Many mHealth technologies do not meet the needs of patients with complex chronic disease and disabilities
(CCDDs) who are among the highest users of health systems worldwide. Furthermore, many of the development methodologies
used in the creation of mHealth and eHealth technologies lack the ability to embrace users with CCDD in the specification process.
This paper describes how we adopted and modified development techniques to create the electronic Patient-Reported Outcomes
(ePRO) tool, a patient-centered mHealth solution to help improve primary health care for patients experiencing CCDD.
Objective: This paper describes the design and development approach, specifically the process of incorporating qualitative
research methods into user-centered design approaches to create the ePRO tool. Key lessons learned are offered as a guide for
other eHealth and mHealth research and technology developers working with complex patient populations and their primary
health care providers.
Methods: Guided by user-centered design principles, interpretive descriptive qualitative research methods were adopted to
capture user experiences through interviews and working groups. Consistent with interpretive descriptive methods, an iterative
analysis technique was used to generate findings, which were then organized in relation to the tool design and function to help
systematically inform modifications to the tool. User feedback captured and analyzed through this method was used to challenge
the design and inform the iterative development of the tool.
Results: Interviews with primary health care providers (n=7) and content experts (n=6), and four focus groups with patients
and carers (n=14) along with a PICK analysis—Possible, Implementable, (to be) Challenged, (to be) Killed—guided development
of the first prototype. The initial prototype was presented in three design working groups with patients/carers (n=5), providers
(n=6), and experts (n=5). Working group findings were broken down into categories of what works and what does not work to
inform modifications to the prototype. This latter phase led to a major shift in the purpose and design of the prototype, validating
the importance of using iterative codesign processes.

JMIR Res Protoc 2016 | vol. 5 | iss. 1 | e28 | p. 1

Conclusions: Interpretive descriptive methods allow for an understanding of user experiences of patients with CCDD, their
carers, and primary care providers. Qualitative methods help to capture and interpret user needs, and identify contextual barriers
and enablers to tool adoption, informing a redesign to better suit the needs of this diverse user group. This study illustrates the
value of adopting interpretive descriptive methods into user-centered mHealth tool design and can also serve to inform the design
of other eHealth technologies. Our approach is particularly useful in requirements determination when developing for a complex
user group and their health care providers.

(JMIR Res Protoc 2016;5(1):e28) doi: 10.2196/resprot.5204

KEYWORDS
eHealth development; mobile apps; multi-morbidity; complex patients; primary care

Introduction

Overview

Software developers have historically relied on standard
processes for requirements determination and functional
specification [1,2]. Commonly used development models range
from the conventional waterfall approach (ie, sequential design
process) [3] through to more contemporary methodologies such
as agile development (ie, frequent testing of iterative designs)
[4]. The evolution in methods for functional specification have
largely focused on finding ways to mitigate the challenge created
by user or environment requirements that evolve during the
development lifecycle. Iterative development approaches such
as prototyping emerged to address difficulties experienced in
identifying user requirements.

Almost all software requirement elucidation techniques assume
the ability to engage—at specific stages or in all stages in the
software specification process—with cognitively and physically
able user populations. Less well understood is how to
successfully elicit user specifications from medically fragile
populations, such as those with complex chronic diseases and
disabilities (CCDDs) [5-7]. These are individuals with two or
more chronic conditions (ie, multi-morbidity) and who often
face social, environmental, and contextual issues that impact
on their health care needs and ability to manage [8]. These
patients are among the heaviest users of the health system [7],
and thus increasingly garner the attention of insurers—public
or private—who are searching for cost-effective solutions [9].
At the same time, patients are seeking to minimize the burden
of their illness as they navigate their way through a highly
complex health care system.

In today’s technology-enabled world, there has been a plethora
of patient-centered apps, online medical resources, wearable
fitness technologies, and similar tools to promote adherence to
treatment plans [10-13]. What is strikingly absent are
information-enabled solutions designed specifically for high
users of the health system [14], like patients with CCDD. The
majority of apps are focused on single-disease management,
thereby not aligned with the needs of complex patients [15].
Furthermore, development methodologies used in the creation
of eHealth solutions lack the ability to embrace users with
CCDD in the specification process.

We posit that eHealth solutions that target CCDD patients are
needed, and that the success of these solutions will in part be
determined by incorporating persons with CCDD in the

development process. We adapted a conventional software
development process to make CCDD patient users central to
the specification and testing process. Using a multi-phased
user-centered approach, we sought to build, deploy, and test a
patient-centered app to improve quality of care and patient
experience for patients with CCDD in primary health care
settings. This paper describes the development phase in the
creation of the electronic Patient-Reported Outcomes (ePRO)
tool, with particular attention to the use of qualitative methods
incorporated into the software specification process to facilitate
user feedback from CCDD patients—a user population for which
traditional design approaches may not be well tailored. Tool
development phases were supported by the technology partner,
QoC Health Inc.

Background and Significance: Adopting Qualitative
Methods in a User-Centered Design Approach

Until the mid-1990s, most software development methodologies
were anchored in a linear process based on the premise that the
more detailed the specification, the greater the prospect of
realizing a well-functioning solution. The System Development
Life Cycle [16], IBM’s Joint Application Design (JAD) [17,18],
and later the Rational Unified Process [19] were typical of the
era. As the opportunities to “computerize” increasingly complex
systems grew, development methodologies shifted toward
increasingly iterative development processes, with agile
development being an excellent example of a contemporary
approach [4]. Central to these approaches was the concept of
user-centered design [20].

User-centered technology development is “characterized by a
focus on the user, and on incorporating the user’s perspective
in all stages of the design process” [21, p 1]. This approach is
often iterative, involving multidisciplinary design teams, and
emphasizes the need to incorporate user feedback as part of the
design, testing, and implementation process [21]. Previous
studies have noted that adopting user-centered design approaches
can improve usability and implementation [22] and can also
improve user acceptance and satisfaction with new systems
overall [23]. Iivari and Iivari [24] suggest that there are four
dimensions of user-centeredness: user focus, work-centeredness,
user involvement or participation, and system personalization.
One or more of these dimensions may be the focus on the
user-centered method employed, and it is suggested that
developers and researchers strive to include all four in the design
approach. Also important is attention to the provision of
appropriate processes and supports to encourage meaningful

JMIR Res Protoc 2016 | vol. 5 | iss. 1 | e28 | p. 2

engagement and empowerment by users involved in the design
process [25].

Design evaluation approaches suggest the use of rigorous
research methods and evaluations in order to support capturing
and incorporating user input [26]. We looked to combine
rigorous qualitative research evaluation with an iterative design
approach to obtain user feedback to develop a mobile solution
that will meet the needs of patients and their primary care
providers. Qualitative methods that capture individual
experiences and perceptions [27] provide a useful toolkit to a
user-centered 
design 
evaluation 
approach. 
Interpretive
description, a form of qualitative inquiry, draws on data
collected through in-depth interviews and focus groups to
capture human experience [28]. Understanding the care
experiences and needs of patients with CCDD requires attention
to the context in which their physical and mental health and
social needs are intertwined [8]. Qualitative inquiry captured
in an open setting closer to participants’lived experience allows
us to capture the complexity and breadth of experiences of
patients with CCDD, which may not be possible through typical
user-centered design approaches, such as one-on-one, lab-based
walk-throughs [29], which capture information—sometimes
both qualitative and quantitative—in a closed setting. Iterative
changes to the tool can be informed by rich user experience
data—ensuring user focus—supporting user involvement in the
design and development of a truly person (user)-centered tool.

This paper describes the design and development approach to
create the ePRO tool, specifically the process of incorporating
qualitative research methods into user-centered design
approaches. Key lessons learned are offered as a guide for other
eHealth and mHealth research and technology developers
working with complex patient populations and their primary
care providers (PCPs).

The Electronic Patient-Reported Outcomes Tool

In this section, we offer a brief description of the ePRO tool
that was developed through the process described in this paper.
The ePRO tool includes a portal system for providers and
patients to set up and monitor goals, as well as a mobile device
for patients to track their goals. There is also a Hospital

CheckOut feature that allows patients to report when they have
visited and been discharged from a hospital—primary care
providers see this information when they access the portal. To
set up goals, patients and providers collaboratively work together
on the portal system during an in-person visit. After initial
set-up, both patients and providers can view patient progress
on the portal any time in between visits. Patients also have the
option of inputting their monitoring data on the portal if they
do not wish to use their mobile device. A full description of the
new tool will be published in our forthcoming paper outlining
our usability pilot (see Multimedia Appendix 1).

Methods

Overview

Guided by user-centered design principles [21] and other studies
involving the development of mHealth technologies [30-33],
we adopted a multi-phased research approach to support the
iterative design and development of the ePRO tool. Full ethics
approval was obtained from the Joint Bridgepoint Hospital-West
Park Healthcare Centre-Toronto Central Community Care
Access Centre-Toronto Grace Health Centre Research Ethics
Board. At the outset, we broadly intended to develop an mHealth
solution to support community-dwelling patients with CCDD
and their PCPs. Figure 1 provides a visual depiction of our
design and development method.

As depicted in Figure 1, patients, carers, and PCPs were
involved at each step in the design process. This paper describes
Phases 1 and 2 with specific emphasis on provider input, as
shown in Figure 1. Methods and findings from the
patient-focused aspects of Phase 1 have been published
elsewhere [34,35].

The tool was developed within a primary health care practice,
which included an interprofessional team of PCPs composed
of physicians, nurse practitioners, registered nurses, social
workers, and dietitians. Feedback on the tool was captured from
PCPs who varied in their interest and willingness to engage in
new technologies. Two PCPs expressed low interest and
willingness in the working group, while the rest were more keen
to try new technologies as part of care delivery.

JMIR Res Protoc 2016 | vol. 5 | iss. 1 | e28 | p. 3

Figure 1. Development approach.

Phase 1: User Needs Assessment—Provider and Expert
Input and Response to Patient-Identified Needs

Phase 1 consisted of focus groups with patients and carers plus
interviews with content experts (CEs) and PCPs from the
practice. This phase of development was mainly concerned with
ensuring a user focus and capturing work-centeredness
dimensions of user-centered design in that we sought to
understand users' needs and the tasks needed to address those
needs. Focus group findings in Phase 1, along with a literature
review [34], provided the initial building blocks for tool
development. A total of 14 patients and carers participated in
four focus groups in the fall of 2013. Of the 14 participants, 10
(71%) were patients, 2 (14%) were caregivers only, and 2 (14%)
were both patients and caregivers. The participants' average age
was 64 years (range 42-90), and 9 out of 14 (64%) participants
were female. Patients participating in the focus groups reported
multiple chronic illnesses, including diabetes, chronic pain,
osteoarthritis, osteoporosis, anemia, cardiac conditions,
glaucoma, and mental illness [35]. Initial findings from the
focus groups and available resources suggested that the tool
should support better communication between patients and PCPs
around three key areas:

1. Information about symptoms and functional status (ie, pain,
mobility, depression/anxiety, activities of daily living [eg,
bathing, toileting], and social well-being).

2. Medication management support (ie, reminders, renewals,
and reporting side effects).

3. Educational materials and/or trusted websites to support
self-management.

Next, purposive sampling [36,37] was used to identify PCPs
and CEs who could provide the feedback required to refine the
tool. Semistructured interviews were conducted with the PCPs,
as well as CEs, in at least one of the fields of development or
utilization of eHealth and/or research or service delivery
experience with CCDD patients. CEs were identified through
their academic, clinical, and/or research networks.

PCPs were selected from the primary care practice where the
tool would be piloted and tested. These PCPs had been engaged
in the project from early stages and had attended several
meetings to receive updates on the project. A patient advocate
was also interviewed, as this individual is experiencing CCDD
who has engaged with other eHealth technologies as part of
their care, and has previously served as a patient representative
in other research projects.

PCPs and CEs were given a summary of patient focus group
findings and asked their perspectives on the following: (1) the
value of ongoing monitoring of symptoms and functional status
as part of usual care, (2) what types of information should be
shared about those symptoms (ie, indicators, scales, and
contextual information) and how it could best be shared, (3) the
role of patients accessing appropriate educational materials, (4)
how different communication methods would fit into provider
workflows, and (5) other aspects of primary health care delivery
that may be important to capture for managing patients with
CCDD.

Phase 2: Tool Development

Based on the Phase 1 findings, we identified four key features
for the tool: symptom monitoring; medication management;
educational resources; and hospital visit notification, as hospital
access notification was identified in the provider interviews as

JMIR Res Protoc 2016 | vol. 5 | iss. 1 | e28 | p. 4

an ongoing problem. Figure 2 shows the prototype development
process; in the figure, the first two icons are open source from
Iconfinder [38] and the last icon is open source made by Flaticon
[39]. Prototype development and refinement occurred over a
series of teleconferences and meetings between the research
partners and the technology partner.

Patients, PCPs, and CEs who participated in the earlier stages
of the study were invited to provide feedback on a working
prototype during separate 2-hour working group sessions. At
each working group session, participants were asked (1) whether
the tool captured issues of importance to patients with CCDD,
(2) whether the tool was easy to use and understand in terms of
question wording and interface, and (3) whether there were
other ways that we could gather similar information. The

working groups aimed to support user involvement in the design
process, while allowing us to pay attention to unique use cases
and identify how we could build in system personalization.

The working groups consisted of modified cognitive
walk-throughs [29]—participants “walk through” the sequence
of tasks—in order to test the usability of the system. In contrast
to one-on-one cognitive interviews, working groups provide an
opportunity for individuals to engage in open dialogue and
reflect on their diverse personal and professional experiences
allowing us to effectively capture the breadth of multiple user
experiences. Each session was audiotaped and recordings were
used to verify and substantiate researcher notes taken during
and after the groups.

Figure 2. Prototype development process. The first two icons are open source from Iconfinder [38] and the last icon is open source made by Flaticon
[39]. PICK: Possible, Implementable, (to be) Challenged, (to be) Killed.

Data Analysis

Data analysis was conducted by reviewing notes and transcripts
from interviews and working groups. An iterative analysis
technique was used in which data were reviewed by two
researchers, first independently and then together at multiple
points aligned with the stage of tool development. Findings
were organized in relation to the tool design and function to
help systematically inform modifications to the tool. We used
an interpretive descriptive approach in which findings are
compared to a starting point [28]—the ePRO tool and prototype.
The tables were written up into a summary report for Phase 1
(PCP and CE interviews) to inform the development process
described above, and another for Phase 2 (prototype
development process) to inform additional tool changes to be
made prior to Phase 3 (usability pilot to be described in a future
manuscript).

Results

Participants

Table 1 offers a description of the participants in Phases 1 and
2. Patients and carers who participated in the Phase 2 working
groups had also attended the Phase 1 focus groups. Although
more patients and caregivers from Phase 1 were invited to
participate in Phase 2, many were unable to attend due to health
issues.

Phase 1: Primary Care Provider and Content Expert
Interviews

PCP and CE interviews ran for approximately one hour. PCPs
and CEs identified that symptom monitoring, medication
management, and educational resources were all important
aspects of care delivery for patients with CCDD. All supported
the idea of ongoing monitoring of pain symptoms and mobility
in relation to activities of daily living, as well as anxiety and
depression symptoms. PCPs and CEs identified a variety of

JMIR Res Protoc 2016 | vol. 5 | iss. 1 | e28 | p. 5

symptom-related variables and scales with little consensus
except for the need for validated measures. PCPs identified the
need to know when their patients were admitted to a hospital,
as they frequently did not know when this had occurred,
resulting in little or no follow-up and poorly coordinated care.

Phase 2: Prototype Development Process

Figure 2 depicts how the user needs assessment was used to
inform the iterative prototype development process. As can be
noted in Figure 2, two features were removed through the design
process by engaging in a PICK analysis—PICK stands for
Possible, Implementable, (to be) Challenged, (to be) Killed. A
PICK analysis is a lean technology development process in
which features are assessed in terms of the time and resource
investment required, and the anticipated value added [40]. The
assessment allowed us to determine whether a feature was (1)
Possible (ie, easy to accomplish but with a low value add), (2)
Implementable (ie, easy to accomplish with a high value add),
(3) to be Challenged (ie, was difficult to accomplish but had a
high value add), or (4) to be Killed (ie, difficult to accomplish
with a little value add). Our focus was on identifying features
that fell into the Implementable category. The medication
management and educational features were challenged, as they
were difficult to accomplish given our resources and time
frames. In addition, our technology partner was developing
similar features for another project, thus the features could be
incorporated into the ePRO tool in a future iteration.

The prototype included two features: symptom monitoring and
hospital access notification. Symptom monitoring focused on
symptoms identified as most important in the patient focus
groups—pain, mobility, anxiety/depression, and social
well-being 
[35]. 
A 
literature 
review 
revealed 
three
Patient-Reported Outcome Measurement Information System
(PROMIS) tools—the Global Health Scale, the Pain Interference
Scale, and the Improved Health Assessment Questionnaire—as
appropriate to needs as they captured symptoms of interest and
were validated in chronic disease populations [41-43]. To
minimize respondent burden, skip patterns were created so
patients could only answer scales that were relevant to their
current symptoms. A free-text comment box was included at
the end of the symptom reporting to allow patients to provide
contextual information to meet the needs of patients who wanted
their providers to understand them as “whole persons” [35].

The hospital visit notification feature allowed patients, and/or
their carers, to notify the PCPs when the patient had been to an
emergency department or admitted to hospital, including the
name of the hospital, date of admission, and reason for

admission. Once notified, PCPs could request discharge reports
from hospitals, which are not typically received in a timely
manner.

Working Group Findings: A New Direction

The three working groups provided rich and valuable feedback
on the prototype. Findings were separated into categories of
what works and what does not work.

What Works

Functionality: Ongoing Monitoring and Tracking
All three groups felt the remote monitoring function was
valuable. Patients appreciated being able to see changes in their
symptoms over time. PCPs felt that having information about
their patient’s symptoms over time could enable them to see
what specific issues their patients had been facing and then
target discussions at the point of care to those issues.

Content: Including Contextual Information
All three working groups saw value in capturing contextual
information through the use of open-ended questions in order
to provide a more well-rounded understanding of patients'
symptoms and capacity to self-manage.

What Does Not Work

Issue 1: The Length of the Tool
All three groups felt that the monitoring questions were overly
burdensome. For patients, this meant potentially taking 20-25
minutes once a week to answer questions, and for PCPs it
entailed sifting through a large amount of monitoring data.

Issue 2: Fitting in With Provider Workflows
While PCPs saw the potential for symptom monitoring between
visits, they were uncertain how they would fit monitoring into
their daily schedules. PCPs also had concerns about liability
issues, if they were to be responsible for monitoring a large
number of patients.

Issue 3: Unclear Answer Keys, Scales, and User Flow
There were concerns from all three groups regarding confusing
visual analog and Likert scales. Patients expected a rating of
10 to be good; however, the scales were based on tools designed
for providers, who tend to see high values (ie, spikes) as a
negative health outcome. Additionally, some of the scales were
flipped. A high number would be a good outcome for one
question but a bad outcome for another. It was felt that
standardization in line with the preference of the patients would
improve usability of the tool.

JMIR Res Protoc 2016 | vol. 5 | iss. 1 | e28 | p. 6

Table 1. Study participants.

Type of group in each phase
Details
Participants

Phase 2
Phase 1

Patient/caregiver working group
(n=4)

3 females, 1 male

Of these, 1 female patient was also
a caregiver

Focus group

(n=12)

9 female

Average age=64 years (range 42-79)

2 patients were also caregivers

All identified have two or more chronic conditions they
find difficult to manage

Patients

Patient/caregiver working group
(n=1)
Focus group

(n=2)

All female
Caregivers

Provider working group
Interview
General practitioners (n=2)
PCPs a (n=7)

Provider working group
Interview
Nurse practitioner

Provider working group
Interview
Registered nurse

Provider working group
Interview
Dietitian and diabetes educator

Provider working group
Interview
Administrative staff member

N/Ab
Interview
Executive director

Expert working groupd
Interview
Complex pain
CEs c (n=6)

N/A
Interview
eHealth

Expert working group
Interview
eHealth for chronic conditions

Expert working group
Interview
Rehabilitation in complex populations and PROse

Expert working group
N/A
Complex stroke

Expert working group
Interview
Complex patient

aPCP: primary care provider.
bN/A: not applicable.
cCE: content expert.
dResearch team participants in expert working group (n=4).
ePRO: patient-reported outcome.

Issue 4: Content Issues
The wording of some questions, including length, reading level,
double-barreled questions, and negative labeling connotations
for some questions—particularly around mental health—were
seen as problematic by patients. Providers also wanted to see
questions on patient confidence and self-efficacy included,
which were subsequently added to the tool.

Shifting From Monitoring to Supporting
Self-Management and Patient-Centered Delivery

The issues identified by all participants suggested the need to
rethink the utility and purpose of the tool moving forward.
Provider workflow concerns, the length of the tool, and content
issues suggested very low usability of the prototype. More
importantly, working group findings revealed that much of the
symptom data of importance to patients were related to the types
of care planning and goal setting that the PCPs would engage
in with patients. This realization prompted a major shift in the
purpose of the tool away from an application that only captures
patient-reported outcome measures to a tool that actively uses
those measures to improve the design and delivery of
goal-oriented 
primary 
health 
care 
while 
supporting
self-management for patients with CCDD.

Goal-oriented models of care can support improved
patient-centered care delivery [44], identified as a crucial need
via the patient focus groups. Furthermore, a goal-oriented
approach to care aligns with the patients’ desires to improve
their health status with respect to symptom management. Goal
setting has been identified as an important process to improve
care for complex and chronically ill patients [44,45]. Despite
this, goal-oriented care has proven to be a challenge in primary
care settings [46] and goals are often not agreed upon between
providers and their complex patients [47].

Discussion

Implications for Development

Overview

An interpretive descriptive approach allowed us to capture
diverse and unique user needs of a complex and often
overlooked patient population. Our data collection and analysis
strategy informed a major shift in system requirements which
may have been missed if we had relied solely on more traditional
requirement elucidation techniques. The discussion will outline
three key lessons learned with regard to developing mHealth
tools for patients with CCDD in primary health care settings,

JMIR Res Protoc 2016 | vol. 5 | iss. 1 | e28 | p. 7

and examine how the use of interpretive descriptive methods
helped address and respond to these issues. These lessons could
extend to development of broader eHealth technologies as well.

Lesson 1: Developing Tools for Patients With Complex
Chronic Diseases and Disabilities Requires Balancing
Multiple and Diverse Needs

A core challenge in adapting functional specifications
methodology for use by people with CCDD was the difficulty
associated with balancing the needs of multiple diverse end
users. Although the initial intention was to create a
patient-centered tool, there had to be acknowledgement of the
needs of PCPs who would be engaging with the tool. While the
original prototype was meeting patient needs for symptom
monitoring, it did not align with provider workflows. Qualitative
methods enabled us to capture why individuals responded as
they did, including contextual factors that played a role in that
response, and allowed for probing at ways to reconcile diverse
needs. Codesigning interventions with CCDD patients and
providers has already been noted to be key to success
[48,49]—an approach that should extend to developing other
types of mHealth and eHealth interventions as well.

Other studies have noted the need to engage with users to further
refine the purpose and goals of new information technology
(IT) systems [30,32]. For example, in designing the Coplintho
project, De Rouck and colleagues underwent extensive early
development work to identify the appropriate user groups and
user needs, as well as to create a final purpose or use case for
their tool [50]. As is the case in developing the ePRO tool, the
Coplintho project drew heavily on qualitative methodologies
and the designers concluded that their methods helped to refine
project goals and tool functionality.

Lesson 2: The Purpose and Intention of the Tool Should
Remain Flexible Through the Development Process

The purpose of the tool had to be flexible in order to meet user
needs. Part of the challenge was that there was uncertainty
regarding the specific needs of the CCDD patient population,
thereby creating a number of design and development
challenges, as well as research challenges, since many early
discussions around the tool were exploratory in nature.
Flexibility allowed for responsiveness to user needs and contexts
but resulted in challenges in the research and development
process that required resources to assess and continually explore
different system capabilities, functionalities, and content.

Lesson 3: Careful Attention Needs to be Paid to Provider
and Organizational Barriers to mHealth Tool Adoption

Close attention also needed to be paid to organizational and
system realities in which our tool would be adopted. The
organizational culture around adopting new technologies
required resources in terms of IT support for PCPs. Further,
provider time and workflows factored into the provider response
and willingness to engage with the tool during development.
Through interviews and working groups, these important
contextual factors were identified and could be addressed in
redeveloping the prototype.

Provider and organizational-level barriers to adopting mHealth
technology are well documented in the literature. In a systematic
review of factors affecting mHealth adoption, provider-level
issues such as perceived usefulness and impact on patient care,
and organizational-level factors such as impact on provider
workflows and interprofessional communication, were found
to be important [51]. It has been recommended that development
stages should involve clinical perspectives in order to mitigate
barriers and ensure appropriate functionality [14]. If only patient
needs were considered, the ePRO tool would serve solely as a
monitoring tool, which would have been unsustainable in the
long term.

Limitations

Blending qualitative specification elucidation into traditional
prototyping methods is time and resource intensive and, as such,
we were only able to go through a single round with a
high-fidelity prototype which was “an incomplete but essentially
executable version of the final product” [52, p 666] . Future
studies involving multiple and diverse end users should build
in additional time and funding, and potentially use lower-fidelity
prototypes like wireframes to enable multiple iterations and
cycles of design. Another limitation was the separation of
patients and PCPs at the working group stage in order to
minimize perceived power differentials that might result in
patients not fully expressing their views. This concern may
make codesign with both parties in the room difficult [49]. We
also had a relatively low number of patients in our working
group due to medical frailty. When working with a complex
patient population, strategies are required to address the high
likelihood of dropout, for instance, recruiting a much larger
number of patients for the focus group then would be typically
done. Another consideration working with this population is
there may be concerns with capturing typical socioeconomic
data, such as education, occupation, and household income,
which could deter patients from participation. As such, we opted
to forgo capturing this information at this stage of development,
so as to reduce barriers to participation.

As we move forward with this work, we must also be aware
that many individuals within the complex patient population,
particularly older adults and those with lower household
incomes, may not have their own mobile phones. To address
this issue, we will make mobile phones available to participants
of our pilots and trials, and make it possible for caregivers to
respond on the patient;#8217;s behalf. As noted earlier, patients
can also input data via a portal system, which they can access
from a home computer or open access computers at libraries.

Conclusions

The use of interpretive descriptive methods can be of particular
use in requirements determination and functional specification
in software development for diverse populations, such as patients
with CCDD. Qualitative methods can do the following: help to
ensure all end users' needs are captured and understood within
their unique contexts, allow for a flexible purpose of tools in
the early stages of design, and help to capture contextual
enablers and barriers to the tool’s uptake. The key lessons that
have emerged from the process of developing the ePRO tool
can be adopted by other researchers or developers of mHealth

JMIR Res Protoc 2016 | vol. 5 | iss. 1 | e28 | p. 8

and eHealth technologies. Using interpretive descriptive
qualitative methods as part of a user-centered design was pivotal
to capturing, analyzing, and implementing user feedback. To
help generate a better understanding between patients and

providers of each other’s experiences, future design stages will
seek to bring patients and providers together to align with
established codesign methods [52].