A User-Centered Design Case Study on Improvements of Hybrid Teaching Through A Physical Avatar in 

the Classroom. 

Daniel Ullrich 
LMU Munich, Department of 
Computer Science, Germany 

Andreas Butz 
LMU Munich, Department of 
Computer Science, Germany 

Sarah Diefenbach 
LMU Munich, Department of 
Psychology, Germany 

ABSTRACT 

Hybrid formats have become a common approach in university 
teaching. Typically, there is a synchronous live session which stu­
dents can join either in the physical classroom or digitally/remotely 
with interaction through textual chat. While this has many ad­
vantages in terms of inclusivity and sustainability, it also poses 
problems such as increased attention requirements for teachers and 
a lacking social integration of remote and on-site students. Based 
on a user-centered design approach, we developed the concept of 
the ”Fernstudent”. A physical avatar represents remote students 
collectively in the classroom, creating a communication channel 
based on the same modalities as for on-site communication. The 
present case study describes the iterative design process, from the 
first idea via explorative interviews and state of the art analysis, 
concept development, potential analysis, exploration of different 
design variants, a first functional prototype, a pilot field test, and 
finally lessons learnt and planned future steps of development. 

CCS CONCEPTS 

• Human-centered computing → Collaborative and social com­
puting; Collaborative and social computing devices. 

KEYWORDS 

Fernstudent, hybrid teaching, user-centered design, concept devel­
opment, prototype, pilot field test 

ACM Reference Format: 
Daniel Ullrich, Andreas Butz, and Sarah Diefenbach. 2024. The Fernstudent.: 
A User-Centered Design Case Study on Improvements of Hybrid Teaching 
Through A Physical Avatar in the Classroom.. In Extended Abstracts of 
the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA ’24), 
May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 8 pages. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3613905.3637144 

1 INTRODUCTION 

After the (enforced) intense experiences with digital and hybrid 
learning in the course of the COVID-19 pandemic, now, coming 
back to the ”regular” mode of university life, the question for us as 
researchers and teachers at a university is what we might want to 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or 
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed 
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation 
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored. 
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s). 
© 2024 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). 
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0331-7/24/05 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3613905.3637144 

carry over. For example, do we still want to offer a hybrid option 
for lectures? 

While the term hybrid teaching is not used consistently, and may 
refer to different ways of integrating technology in education (e.g., 
[8, 11, 17]), it usually refers to a combination of on-site and digi­
tal teaching in a synchronous live-session, where remote students 
follow the lecture via video and audio channels using an online 
platform (e.g., Zoom, Jitsi Meet), with the opportunity to pose ques­
tions or comments via textual or voice chat (e.g., [12]). Informal 
discussions with colleagues showed a split opinion on hybrid teach­
ing: while some saw this as a worthwhile option and positive signal 
of progress and inclusion which would also be expected from a 
modern university, others clearly declared they would not offer a 
hybrid option, because of the many disadvantages. In particular, 
these others complained about the additional demands to handle the 
lecture’s slides and the online platform to integrate remote students 
on one screen at the same time, which would definitely impair their 
attention and teaching quality. Also, the splitting of the students’ 
group in on-site and remote would impair the quality of interaction. 
In the end, one teacher declared that they can only focus on one 
place and one group, so that the other group is left out. As HCI 
researchers, this made us think: Does it really have to be like this? 
Or could there be a technical solution, that would allow teachers 
to focus on one place, but still include remote students? This was 
the birth of the idea of the ”Fernstudent” (German compound word, 
originally referring to students at a remote university). Driven by 
the aim to improve the quality of hybrid teaching and make it a 
worthwhile option for both, teachers and students, we received 
funding from our university’s Quality Teaching Fund to develop 
corresponding concepts in a user-centered design approach. While 
we started our exploration at our own university and, thus, focused 
on the needs and experiences of teachers and students at LMU as 
informants, we also aim to disseminate the concept and possibly 
adapt it to other universities and meeting contexts in future work. 

The present case study describes the user-centered iterative de­
sign process, from the first idea via explorative interviews and 
an analysis of the state of the art, concept development, potential 
analysis, exploration of different design variants, a first functional 
prototype, a pilot field test, and finally lessons learnt and future 
steps of development. While insights from the user studies and 
relevant backgrounds from educational psychology are reported 
in more detail elsewhere [13, 14], the present case study focuses 
on the HCI practice and translation of user needs into concrete 
technical design decisions, the challenges and solutions, impacts on 
real-world teaching, and implications for HCI research and design, 
also beyond the context of teaching and the university.

Daniel Ullrich et al. 

2 EXPLORATIVE INTERVIEWS AND STATE OF 
THE ART ANALYSIS 

Explorative interviews with two university teachers and 57 stu­
dents provided us deeper insights into the particular needs and 
experiences of these two relevant groups in the context of hybrid 
teaching (also see [13]). The interviews were structured along three 
leading questions, i.e., (1) What are your (positive and negative) 
experiences with hybrid teaching? (2) What are the advantages and 
specific qualities of face-to-face compared to hybrid teaching? (3) 
What should be changed to make hybrid teaching an (even) better 
option? Do you have any ideas on how technology could support 
this? From the teacher’s perspective, hybrid teaching was mostly 
experienced as one-directional communication, resulting in a bad 
atmosphere and lacking a feeling of connectedness. Also, hybrid 
teaching was described as ”a bad compromise”, where the fact that 
it is live would create more stress, but the advantage of being live 
was hardly taken advantage of. Both, teachers and students also 
emphasized the lacking connection between on-site and remote 
students. Furthermore, the students complained that the teachers 
felt overburdened and some teachers would even explicitly state 
that questions from remote students were not allowed. On the 
other side, the teachers complained that they didn’t get anything 
back from the remote students and would feel uncomfortable, es­
pecially if remote students turn off their camera (”… the ones who 
are remote might as well be gone [. . .] you are totally exposed but 
speaking to people you can’t see”). 

In the end, both, teachers and students, emphasized the necessity 
to bring both student groups (on-site and remote) more on one level 
(in visibility, modality, social interaction, appearance in the room) 
and provided first design ideas, such as a loudspeaker for questions 
from remote students or a microphone that records not only the 
teacher but also the audience, so that remote students could better 
follow discussions in the physical classroom. 

A state-of-the-art analysis of literature on hybrid teaching re­
vealed a similar picture. The main advantage is its inclusive char­
acter, i.e., even those who are unable to be present in the physical 
classroom, for example for reasons of childcare, illness or infection 
risks, or traveling (e.g., [5, 6]), still can attend a lecture. On the 
other hand, the format comes with numerous difficulties, connected 
to impairments of wellbeing and educational quality (e.g., [3, 4, 9]). 
As studies showed, both parties (remote and on-site) show behavior 
that contributes to growing psychological distance and reduced 
interaction between the two settings. Remote students often engage 
in side-activities while attending their lecture and participate less 
actively than on-site students [9]. The teachers, in turn, tend to 
focus their attention on the on-site students, and do this even more 
if questions or comments from remote students are rare [4]. Overall, 
experiences reveal two primary objectives for the improvement of 
hybrid teaching: (1) to reduce the cognitive load on the part of the 
instructor and (2) to reduce the differences in social presence and 
interaction opportunities between remote and physically present 
students. 

A straightforward approach to enhance the social presence of 
remote students in the classroom could be a physical avatar, which 
serves as a prominent ”reminder” of the remote students joining 
the lecture while naturally supporting a style of interaction with a 

social entity (see also [1, 2]). This approach also has some similari­
ties with the idea of telepresence robots (TPRs), as already applied 
in diverse educational settings (e.g., [7, 15, 16]). A telepresence 
robot is typically a 1:1 representation of a remote person, usually 
displayed on a screen, through which the remote person can op­
erate the camera angle to control their view at the on-site setting 
(for examples see https://telepresencerobots.com). Compared to 
this, the present approach is an adoption of the TPR tailored to 
the university context. Instead of a 1:1-representation, all remote 
students are represented by a single physical entity placed at a fixed 
spot among the on-site students (which seems more practical and 
affordable than one TPR for each remote student). 

3 CONCEPT DEVELOPMENT 

Based on these insights about the key requirements, in an internal 
workshop, we sketched a preliminary first concept (called the ”Fern-
student”) with the following basic features: A physical avatar with 
a physical presence, ”sitting” in the lecture hall, side by side with 
the on-site students, representing the remote students, whereby 
image and sound from the lecture hall are transmitted to 
the remote students, and images and sound from remote stu­
dents are transmitted into the lecture hall. Remote students 
can indicate that they want to speak (e.g., by motor elements, 
”hand signals”, light signals) and the number of remote students 
is somehow displayed in real time. With these features, the 
concept of the Fernstudent addresses the main identified challenges 
of hybrid teaching: (1) It reduces the cognitive demands for the 
teaching person by limiting the focus of attention to one spot and 
modality. Signals from the remote students become visible in the 
same space as those from the on-site students, which frees up the 
instructor’s attention capacities for lecture content and interac­
tion quality. (2) It enhances the presence of remote students by a 
physical, anthropomorphic representation and places both student 
groups on a more equal level (in visibility, modality, and opportuni­
ties for social interaction). 

4 POTENTIAL ANALYSIS: CONCEPT 
EVALUATION WITH TEACHERS 

Before we went on with a further realization of the concept as a 
functional prototype, we presented the concept (by means of a short 
description and scribbles) to a convenience sample of 21 teachers 
at our university from diverse departments (e.g., politics, literature, 
law, computer science, economics) and collected their spontaneous 
opinion about the potential of the concept. Before presenting the 
concept of the Fernstudent, the teachers reported about their experi­
ences with hybrid teaching in general and their personally preferred 
teaching mode (e.g., on-site, online, hybrid). Each interview lasted 
about 30 minutes. The interviews were transcribed verbatim and 
statements were broadly categorized. The following sections report 
the central results. Regarding the question of preferred teaching 
format, the largest group had a clear preference for the classical 
on-site teaching (9 of 21, 43%). Five teachers (24%) declared that 
depending on the type of course (e.g., lecture, seminar, group work) 
both, on-site and online could be preferable, but not a hybrid so­
lution. Four teachers (19%) opted for hybrid teaching, but stated 
that remote participation should only be a back-up solution and

on-site participation should remain the standard. Three teachers 
(14%) were unsure. After a short introduction to the concept of the 
Fernstudent, teachers reflected on the imagined mental load with 
either a hybrid lecture with the Fernstudent in the classroom or 
a classical hybrid format, using a software such as Zoom or Jitsi 
Meet. The majority (17 of 21, 81%) rated the mental load higher 
for the classical hybrid format. One (5%) rated it higher for the 
Fernstudent, ”because it is something that I am not used to, simply 
because it is new” [P6]. Three teachers (14%) thought that this was 
hard to tell or probably similar for both. 

Regarding the functionality and modalities of interaction, the 
vast majority (18 of 21, 86%) stated that remote students should be 
able to pose questions or comments via speech, using their natural 
voice (just like the on-site students). Two teachers (10%) suggested 
that a robot voice should read out what the remote students typed in 
via chat. One teacher (5%) found that it doesn’t matter whose voice 
it is, as long as it is understandable. With regards to a video option 
(i.e., the teacher can not only hear but also see the remote students), 
14 teachers (67%) suggested that all participating remote students 
should be visible with their face, because it is a ”better feeling if 
you see who you are talking to” [P10], and also explaining that the 
mimic expressions are an important (nonverbal) feedback for the 
teacher, where they see that something might has to be explained 
in more detail [P10, P17, P23]. Four teachers (19%) declared that 
it was not necessary for them to see the remote students, and 2 
teachers (10%) said that at least the speaking student should be 
visible (1 person was not sure). 

Sixteen teachers (76%) clearly wished for a feature that displays 
the number of remote participants. Two teachers (10%) stated that 
this would be a nice feature but only if it is easily recognizable, 
and that the exact number of participating students was not im­
portant. Three teachers (14%) were not sure. Finally, regarding 
the design of the avatar, there was no clear opinion among the 
interviewed teachers. One third (7, 33%) thought that it should 
have a human-like design, whereas another third (7, 33%) opted 
for a minimalistic, non-human like design. Another third (7, 33%) 
declared no preference and emphasized that the focus was on the 
functions and not the design. 

In sum, the potential analysis thus confirmed the Fernstudent as 
a promising concept, worth to be further developed and tested. The 
majority of teachers assumed that this could reduce their mental 
load. Also, the teachers’ opinion confirmed the planned features 
such as a display of the number of remote participants and video 
and audio transfer between classroom and remote students. Re­
garding the latter, we also discussed that the transfer of the video 
of the remote students could be an optional feature and it should be 
decided jointly in a course how to deal with this (e.g., an agreement 
that all switch the camera on or all off). Regarding the design of 
the avatar, we came to the conclusion that it could have human-
like elements but altogether should have a neutral, minimalistic 
impression that keeps the focus on the remote students which it 
represents instead of becoming a focus of attention itself. 

Figure 1: Set-up of hardware components. 

5 TECHNICAL REALIZATION AND 
PROTOTYPE 

In order to implement the Fernstudent as a functional prototype, 
we had to address two basic questions: the technical realization, 
including hardware and software, and its physical shape and aes­
thetic appearance. In the following sections we describe how we 
came to the current solutions for each of these issues. 

5.1 Technical realization 

5.1.1 Hardware. Figure 1 shows the set-up of hardware compo­
nents, which are described in more detail below. In order to reduce 
complexity and keep space requirements to a minimum, we wanted 
to include as few devices as possible. Thus, we started from a tablet 
computer with an integrated touch interface, so that there no addi­
tional keyboard is needed and all commands can be realized via the 
screen. We used a Microsoft Surface 7+ notebook which also 
features a front camera and microphone. 

Video transfer. Our first idea was to use the integrated notebook 
camera to record the teacher. However, first tests showed that the 
camera angle was too wide which meant that the notebook had to 
be positioned fairly close to the teacher and projector image. As 
we did not want the position of the Fernstudent in the classroom 
to be determined by the camera angle, we decided for an external 
camera with a zoom lens (Raspberry Pi Zero with HQ Camera 
Module, 8-40mm Zoom). This worked well to record the teacher, 
however, it turned out that the light sensitivity was not always 
sufficient to capture the sometimes faint image of the lecture slides. 
Hence, in order to transfer the slide image safely to the remote 
students, we used a video capture card (Elgato HD60 X) that 
loops the signal through to the projector. In the end, the remote 
students see a combination of the captured image and the filmed 
teaching person, which resolves all lighting issues. 

Audio transfer. Our requirement was to transfer audio signals 
from the classroom to the remote students, so that they can follow 
the lecture and discussions on-site, and to transfer audio signals

Daniel Ullrich et al. 

from the remote students to the classroom, if one of the remote stu­
dents wants to pose a question or join the discussion. Regarding the 
transfer of audio signals from the classroom to the remote students, 
we needed a microphone that can transfer near and far sounds. The 
notebook’s built-in microphone was too insensitive and a dedicated 
microphone worn by the teacher was not an option because we 
wanted all technology to be integrated in the Fernstudent. We 
therefore used a directional microphone (Rode VideoMic GO II), 
that primarily records the teacher. Nevertheless, if the teacher does 
not say anything, the microphone becomes more sensitive to other 
sounds which are then also transmitted. Hence, also the on-site 
students’ questions and comments are transmitted to the remote 
students. This has the advantage that the teacher does not have to 
repeat questions from the audience, and it promotes a natural flow 
of discussion. However, a disadvantage is that if for some reason 
the teacher does not say anything (e.g., during a silent exercise), 
every noise from the classroom is transmitted, even paper rustling. 
Regarding the transmission of audio signals from the remote stu­
dents to the classroom, the Fernstudent prototype was equipped 
with an external conference loudspeaker (Jabra Speak2 75). 

Signaling function. As a signal that one of the remote students 
wants to say something, we decided for a light signal (prior ideas 
also referred to the Fernstudent lifting its ”arm”, however, this 
would have required a more human-like shape of the prototype and 
more complex requirements regarding motor elements, which we 
decided against). The light signal was realized via a set of LED ring 
stripes controlled by a microcontroller (Arduino Uno). When one 
of the remote students clicks the ”raise hand” icon, a LED light 
circle, signaling that one of the remote students wants to say 
something illuminates. The LEDs were chosen so that brightness 
and color could be adjusted to reach an optimal level of salience. 
In parallel to one of the on-site students raising one’s hand, this is 
a decent signal which is clearly visible for the teacher but also not 
too distracting or annoying (like, for example, a flashing light) so 
that it would disturb the ongoing lecture. After the remote student 
has spoken, they press the ”lower hand” icon and the light circle 
vanishes. In addition, another LED matrix shows the number 
of dialed-in remote students. 

5.1.2 Software. Figure 2 shows the communication diagram of the 
software components as described in more detail in the following 
sections. We searched for an existing software such as a videocon­
ferencing tool with an integrated raise hand function that can be 
intercepted in order to be able to translate it into the light signal. 
This was not possible for many existing videoconferencing tools 
(e.g., Zoom, that removed the feature in its API). A possible option 
was Jitsi Meet, which is an open software in which this could be 
realized. Hence, we used Jitsi Meet as a software and set up a 
server at our university that runs the Jitsi server. For the remote 
students the process of joining a lecture is similar as with other 
meeting tools. They simply follow a link in their preferred browser, 
choose a name and are ready to join without the need for additional 
programs or apps. In addition, the Fernstudent needs to join the 
meeting as well (which the teacher or some other on-site person 
has to set-up before the lecture starts). The remote students then 
see a merged image combining the teaching person and the lecture 

slides, which is realized via Open Broadcaster Software (OBS, 
https://obsproject.com/de). 

The required interactivity was realized via a React App with 
Node.js (https://react.dev; https://nodejs.org), which runs on the 
Fernstudent computer and inserts the Fernstudent as a participant 
in the Jitsi meeting. Furthermore, the app monitors Jitsi events, such 
as raised hands or the joining or leaving of students, which results 
in a change of the total number of remote students. Those events 
are then transmitted to the Arduino, which, in turn, initiates actions 
such as turning on the LED ring stripes or update the number in 
the LED matrix. Similarly, the Arduino captures button touches on 
the remote control (such as reset raised hands) and sends them to 
the React App, which, in turn, sends commands to the Jitsi Server. 
Thus, we have the Jitsi-Server on the one side, Arduino on the other 
side, and the app mediates between these two. 

5.2 Physical shell and aesthetic appearance 

Initially, we experimented with different design variants in a prac­
tical course on experience design. Students’ ideas ranged from 
relatively abstract shapes to animal-like shapes or toy figures (see 
Figure 3). However, informal pre-tests showed that playful designs 
were not ideal for the ”serious” university context. Characteristic 
variants (e.g., Lil’E) or variants based on existing movie characters 
(e.g., Dr. Minion) generated more polarized judgments, which we 
considered inappropriate for an entity that should represent many 
students at the same time. Thus, we decided for a relatively simple 
geometric form, i.e., a cuboid and a cylinder built from acrylic 
glass, which contained the required technology. The cuboid ac­
tually is double-walled and contains a second, smaller cuboid for 
the mounting of the equipment which also hides the technology 
from outside. We also added cutouts for the camera and directional 
microphone. The power supply units are collected in the bottom of 
the cylinder. Regarding size, the basic idea was that the Fernstudent 
”sitting” in the lecture hall should be on face level with the on-site 
students. Moreover, the exact size was also determined by the size 
of the technology inside (e.g., the size of the notebook determined 
the edge length of the cuboid). Figure 4 shows a smaller prototype 
from experimenting with different materials and ratios of forms 
and the final prototype which was then used in a field test. 

6 PILOT FIELD TEST 

The Fernstudent was applied in multiple sessions of different lec­
tures at our university during the summer semester 2023. The 
lectures were given by the same teachers who also served as infor­
mants about their experiences with remote teaching in the explo­
rative interviews. Students were free to decide whether to join the 
lecture in presence or remotely. During the test phase, students 
and teachers filled in a survey after each lecture and rated their 
experience of the lecture by a combination of quantitative and qual­
itative measures. In addition, retrospective in-depth interviews 
were conducted with the two teachers after the end of the semester. 
Altogether, the test phase lasted nine weeks. In the first weeks, 
the hybrid option was realized via the regular Jitsi Meet software 
with no physical avatar, and in the second part of the test phase, 
the Fernstudent was used for the hybrid option. The Fernstudent 
and its basic features were introduced in the first test session. The

Figure 2: Communication diagram of software components (Figure adapted from [10]). 

Figure 3: Different design variants created by students of the experience design course (https://blockpraktikumexperi­
encedesign.wordpress.com: a) Student cube, b) Lil’E, c) Remotey, d) Dr. Minion 

Figure 4: Fernstudent prototypes: a) Smaller prototype from experimenting with different materials and ratios of forms and b) 
+ c) the final prototype used in a field test. 

study was approved by the institutional review board and informed 
Fernstudent was the reduction of stress and cognitive demands, 
consent was collected from all participants. 
which allowed them to focus on the lecture content and discussion 
In summary, the field test showed promising results both from 
with the students, instead of the handling of technology. Also, 
a teachers’ and a students’ perspective (for details see [13, 14]), 
they experienced the interaction with the remote students as more 
however, different aspects of the concept were of in the focus of 
satisfying and more natural, and they experienced the two groups 
attention. From the teachers’ perspective, the main benefit of the 
of students more like one category [13].

Daniel Ullrich et al. 

Regarding the students’ perspective, the main changes initiated 
through the Fernstudent refer to the experienced social presence 
and the affordances for participation for the remote students. More 
specifically, the survey data showed that compared to the regu­
lar hybrid sessions, the perceived social presence of the remote 
students became higher with the Fernstudent, and the interaction 
between teacher and remote students was perceived as being more 
similar to that between teacher and on-site students. Furthermore, 
remote students reported a higher intention for active participation 
(raising their hand) in Fernstudent sessions compared to Jitsi Meet, 
up to a similar level as the on-site students. Regarding the perceived 
character and impression of the Fernstudent in the classroom, the 
students described it as mainly neutral and mainly pragmatic. This 
generally corresponds to our intention of giving the remote stu­
dents a presence in the classroom but not introducing a technology 
that becomes a character and source of attraction itself [14]. 

In sum, the pilot field test of the Fernstudent showed benefits 
for all groups involved, however, on a different level and regarding 
different qualities. Among the three relevant user groups (teachers, 
on-site and remote students), the least changes for the on-site stu­
dents. For them, the Fernstudent appears as a new element in the 
classroom and their remote classmates become more present, but it 
doesn’t change their own behavior. They still listen to the lecture 
and raise their hand as usual. In contrast, for the teachers, the 
Fernstudent changes a lot, also regarding their behavior and tasks 
as a teaching person. Compared to the regular hybrid format, they 
get rid of several tasks which formerly created stress and captured 
attention. Instead of watching the chat and online-tool in parallel to 
what is happening in the classroom, with the Fernstudent, signals 
from the remote students become visible in a more natural way. The 
focus of attention can remain in the classroom, where signals from 
on-site and remote students are visible on one level and the inter­
action takes place in the same modality. In the teacher interviews, 
this was reflected in reports about stress reduction, a more relaxed 
teaching session and feeling more competent as a teaching person. 
For the remote students, in the present form of the Fernstudent, 
the biggest change refers to the enhanced modalities of interaction 
(participating in the discussion via speech, better hearing what the 
on-site students are saying), which probably made them feel more 
involved in the happening and in turn encouraged a more active 
participation in the lecture. Also, they are aware of being “more 
visible” in the classroom, however, their visibility in the classroom 
is still not much represented in what the remote students see on 
their screen at home. Amongst other, this issue was picked up 
for further developments of the concept, as described in the next 
section. 

7 LESSONS LEARNT AND FUTURE STEPS 

The encouraging results and feedback from students and teachers 
in the potential analysis and pilot field test confirmed the general 
potential of the concept. At the same time, the experiences so far 
also provide an opportunity for further developments and improve­
ments of the concept. We thus conducted a workshop with four 
teachers and four students involved in the project. The aim of the 

workshop was to reflect on lessons learnt and to discuss reason­
able further development of the concept, regarding technical and 
conceptual issues. 

7.1 Technical issues 

A recurring issue was the audio quality, which was mentioned 
by teachers and students alike. While the overall audio quality 
was quite satisfying, there were several instances where communi­
cation was hindered. From the remote students’ perspective, the 
microphone’s sensitivity adjustments were an advantage in some 
situations but a disadvantage in others. While it ensured that ev­
ery student in the classroom could be heard clearly by the remote 
students, in silent conditions background noise was amplified and 
annoyed remote students. In future iterations, more fine tuning of 
the microphone settings or additional features such as a squelch 
function (to address background noise) could be a starting point for 
improvement. Another issue was the practical handling and mo­
bility of the prototype. With the current prototype, two students 
were designated to handle the set-up for the field test, i.e., putting 
together the acrylic frame and the hardware elements, wiring every­
thing together, and setting up the software. Given that the concept 
aims to provide a seamless solution with low barriers for entry, any 
complicated set-up process would be contradicting. Therefore, an 
improvement in practical handling and mobility of the prototype 
for easier removal between lecture rooms or even universities and 
other institutions must be addressed in future iterations. A slimmer, 
potentially foldable design, could be a starting point combined with 
default settings for lectures, so that teachers just have to open and 
start the system to be ready to go. 

7.2 Further developments of the concept 

From the teachers’ point of view, there were some starting points for 
improving the interaction with remote students and making 
the opportunities even more similar to those regarding on-site 
students. For example, ”hand raises” by remote students could 
be less anonymous. In the current iteration, the Fernstudent 
shows the last remote student which actively used voice chat. While 
that was sufficient for many situations, in the event of a new hand 
raise, teachers might like to know who the student is who wants to 
talk. Another improvement could be an indication of how many 
questions are in the queue. While the present concept works 
well in smaller groups it could quickly go out of control if several 
hundred remote students are present. Lastly, an alternation of the 
shown remote student by camera picture would underline that 
the Fernstudent is no classical telepresence robot and represents 
not one but many. This would ensure that teachers perceive the 
diversity of joined remote students including the quiet ones who 
otherwise remain invisible. 

Another discussion revolved around the question of camera us­
age as default or even mandatory. One perspective is the privacy 
of remote students, who might not want to turn on their camera 
for a variety of reasons. However, there are some implications to 
consider, contradicting the core intentions of the concept. First, the 
core concept of the Fernstudent is the idea of bringing all students, 
remote and on-site, to the same level, including presence, interac­
tion capabilities, and also visibility. Making the camera optional

would undermine this core idea resulting again in differences be­
tween the student groups. Second, turning the camera off would 
make individual remote students invisible, promoting secondary 
activities, which again decreases interaction probability. Third, 
while we are only beginning to understand such hybrid teaching 
scenarios, depending on the concept features, we can anticipate 
an unfolding culture of remote students. For example, if many stu­
dents use the text chat, this could motivate others to do the same. 
Similarly, if most students have their camera turned off, others will 
likely do the same, simply to adapt to the existing culture. The 
result could be that the default is turned-off cameras, a situation 
witnessed by many teachers when they talk to a ”wall of black 
screens”. How such a culture would evolve is hard to predict but 
we can use design to make an inclusive culture characterized by 
increased interaction more likely. 

Another issue was the presence of remote students in the 
classroom from their own perspective. While they were physi­
cally represented by the avatar among on-site students, and there­
fore were present from the perspective of teachers and on-site 
students alike, from their own perspective they only saw the com­
position image of lecture slides and a smaller video feed of the 
teacher. Hence, it was hard for them to get really immersed and 
feel present. We discussed design solutions such as a 360-degrees 
field of view or adjustable camera angles but dismissed those ideas 
for privacy reasons and uncertainties of who could be in charge 
of the camera angle (there are many remote students but only one 
adjustable angle). We came up with alternative, more promising 
solutions, which aimed not so much at the remote students’ current 
perceptions but rather at the conceptual understanding (i.e., mental 
model). More precisely, we envisioned two different approaches. 
The first is derived from computer games in which you control 
a character from their point of view and which sometimes begin 
with a perspective flight where you see a character from above 
and then you fly into their body which grants you control over 
them. Such a fly-in sequence could be shown right after logging 
in where joining remote students see the lecture hall from above, 
flying into their robotic avatar and then changing the view to the 
normal view which shows the presentation slides and the lecturer. 
The second idea was in analogy to a seat reservation system (simi­
lar to choosing a seat in the theatre), where remote students see a 
seating plan of the lecture hall and remote students “pick their 
seat” in the lecture hall (i.e., the Fernstudent). Both approaches 
could change the mental model of remote students in the desired 
direction, making them more aware of the situation and their place 
in the lecture. 

We gathered many more feature requests, such as feedback op­
tions for remote students to indicate their satisfaction with speed 
and/or content of the lecture. However, we think that such features 
should be implemented with care to prevent ”feature creep” (i.e., 
implementing secondary features which do not support the core 
concept). 

In the end, many design decisions depend on the maxim and core 
intention behind the concept (which could differ from case to case 
and university to university). We hope, that our experiences and the 
described method will inspire other researchers and lecturers and 
are looking forward to collaborations and testing the Fernstudent 
(or adaptions of it) at other places. For the present case at LMU 

Munich, our maxim was to reduce the differences between on-site 
and remote students, and to create equal rights, responsibilities 
and interaction opportunities where possible. For example, for the 
remote students the barrier to participate should be as low as for 
the on-site students. From that perspective, it makes sense to use 
natural speech (instead of chat) and the camera being switched on 
as the default option. In contrast, if the default was total anonymity, 
the barrier to break up the anonymity and participate in the dis­
cussion was much higher. All this reflects a central position in our 
university: LMU is and will remain a face-to-face university, but 
it will leverage the experiences from the pandemic and use them 
wherever they can benefit the future of teaching.