Original Paper

Active Patient Participation in the Development of an Online
Intervention

Inge Renske van Bruinessen1, Ir; Evelyn M van Weel-Baumgarten2, MD, PhD; Harm Wouter Snippe1, MSc; Hans
Gouw3; Josée M Zijlstra4, MD, PhD; Sandra van Dulmen1,2,5, PhD

1NIVEL (Netherlands Institute for Health Services Research), Utrecht, Netherlands
2Radboud University Medical Center, Department of Primary and Community Care, Nijmegen, Netherlands
3Hematon, Amersfoort, Netherlands
4VU University Medical Center, Department of Hematology, Amsterdam, Netherlands
5Buskerud and Vestfold University College, Department of Health Science, Drammen, Norway

Inge Renske van Bruinessen, Ir
NIVEL (Netherlands Institute for Health Services Research)
Otterstraat 118-124
Utrecht, 3500bn
Netherlands
Phone: 31 302729680
Fax: 31 302729729

Abstract

Background: An important and challenging part of living with cancer relates to the repeated visits to the hospital. Since how
patients cope between these post-diagnostic visits depends partly on the information and support received from their physician
during the visits, it is important to make the most of them. Recent findings reinforce the importance of training not only the health
care professionals in communication skills, but providing patients with support in communication as well. Delivering such
supportive interventions online can have potential benefits in terms of accessibility, cost-effectiveness, and ability to tailor
information to personal needs. However, problems with attrition (dropout, non-usage) during the test phase and poor uptake after
implementation are frequently reported. The marginal level of engagement of the patient as end user seems to play a role in this.
Therefore, recent research suggests integrating theory-based development methods with methods that promote involvement of
the patient at an early stage. This paper describes a participatory protocol, used to let patients guide a theory-informed development
process.
Objective: The objective of this project was to apply a bottom-up inspired procedure to develop a patient-centered intervention
with corresponding evaluation and implementation plan.
Methods: 
The applied development protocol was based on the intervention mapping framework, combined with patient
participatory methods that were inspired by the participation ladder and user-centred design methods.
Results: The applied protocol led to a self-directed online communication intervention aimed at helping patients gain control
during their communications with health care professionals. It also led to an evaluation plan and an implementation plan. The
protocol enabled the continuous involvement of patient research partners and the partial involvement of patient service users,
which led to valuable insights and improvements.
Conclusions: 
The applied protocol realized patient participation on different levels throughout the entire project. Early
involvement, involvement on different levels, and flexibility in terms of planning and setup seem to be preconditions to creating
a bottom-up inspired development procedure with (seriously ill) patients. Further research is necessary to find out if a more
patient-centered approach improves the implementation and uptake of eHealth interventions.
Trial 
Registration: 
Netherlands 
National 
Trial 
Register 
ID 
number: 
NTR3779;
http://www.trialregister.nl/trialreg/admin/rctview.asp?TC=3779 (Archived by WebCite at http://www.webcitation.org/6TdfALKxV).

(JMIR Res Protoc 2014;3(4):e59) doi: 10.2196/resprot.3695

JMIR Res Protoc 2014 | vol. 3 | iss. 4 | e59 | p. 1

KEYWORDS
communication; malignant lymphoma; online intervention; self-help application; patient participation; intervention development

Introduction

An important and challenging part of living with cancer concerns
the repeated visits to the hospital. These visits are important as
they monitor the development of the disease and set the stage
for how to cope with life until the next consultation. Since how
patients cope between these post-diagnostic visits depends partly
on the information and support received from the health care
professionals (HCPs) (eg, specialists, nurses) during the visits,
it is important to get the most out of them. Many training
programs are designed to improve HCPs’communication skills,
which may facilitate patient engagement in the medical dialogue.
However, cancer patients ascribe many barriers in medical
communication to their own attributes, such as a lack of
communication skills, and interfering emotions and beliefs [1,2].
These findings reinforce the importance of training not only
HCPs in communication skills, but providing patients with
support in communication as well. Epstein and Street (2007)
have stressed the need for developing specific types of
interventions to support cancer patients, such as in-person
coaching, interactive computer programs, videos of role models,
and question prompt sheets [3].

Such interventions can be especially efficient when delivered
online. The content and type of online interventions can be
computer tailored to patients’ preferences and needs and they
can be accessible any time and any place in a cost-effective way
[4]. With regard to knowledge and skill building, the effects of
online interventions for patients seem to be equivalent to
traditional medical education methods (eg, a brochure or
human-delivered intervention) [5,6]. Despite these potential
benefits, problems with attrition (dropout, non-usage) during
the test phase and poor uptake after implementation are
frequently 
reported 
[7-9]. 
According 
to 
Eysenbach,
characteristics related to the participants, the intervention, and
the study design influence the usage and adoption success of
online interventions [10].

The technology- and expert-driven development methods
(top-down) are indicated as possible causes for attrition and
adoption problems [11]. These imply a marginal level of
engagement of the involved end-users (especially patients).
Therefore, recent research suggests integrating methods that
promote involvement of the patient at an early stage (bottom-up)
with theory-based intervention development methods [11,12].
Patient participation is frequently referred to, the potential
benefits are widely accepted, and there is a clear urge for more

patient involvement [13]. However, the actual operationalization,
that is, how and when (seriously ill) patients are involved, is
rarely reported [14,15]. It often seems a more symbolic
statement or it is used to describe the participation of patients
in health programs. This differs from patients’ active
involvement in the organization, goal setting, planning, and
execution of interventions [16].

Considering the fact that the contribution of patients in oncology
consultations is often limited [3,17,18] and that patients ascribe
many communication barriers to personal attributes [1,2], the
PatientTIME project was set up (Patients Talk In Medical
Encounters). In this project, an online intervention is developed,
tested, and implemented that aims to teach patients to take more
control during their consultations. The project aims to realize
this with a bottom-up inspired approach, which implies the
involvement of seriously ill patients throughout the entire
project. The initiation of the project was triggered by a specific
request for support in communication with HCPs, expressed by
a group of patients diagnosed with malignant lymphoma.
Lymphoma patients often face long, intense treatment periods
and/or monitoring periods under specialist care, which involve
many hospital visits. Apparently, despite the (mainly
paper-based) information available for this group, patients with
malignant lymphoma experience difficulties in communicating
their own agenda and needs to their HCP.

This paper outlines the patient participatory approach used to
develop an online intervention with corresponding evaluation
and implementation plan. The goal of this paper is to share the
applied protocol, the use of the protocol in the PatientTIME
project, and our lessons learned in the attempt to create a
bottom-up inspired intervention.

Methods

Outline

A stepwise protocol (Figure 1) was applied to develop the
intervention with corresponding evaluation and implementation
plan. For each step, goals were set and the procedure to involve
patients was planned in advance. The Intervention Mapping
(IM) framework was used as theoretical backbone of the
protocol. Aiming at a patient-driven development protocol,
practical patient participatory methods were integrated in the
theoretical IM framework and used to inspire when and how
patients could be involved.

JMIR Res Protoc 2014 | vol. 3 | iss. 4 | e59 | p. 2

Figure 1. Stepwise protocol.

Intervention Mapping as a Theory-Based Guideline

The IM framework systematically guides the planning and
decision-making process in health promoting programs [19]. It
comprises six steps in the process toward the development of
a theory-driven and evidence-based intervention (Figure 2). The
outcome of each step guides the next step. The IM framework

has already been used successfully in developing a range of
eHealth programs [20-23]. The IM framework was chosen as
a guideline because it links decisions, final materials, and
activities to theory. A preparatory step was added to the IM
framework to plan and prepare the patient participation
throughout the entire protocol.

JMIR Res Protoc 2014 | vol. 3 | iss. 4 | e59 | p. 3

Figure 2. Intervention Mapping framework.

Patient Participatory Methods

The way patients were involved in the applied protocol was
inspired by the concept of participation ladders. Different
participation ladders describe the idea of involving participants
in varying degrees [24-27]. Definitions of these degrees vary,
but they all describe a stepwise scheme from no participation
(eg, patients participate but have no understanding of the project;
they get information but there is no dialogue) to the highest
possible level of participation (participants directly collaborate
with the stakeholders; have an agenda-setting, initiating role).
This concept inspired us to involve patients on different levels
and we operationalized this by (1) setting up a close
collaboration with the patient association for malignant
lymphoma (Hematon), (2) recruiting patients as research
partners, and (3) planning the involvement of patient service
users. Hematon informs and supports patients and champions
patient interests. Patient research partners are involved
throughout an entire project and they are equal partners in a
working group. Patient service users are involved on different
levels, in different parts of the project.

User-centered design (UCD) was used as a guide to realize
patient participation in the different protocol steps. UCD is
defined by Preece et al (2002) as “an approach, which views
knowledge about users and their involvement in the design
process as a central concern”. The challenge of UCD is to map
the needs, behavior, actions, and abilities of the end user and

let this information influence how the intervention takes shape.
The context mapping method (Step 1) and the usability tests
(Step 4) were inspired by UCD thinking.

Patient Recruitment

All participating patients were adults diagnosed with malignant
lymphoma and they all voluntarily signed up to contribute to
the project. They were recruited via social media, online
newsletters, advertisements on Hematon’s website, regional
and national patient conferences, and leaflets in hospital waiting
rooms. To recruit patient research partners, Hematon informed
several of their active volunteers (patients) who had experience
in information and communication technology (ICT)
development and with supporting fellow patients.

Project Management

A multidisciplinary working group consisting of researchers,
HCPs, and a patient research partner was responsible for the
daily coordination of the project. The working group
collaborated with physicians, nurse practitioners, patients,
user-interaction 
designers, 
software 
developers, 
and
representatives of Hematon. Final decisions regarding the
protocol were reached through discussions in the working group.
Decisions related to the implementation plan were made in
consultation with Hematon.

JMIR Res Protoc 2014 | vol. 3 | iss. 4 | e59 | p. 4

Results

Overview

The intervention development protocol resulted in three
products: a self-directed online communication tool, a
corresponding evaluation plan, and an implementation plan.
The goal of the intervention is to help patients gain more control
in the communications with their HCPs. Patients can access the
intervention before each hospital visit. The information is
provided via an algorithm computer-tailored to the patient’s
self-assessed, momentary efficacy for communication with their
HCP, to whether he or she attends the HCP alone or with a
companion, and to the stage of treatment. The central
information consists of short video clips of simulated
consultations that model adequate communication behavior.
Additionally, the intervention includes an open question prompt
sheet (QPS), a reminder system linked to a list of planned
hospital visit dates, and an option to store and play back audio
recordings of the consultation (see Multimedia Appendix 1).
The evaluation plan comprises a randomized controlled trial
(RCT) protocol, in which the effects of the intervention on the
patients’ perceived efficacy are measured in a trial setting. In
the implementation plan, the conditions are built to transfer the
evaluated intervention to a publicly available tool. The following
paragraphs outline how the patient participatory protocol was
used to develop these three products.

Patient Participation Planning (Preparatory Step)

The goal of this preparatory step was to integrate and plan the
patient involvement throughout the entire protocol. This resulted
in the recruitment of two patients as research partners. They
both had been active in supporting fellow patients and therefore
they had built a rich body of knowledge about the different
aspects of having malignant lymphoma. Additionally they both
had 
a 
relevant 
professional 
background 
in 
ICT
(Web-development, system design, research and development).
One research partner (HG) became part of the working group.
The second research partner was consulted on a more irregular
basis. The research partners were directly involved in the
planning of the PatientTIME project and in the decision-making
processes in each protocol step. This involvement approach
aligns with the upper steps of the participation ladder as they
had an initiating and agenda-setting role and they worked
directly with the other stakeholders. Additionally, patient service
users were invited to participate in the needs assessment (Step
1), intervention design (Step 4), and the evaluation (Step 5).
Moreover, their input was used to inspire the other protocol
steps. Last, representatives of Hematon were consulted to
explore the possibilities for implementing the intervention after

the research project has ended (Step 6) and how we could use
their network to keep in close contact with patients.

Needs Assessment (Step 1)

The goal of the needs assessment step was to map the
patient-perceived barriers and facilitators in communication
with HCPs and to learn from patients’experiences. A qualitative
two-step method was applied, inspired by user-centered design
thinking. The applied method is derived from the context
mapping framework, used by product developers and user
interaction researchers to gain insight into the needs of
prospective users of new products [28]. Details of this study
are described elsewhere [2]. In short, patients completed a set
of assignments about their experiences with medical
consultations, aiming to trigger them to verbalize and reflect
on experiences, preferences, and needs without the presence of
researchers or other patients. This so-called sensitizing process
is supposed to enhance the quality and quantity of patients’
contributions in later (group) interviews [29]. Subsequently,
these patients and their spouses shared their experiences during
semi-structured (group) interviews, which were audio-recorded.
Before conducting this needs assessment, a patient research
partner reflected on the study design and the formulated
questions. According to his feedback, the introduction was
changed to further clarify the goals of the study, more and other
examples were added to illustrate the questions, and subtle
changes were made to the formulation of questions (eg, avoiding
medical jargon, less formal style). A total of 37 patient service
users (28 patients and 9 spouses) contributed to this needs
assessment. They were open, willing, and motivated to share
their experiences and they all had experienced difficulties in
communication during consultations. Many communication
barriers were ascribed to their own attributes (eg, emotions,
skills, and beliefs).

The expressed barriers were analyzed, clustered, and translated
into a list of intervention objectives (Step 2) and used as a basis
for the central information of the intervention (Step 4). For
example, patients did not want to be bothersome and therefore
they found it hard to ask (all of) their questions and to express
details about their physical and/or mental health status. This
information was used to develop information about how to
request attention for your prepared questions (Figure 3,
Objective 4) and about the importance of expressing your
physical complaints and worries (Figure 3, Objective 8).
Participants also reported that their communication attitude and
skills changed over time, and so did their perceived barriers and
facilitators. This finding stressed the need to inquire about the
patient’s needs before every hospital visit and tailor information
accordingly.

JMIR Res Protoc 2014 | vol. 3 | iss. 4 | e59 | p. 5

Figure 3. Intervention objectives, theory-based methods, and practical strategies.

Intervention Objectives, Theory-Based Methods,
Practical Strategies (Steps 2 and 3)

The goal of the second and third step was to establish the
objectives of the intervention by specifying what would change
as a result of the intervention. The overall aim of the intervention
is to support patients in effective communication by creating
awareness about the role they can play and the benefits they
can gain from participating, as well as providing matching
communication skills. Patient input gathered during the needs
assessment was used to operationalize the overarching objective
in 11 intervention objectives that relate to the awareness,
attitude, and skills of the patient (Figure 3, column 1). These
objectives were linked to theoretical methods and corresponding
practical strategies. The main criterion for the selection of the
strategies was the ability to operationalize strategies in an online
environment that could be hosted by Hematon. Three
theory-based methods and four practical strategies were selected
to influence the attitude and skills of patients (Figure 3, columns
2 and 3).

The main method chosen was modelling. Modelling has proven
to be effective in patient-targeted skill building interventions
[30-33] and can be operationalized in an online environment
by means of video clips. Moreover, pre-visit goal setting was
selected to encourage patient involvement during the
consultations. This strategy was operationalized in two ways.
First, the patient’s appointment dates were linked to a reminder

system, which reminds patients a week before their consultation
to access the online intervention in order to prepare for their
visit. Second, an open QPS was integrated, which could be
completed and printed or sent to one’s personal email address.
A QPS can enhance the contribution of patients in medical
communication [34-36]. Finally, there was an option to store,
play back, and share audio recordings of a consultation with
relatives, via their personal account. Playing back audio
recordings has been shown to enhance recall, improve informed
decision making, reduce anxiety, and improve communication
with family members [37,38].

The intervention objectives were based on the experiences
expressed by the patient service users. However, because this
was a more theoretical phase comprising the literature search
and the analysis of data, further patient involvement in this step
was limited to a discussion with the patient research partners.
The outcomes were presented and the feasibility of the
operationalization was discussed, which was important for the
final implementation. Their feedback did not change the initial
outcomes.

Intervention Design (Step 4)

The goal of the fourth step was to design the content, structure,
and layout of the intervention, inspired by the information
gathered in the previous steps. An iterative design method was
applied, that is, intermediate results (eg, video scripts, website
navigation) were presented to patients and experts.

JMIR Res Protoc 2014 | vol. 3 | iss. 4 | e59 | p. 6

Subsequently, the intermediate results were adapted to their
feedback, which is discussed in the following paragraphs.

The targeted intervention objectives (Step 2) were translated
into five video diaries, in which five simulated patients
demonstrate different communication skills. Each video diary
(see Multimedia Appendix 2) displays the story of one
lymphoma patient in 11 to 12 short clips (47-180 seconds). This
setup was chosen to capture the experiences of a large group of
patients and incorporate them in five personal stories, whereas
a selection of only five patients may provide a biased view [39].
The scripts for the video clips were based on personal stories
that patients had expressed in Step 1. Additional material was
gathered with video recordings and real-time observations of
relevant hematologic consultations. This type of patient
contribution represents the lowest step in the participation ladder
as the involved patients agreed to be observed, but had no further
understanding of the project. Subsequently, a patient research
partner reviewed the scripts. The feedback contained suggestions
and corresponding content for additional scenes and unclear
medical/technical jargon was highlighted. We incorporated the
additional scenes in the video clips and rephrased the highlighted
sentences. After recording the clips, the rough material was
shown to a physician, an ICT expert, a patient research partner,
and an external communication researcher. Their feedback was
used in the editing process. For example, the reactions of the
doctors to patients’ communication behavior were cut out as a
result of the feedback, aiming to increase the focus on the
modelled communication behavior of the patient.

Given the changing preferences and needs of the patient, the
working group chose not to present all 58 video clips to the
patient at once. The patient-perceived, pre-visit communication
needs determine the selection of three most relevant objectives,
leading to the matching video clips. These needs are measured
with an adapted version of the 10-item, 5-point Likert scaled
Perceived Efficacy in Patient-Physician Interaction instrument
(PEPPI). In this scale, patients indicate pre-visit their expected
efficacy and post-visit their perceived momentary efficacy in
communication [40]. Based on the input of patients, two extra
tailored variables were added to determine which two video
diaries match the patient’s situation best: (1) the patient’s
preference to visit their HCP alone or with a companion, and
(2) the stage of treatment (ie, ahead of treatment, in the middle
of treatment, in remission, cured but monitored, and
wait-and-see policy). If a patient wants to prepare his or her

next consultation, new clips will be selected and these will be
added to their previous selection.

Special attention was paid to two aspects that can influence the
uptake of eHealth interventions: usability and credibility.
According to Nielsen, usability is a quality attribute that assesses
how easy user interfaces are to use and it is a necessary
condition to bind users to a website. Credibility is an important
element for the persuasive character of the intervention [41].
To enhance the persuasive character of the intervention, the
Stanford Guidelines for Web Credibility were followed [42].
After testing preliminary versions of the intervention, a more
comprehensive credibility and usability evaluation was
performed by experts and prospective users. A heuristic
evaluation (expert-based) and a think-aloud procedure
(user-based) were set up with a total of 8 participants, which
should be enough to detect over 80% of the usability problems
[43]. A heuristic evaluation involves having a small set of
evaluators examine the interface and judge its compliance with
recognized usability and credibility principles (the heuristics).
The list of heuristics used to evaluate PatientTIME was
composed with the 10 usability criteria of Nielsen, supplemented
with usability criteria specifically developed for older Web users
[44], who are expected to be over-represented in the targeted
population. The Stanford Guidelines for Web Credibility were
added to this list, in order to objectively evaluate the
aforementioned Web credibility. The list included themes such
as consistency, user control, and efficiency. Three software
experts and one master graduate in communication individually
evaluated the intervention based on the list of heuristics. The
user-based test included a think-aloud procedure. Two patients
and two healthy people were asked to perform a set of
consecutive tasks, which represented the major functionality of
the intervention. Simultaneously, the subjects were encouraged
to verbalize their thoughts [45]. Participants of both tests were
asked to suggest improvements about the issues they came
across.

The main credibility and usability issues that were identified
are summarized in Table 1. Changes to these issues were
incorporated before the release of PatientTIME apart from one.
The illustrative pictures of patients in the layout were evaluated
by the users as too positive. However, because we wanted to
present a positive and encouraging context, we kept these
pictures.

JMIR Res Protoc 2014 | vol. 3 | iss. 4 | e59 | p. 7

Table 1. Summary of identified credibility and usability issues.

Processed changes
Identified issues

An extra information page was added with separate tabs containing informa-
tion about collaborating stakeholders, introducing members of the working
group, explaining privacy issues, and explaining the scientific context. A
separate ‘help’function was highlighted with contact details, frequently asked
questions, and a project summary.

Information about collaborating parties, help func-
tion, and privacy issues is missing / unclear.
Credibility

The agenda was made accessible on the home page, corresponding text was

changed, and buttons were highlighted. The print function of the QPSawas
highlighted.

Print function QPS unclear and use of the agenda not
clear.
Functionality

The consistency in color use and type of buttons improved, more contrasting
colors were used when mouse-over, headings of active pages remain high-
lighted and stand out more comparing to the headings of inactive pages, the
home pages present instructing messages to the user about the project status.

Location and additional text related to ‘log-in’button
is confusing. It is not always clear which elements
are ‘buttons’. Not always clear where you are in the
website.

Navigation

Textual changes were made.
Some texts are too formal. Some inconsistency in
use of terms / jargon.
Information

Another way to present the video diaries was developed, the video archive
was removed and its function was incorporated in the video page.
Illustrative pictures too positive / happy. Unclear
presentation of the selection of video clips. It is not
clear what the content of the ‘video archive’ is or
will be.

Layout

aQPS: question prompt sheet

Development of Evaluation Plan (Step 5)

The goal of the fifth step was to develop an evaluation plan to
examine the effects of the intervention. Decisions regarding the
evaluation were partly stipulated in the research protocol, which
proposed a randomized controlled trial (RCT) in which
participants are randomized into the intervention group (with
access to PatientTIME) and control group patients (without
access to PatientTIME).

While working out the RCT protocol, practical issues like
recruitment and patient information were discussed with the
research partners and questionnaires were developed in
collaboration with them. One patient research partner and one
patient service user were asked to pre-test the developed
questionnaires with a think-aloud procedure. Their feedback
focused mainly on questions initially formulated as too formal
or medical jargon that was unclear.

The involvement of prospective participants (ie, patient service
users) in the RCT was planned on different levels. Both
intervention and control group participants were asked to
participate for a maximum of three consultations and they were
both asked to fill in questionnaires delivered via their personal
account. On the lowest participation level, participants are
provided with information and asked to complete questionnaires.
On a second level, they are encouraged to verbalize their ideas
and input with regard to the study design to inform decisions
taken by the working group. Last, a random subset of patients
in the intervention group is encouraged to audio record and
upload their consultation(s) on their secured PatientTIME
account. This pilot was designed for the purpose of evaluating
the playback option as well as to be analyzed by the researchers
on their actual participation during their consultation.

The developed RCT protocol was audited with external experts
to evaluate privacy issues and the exchange of online
information and to assess and reduce possible risks. Because

of the juridical, technical nature of the audit, we did not include
patients in this audit. The Medical Ethical Committee of the
Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre evaluated the
RCT protocol and concluded that following the Dutch Medical
Research Involving Human Subjects Act, the study did not
require ethics approval. The RCT (registered in the Netherlands
Trial Register, 3779) started in 2013 and the first results are
expected to be available in 2015.

Development of Implementation Plan (Step 6)

The goal of the last step was to design an implementation plan
that would guide the transfer of the intervention to a publicly
available online tool. Contrary to the detailed evaluation plan,
the implementation plan was a rough setup of actions that were
guided by and adapted to decisions made in previous steps. To
increase the chance of a successful implementation and adoption,
the involvement of patients and Hematon in the planning and
execution of the actual implementation started as early as the
project planning. In the preparatory step, the board of Hematon
was asked to help thinking about the valorization of the research
results. In this way, we aimed to divide responsibilities at an
early stage and awareness was created about the upcoming
intervention.

Hematon wanted to make developed materials available for all
their members and other patients. As a result, an agreement was
established noting that after research is finalized, Hematon
would become responsible for hosting the tool. Subsequently,
during the development of the intervention and evaluation plan,
several meetings were planned with our software developer and
the webmasters of Hematon. In consultation with them, we
aimed to develop materials that were not only usable for the
secured trial setting, but could easily be transferred to a publicly
available tool. Both patient research partners will be actively
involved in the actual transfer of the intervention.

This transfer is not within the scope of this paper and will be
done when the RCT proves to be acceptable, usable, and

JMIR Res Protoc 2014 | vol. 3 | iss. 4 | e59 | p. 8

efficient. Lessons learned from the evaluation will be used to
optimize the intervention before implementation.

Discussion

Principal Findings

In the PatientTIME project, patients were given the opportunity
to actively participate in the development of an online
communication intervention with corresponding evaluation and
implementation 
plan. 
In 
conformity 
with 
previously
publications, the cooperation with patients brought valuable
insights and appeared to influence many decisions made [46,47].
By combining patient participatory methods with a theoretical
protocol, we aimed to create a bottom-up inspired development
procedure. We encountered both facilitating elements, as well
as obstacles in this approach.

Facilitators to Participatory Development

The combination of evidence-based and patient participatory
methods did assist us in involving patients. The structure of the
IM framework helped us choose when to involve patients, while
the idea of participation ladders and user-centered design
thinking inspired us in how to involve patients.

The involvement of patients on different levels appeared to be
useful and practical. The patient research partners ensured a
continuous patient-centered view, while the patient service users
were able to give fresh new insights on different protocol steps.

Both Hematon as well as the research partners were involved
from the very beginning of the project as a result of the
preparatory planning step. We experienced this as a precondition
to creating a continuous patient-centered view. Their early
involvement supported the participation of patient service users
and it gave the opportunity to discuss possible valorization of
results at an early stage.

Another facilitating aspect was the attitude of the participating
patients. They all seemed to recognize why the intervention was
developed. This appeared to be a driving force behind their
motivation to participate. Attracting engaged patients may be
a precondition to creating a successful patient-centered
approach.

Obstacles to Participatory Development

The recruitment and involvement of patients was a
time-consuming part of the project. In some steps, we could
have benefited from more involved patient service users
(especially the intervention development step), but time
constraints prevented us from doing so. The extent of patient
involvement relates to the amount of time available to execute
the project. However, we think time constraints should not be
a reason for limited participation.

Flexibility in terms of planning and setup seemed a precondition
to including the perspectives of the (seriously ill) patients. For
example, during the needs assessment, some patients were too
ill to attend a focus group session. An interview at their home
gave us the opportunity to incorporate their experiences as well.
Considering the illness of the targeted patients, we think the

extent of involvement of service users should be evaluated per
protocol step.

Flexibility also appeared to be a key concept in incorporating
patients’ viewpoints and experiences in the defined research
proposal. In the current study, a research proposal defined
certain decisions, for example, the intervention would be
delivered online and the evaluation of the effects would be tested
in an RCT. Although the proposal was built on previous research
and experiences, these decisions were made before the targeted
patients could be consulted (see Future Research).

Future Research

While there is a desire for more patient participation in research,
it seems to clash with strict research proposals and protocols
that need to be approved before the start of a project. Perhaps
researchers should involve (ex-) patients in the design of such
documents. However, this still does not give the required
flexibility to adapt a project to the input of patients, gathered
along the way. Patient participation in research projects that
include design activities requires methodologies that allow the
dynamics of design (eg, by patient input) to influence the
process. Intervention mapping can be a guiding method, unless
it is bounded to a strict predefined proposal. Participatory
Learning and Action Research or Design Inclusive Research
might be interesting alternative methodologies [48-50]. Funders
also should evaluate the extent of detail they request in proposed
projects and how this might restrict the extent of (true) influence
patients can have.

Considering the evaluation of online interventions and the
necessary flexibility to incorporate patients’ input, it might be
interesting to study other perhaps more flexible evaluation
methods than an RCT. A longitudinal study where intermediate
results can be used to optimize the intervention during the test
phase might be an interesting alternative. Furthermore, some
patients might have a strong preference for using or not using
technology. In the case of strong preferences, results may be
biased when using a regular randomized controlled trial. Within
preference trial designs, this bias is dealt with by the fact that
patients with strong preferences for either intervention will get
the intervention they prefer. Only those without explicit
preference are randomly assigned to either the intervention or
the control group [51].

Limitations

A limitation of the applied method is that the participating
patients represent a self-selected convenience sample as involved
patients voluntary signed up to contribute to the study. This
could have led to a biased view of a more empowered group of
patients. In general, the possibility of having a biased group of
participants in a participatory development approach is evident,
as one needs to find patients that are interested in cooperating.
On the other hand, one wants to develop an intervention that
reaches out to the whole targeted population. This advocates
the use of different participation levels and creative solutions
to attract and/or select patient service users to capture a broad
view of experiences.

Similar to other studies [52], in the current study the IM
framework was not applied in a linear way as proposed, which

JMIR Res Protoc 2014 | vol. 3 | iss. 4 | e59 | p. 9

can be argued as a potential limitation. However, a design
process rarely follows a parallel execution process and,
especially because the aforementioned flexibility was required,
we think it does not have to affect the quality of the developed
products.

Conclusions

Involvement of patient research partners in combination with
patient service users can inspire and guide the evidence-based

intervention mapping protocol. Early involvement, involvement
on different levels, and flexibility in terms of planning and setup
seem to be preconditions to create a bottom-up inspired
development procedure with (seriously ill) patients. Further
research is necessary to find out if a more patient-centered
approach improves the implementation and uptake of eHealth
interventions.