Age-appropriate Participatory Design of a Storytelling Voice Input in 
the Context of Historytelling 

Torben Volkmann, Michael Sengpiel, Rita Karam and Nicole Jochems 
Institute of Multimedia and Interactive Systems, University of Lübeck, Ratzeburger Allee 160, Lübeck, Germany 

Keywords: 
Aging Users, Human-centered Design, Participatory Design, Voice Interface. 

Abstract: 
With the demographic change, the percentage of older adults steadily increases. At the same time, new 
information and communication technologies (ICT) emerge at an ever-increasing rate, making it imperative 
to consider older adults in the development process to achieve the best possible usability and acceptance for 
older adults. This paper describes the development of a storytelling input component in the context of 
Historytelling (HT), which provides a digital interactive platform for older adults to share life stories across 
generations, potentially improving their health and wellbeing. HT follows the HCD+ (Human Centered 
Design for Aging) approach, claiming that older adults should be integrated as co-designers throughout the 
development process. A total of 19 older adults (M=68 years old) participated in 3 studies to analyze, evaluate 
and design a storytelling voice input, investigating voice communication technology for conversational 
agents. They were successfully involved in the design process, with methods adjusted to accommodate 
specific user characteristics of older adults and substantially contributed to the further development of the HT 
project, exploring the two central research questions regarding the type of voice input suitable for older adults 
and the minimal requirements for a conversational agent.

1 INTRODUCTION 

With the demographic change, the percentage of 
older adults steadily increases. At the same time, new 
information and communication technologies (ICT) 
emerge at an ever-increasing rate, making it 
imperative 
to 
consider 
older 
adults 
in 
the 
development process to achieve the best possible 
accessibility and usability for older adults. Thus, we 
should value older adults as possible co-designers in 
the development process (Sengpiel et al., In Press). 
The Historytelling project (HT) is a research project 
relying on the strengths of older adults, giving them a 
tool to tell life stories on a digital platform and share 
them with other people. HT seeks to have a positive 
influence on a societal, a group and an individual 
level. On the societal level, HT fosters multi-
perspective historiography, on the group level 
strengthening of family bonds and friendships and on 
the individual level a place to actively reminisce and 
reach out to others. The project addresses these 
challenges by developing a digital social platform for 
older adults, giving them the power to record, 
visualize and share their life stories. 

One key aspect of HT is the actual storytelling of 
older adults. Passing on stories is mostly done via 
speech as it is the most natural channel and stories are 
mostly passed on in face to face conversations, having 
their own research field (Bornat et al., 2015) and 
potentially positive effects on the listeners (Isbell et 
al., 2004). Thus, the challenge for HT is to transfer 
and implement this conversational element to 
technology in the best possible manner. 
Thus, alongside the development of a voice input 
component for HT, the goal of the research was to 
explore two research questions: (Q1) Which type of 
voice input is suitable for older adults? (Q2) What are 
minimal requirements for a conversational agent for 
older adults in the context of Historytelling? 
An HCD+ (Human Centered Design for Aging) 
approach focusing on participatory design and 
consideration of user characteristics was used to 
answer these research questions and for the actual 
development of voice input for HT. Hence, older 
adults took part throughout the development process.   
 
 

104

Volkmann, T., Sengpiel, M., Karam, R. and Jochems, N.
Age-appropriate Participatory Design of a Storytelling Voice Input in the Context of Historytelling.
DOI: 10.5220/0007729801040112
In Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Information and Communication Technologies for Ageing Well and e-Health (ICT4AWE 2019), pages 104-112
ISBN: 978-989-758-368-1
Copyright c
⃝2019 by SCITEPRESS – Science and Technology Publications, Lda. All rights reserved

1.1 
State-of-the-art of Voice 
Communication Technology 

As Schafer (1995) pointed out, there are four 
challenges 
regarding 
voice 
communication 
technology: “(i) hardware/software implementation 
of the system. (ii) synthesis for voice output, (iii) 
speech recognition and understanding voice input, 
and (iv) usability factors related to how humans 
interact with machines”. Schafer (1995), Cohen and 
Oviatt (1995) also point out advantages of voice 
input: Speech is the natural way to communicate; 
voice is usable even if the hands or eyes are busy; 
voice communication is accessible for handicapped 
persons; sometimes natural language interaction is 
preferred and “pronunciation is the subject matter of 
computer use” (Cohen and Oviat, 1995). 
In the last few years, different digital voice 
assistants such as Google Home and Amazon’s Echo 
were developed and marketed that increased the 
overall usage of voice input systems. Thus, the 
longstanding problem of speech recognition and 
understanding voice input seems to have been solved 
for the consumer market, at least in a narrowed 
context (Hailpern et al., 2010; Hazen et al., 2004; 
Levin and Lieberman, 2004). Especially new 
developments of neural networks bring constant 
improvements to the field of voice recognition (Arik 
et al., 2017). 
Technologically, there are three options to 
process the voice input: audio recording, speech-to-
text input and automatic transcription. Audio 
recording is possible using various ICT, such as 
laptops, tablets and smartphones. The speech-to-text 
input converts spoken words instantaneously into 
text, whereas the automatic transcription converts the 
recorded audio to text afterwards and is often used for 
automatic interview transcription.  

1.2 
State-of-the-art of Embodied 
Conversational Agents 

With a strong focus on reminiscing and passing on 
life stories, it is most likely that HT will provoke 
emotional reactions during the process of telling and 
listening to stories. Thus, it is important to design an 
interface that responses to these reactions. One 
possibility to do so is by using avatars, which can 
answer to emotional stories via facial expressions and 
gestures (Sutcliffe, 2017). Using the OCC (Ortny, 
Clore, Collins) model, Sutcliffe (2017) proposes a 
taxonomy based on 22 emotions, split into reactions 
to events, agents (other people) and objects to design 
suitable reactions of systems.  

Integrating these emotions via faces can be done 
with embodied conversational agents (ECA), which 
gained attention in the last few years in research 
(Tsiourti et al., 2014).  ECAs are virtual characters, 
which have the same properties as humans in a face-
to-face communication and have been successfully 
integrated into projects with older adults (Cassell, 
2000). It became apparent, that older adults followed 
instructions by ECAs better than those by classic user 
interfaces and that they had a subjectively had a 
positive influence on recall tasks (Ortiz et al., 2007; 
Tsiourti et al., 2018).  
Isbister and Doyle (2002) developed a taxonomy 
relevant for the development of an ECA. It consists 
of five different categories to classify and evaluate 
ECAs: Believability, Social interface, Application 
domains, agency and computational issues and 
production.  

1.3 
Participatory Design Process 

Participatory design is often seen as a third space of 
human computer interaction in which the knowledge 
of different stakeholders such as the user and the 
developer can be combined, giving new insights to 
perform 
new 
actions 
(Muller, 
2003). 
Thus, 
fundamental 
design 
decisions 
are 
based 
on 
information gathered by involving potential users into 
the discussion about functionality, features and look-
and feel. Participatory design especially helps if the 
developers are not specialists in the observed field.  
There are special demands for participatory 
design methods involving older adults. For them, 
some conventional design methods may even be 
inappropriate (Eisma et al., 2004).  
In a literature review, Orso et al., (2015) found 
that 
especially 
visual 
prompts 
(graphical 
representation of an abstract concept),  experiencing 
(giving a direct first-person perspective, i.e. with 
video sketches), hands on (evoking the reaction and 
opinion on a tool by providing a physical object 
instead of a conceptual prototype) and natural tasks 
(performing a task that is similar to the final context 
of use) are used when older adults are involved in 
designing interactive technology. For the HT-
development, the HCD+ approach was used, 
emphasizing the importance of involving the user in 
every crucial design step as participatory designers. 
HCD+ especially provides guidelines regarding the 
recruitment of participants, the atmosphere when 
working with older adults and required adaptations 
concerning the concrete execution of methods 
(Sengpiel et al., In Press). 

105

In the analysis phase, current technological 
approaches were tested and evaluated by older adults. 
In the design and conception phase, an experimental 
game was conducted to develop specific design 
elements. As a last step, a task-based evaluation of the 
developed interface was conducted. 

2 VOICE INPUT ANALYSIS 

2.1 
Method 

To answer the first research question (“Which type of 
voice input is suitable for older adults?”), an 
evaluation of state-of-the-art software was conducted. 
Thus, the three different input technologies were 
subjectively evaluated.  
Interviews are an important method in an HCD 
development process, especially in the beginning 
(Wood, 1997). Due to the potential lack of computer 
literacy in the group of older adults (Fisk, 2009; 
Sengpiel and Dittberner, 2008), a task-based 
evaluation of various technologies was conducted in 
this initial study.  
In the evaluation, eight older adults aged between 
60 and 73 (M=67.5, SD=3.7) took part. Four of them 
were males and four females. They were recruited 
through personal contacts, mailing lists and notice 
boards. Seven interviews took place at the university, 
one took place at home due to physical handicap. 
The evaluation was divided into three parts: 
introduction, practical work, and follow-up. In the 
introduction, participants introduced themselves and 
where asked about key aspects of their life and 
technology usage. In the practical work phase, the 
older adults got a task for three different input 
approaches. Google docs was used to demonstrate the 
speech-to-text capabilities, the software “Speak a 
Message” was used for audio recording and 
transcription. 
Qualitative 
post-interviews 
were 
conducted after every task. 
As a follow-up, each participant was asked for 
their favorite input approach and filled in a 
questionnaire 
testing 
their 
computer 
literacy 
(Sengpiel and Dittberner, 2008) and affinity for 
technology (Franke et al., 2018) 

2.2 
Results 

In particular, the transcription method was not well 
known among the participants or they had outdated 
information on technical possibilities and were 
positively surprised about the initial quality of the 
automatic transcription.  

All participants stated that an assistive system and 
better feedback by the software would be appreciated. 
The 
preferred 
feedback 
varied 
among 
the 
participants, so that visual and auditory assistance 
should complement each other. 
The results show a strong heterogeneity within the 
group of participants regarding affinity towards 
technology and computer literacy. Thus, some 
participants were confident in using the presented 
software, whereas others needed some time to adjust 
to the task. Faster participants showed a higher 
affinity towards technology and computer literacy 
and stated that they tend to find solutions on their own 
when problems occur.  
All (N=8) participants had either a laptop (6) or a 
computer (3) at home and used either a smartphone 
(5) or a cell phone (3). They used computers mainly 
for 
word 
processing, 
mailing 
and 
targeted 
information searching, with a weekly average time of 
M=18.9 hours (SD=7). On average, they scored 
M=20.4 (SD=4.17) on the computer literacy scale 
(CLS, max = 26), which is still low compared to a 
younger group (M=23.9), but relatively high 
compared to other older adults (M=14.4, Sengpiel 
and Dittberner, 2008). Also, they scored M=2.8 on 
the affinity for technology interaction scale (ATI, 
SD=0.9, max score = 6). 
The participants stated that their technical 
difficulties were situational and rather hard to 
describe. When problems occurred, they would 
mainly turn to friends or family or seek professional 
help. Three participants stated that they try to find the 
solution on their own first. However, they also desire 
assistance 
provided 
by 
the 
device 
itself. 
Alternatively, integrated tutorials as videos would be 
appreciated, an approach that has been described by 
Sengpiel and Wandke (2010) among others. The 
practical part of the study could only be conducted 
with 7 of the 8 participants. 

2.2.1 Speech-to-Text 

Five of the seven participants had never used speech-
to-text input, and even the two participants who had 
used this technology before were surprised by the 
accuracy of the results.  
Three participants stated that the conversion from 
speech to text was too slow, impairing oral fluency. 
Also, some problems with speech were ambiguous or 
not seen at all. The software was not “user friendly”, 
since finding functionality was difficult and it was not 
clear when the recording had started.   
 
 

106

2.2.2 Speech-to-Audio 

Six of the seven participants had used a dictation 
device to record audio before. Foremost, participants 
liked the simplicity of that method, the possibility to 
replay and edit the audio footage later, and the fact 
that audio authentically captures the atmosphere.  

2.2.3 Transcription 

None of the participants had used audio transcription 
before, but five out of seven participants liked the 
possibility to have both, audio and text. Assessed 
particularly positively was the unobtrusiveness of the 
method, maintaining the oral fluency. Nonetheless, 
the quality of the initial transcription is crucial for 
further adoption.  

2.2.4 Preferred Input Method 

The overall quality and usability aspects of each 
method played a big role in participants' preferences. 
Furthermore, intended audience and purpose are key 
drivers of the preferred method. If the goal was to 
write a short story quickly, participants would choose 
the speech-to-text input. The transcription technology 
was preferred especially for longer, more meaningful 
stories. Table 1 shows the acceptance among the 
participants, multiple answers were possible. Since 
older adults preferred the transcription technology, it 
will be used for further development. 

Table 1: Acceptance frequencies of input methods among 
participants (N=8). 

Technology 
Acceptance frequency 
Transcription 
6 
Audio recording 
2 
Speech-to-text 
4 

3 AGE-APPROPRIATE DESIGN 

3.1 
Methods 

To answer the second research question (“What are 
minimal requirements for a conversational agent for 
older adults in the context of Historytelling?”) a 
workshop with three different groups was conducted.  
Due to possibly low computer literacy among the 
participants, the technology was partly replaced by a 
real-life example. (see also Lindsay et al., 2012; 
Sengpiel et al., In Press)  
There are a variety of methods using real life 
examples as prototypes for technology development, 

among them „invisible technology videos“ (Lindsay 
et al., 2012), (Cultural) Probes (Brandt and Grunnet, 
2000), and Forum Theater (Rice et al., 2007).  
We used a simulation game often used in 
educational context, more specifically a modified 
simulation game used by Reich (2007).  
He states that the ideal simulation game consists 
of seven phases: (1) introduction, (2) information and 
reading, (3) opinion-forming and strategy planning, 
(4) interaction within the groups, (5) preparation of a 
plenum, (6) conducting a plenum, (7) game 
evaluation. Due to a lack of time, the second and third 
phases were omitted during the workshop and 
conducted a priori by the researchers. Phase seven 
was conducted by the researchers after the workshop.   
We recruited nine older women (M=68) through 
the “Deutscher Frauenring e.V.”, a leading women's 
organization in Germany, who took part in three 
rounds within a larger full day workshop with several 
parts on the University campus.  
To record interactions, we used a desktop 
microphone and the software “Speak a Message” 
running on a laptop with external screen and mouse. 
The simulation game lasted 15 min per round plus 
seven minutes for discussion. Participants were inter-
viewed afterwards according to their respective roles: 
Assistant (Please simulate a voice assistant. 
Remain within your role and react to anything you 
notice.)  
Storyteller (Please read out loud this shortened 
version of “Mother Hulda”. The assistant will help 
you with the recording.) 
Observer (Please observe the interaction between 
the assistant and the storyteller and fill in this 
observation sheet.)  
The assistant and the storyteller were positioned 
to have no direct eye contact, while the observer was 
asked to sit seeing both (see the sketch and photo in 
figure 1). 

 

Figure 1: Sketch and photo of the simulation game's setup; 
A=Storyteller, B=Assistant, C=Observer, D=examiner. 

107

3.2 
Results 

The use of the simulation game method showed that 
participants were good at taking the provided 
perspectives, were eager to give meaningful 
information and help with their expertise and had no 
problems solving the tasks given.  
In the follow-ups there were lively discussions 
about possible improvements, which will be 
translated into requirements for the assistance system.  

3.2.1 Participants 

All the 9 older participants were women. Eight out of 
nine older adults were using their computer or laptop 
frequently, all participants own a smartphone and 
seven out of nine used it frequently. Technology is 
mostly used for communication and targeted 
information research. As expected for their age group, 
they scored relatively low on the computer literacy 
scale (CLS: M=16, SD: 3.67) but high on the affinity 
for technology scale (ATI: M= 3.8, SD=0.8). 

3.2.2 Simulation Game 

Simulation game results are quite diverse between 
groups, for they showed very different behavior. For 
example, group 2 had a fluent dialogue, while the 
other groups had rather functional dialogues, e.g.:  
Group2: Assistant: “I am the voice assistant. My 
name is…“ Storyteller: “I am the storyteller. My 
name is… and I will start right away.”  
Groups 1 & 3: Assistant: “I am the voice 
assistant. My name is… Have you turned on your 
microphone?” Storyteller: “Yes, should I press the 
record button? Assistant: “Yes “ 
Group 1 did not establish a fluent dialogue, yet in 
the interview the storyteller said she would have liked 
a more fluent dialogue and better feedback from the 
assistant, especially regarding recording quality. 
Group 2 established a fluent dialogue from the 
start and immediately reacted to the assistant’s 
remark to speak louder. However, in the interview the 
storyteller considered this interruption unpleasant and 
said she would prefer visual help and remarks, for any 
interruption in the flow of storytelling should be 
avoided. 
Group 3 started with a longer dialogue, but the 
storyteller had forgotten to record it. The assistant 
said in the interview that she had noticed it, but did 
not want to interrupt the storyteller, conceding 
afterwards that it would have been better to do so. 
They also appreciated the dialogue in the beginning 
and wished it could have been continued in the study 
as well as with the technical system to be developed. 

3.2.3 Resulting Interface Requirements 

With the simulation game, some requirements were 
developed for the assistance system: It should answer 
user questions with a fluent verbal dialogue, being 
able to assess events' relevance and adapt kind and 
timing of communication to avoid unnecessary 
interruptions. In essence, the participants hoped for an 
assistance system behaving like a polite competent 
human, perhaps pushing the boundaries of today’s 
technology.   
Especially the recording flow should be supported 
from start to finish. There are further requirements for 
voice input communication in the literature, which 
were pointed out in 1.1 

3.3 
Resulting Interface 

The resulting high-fidelity prototype is based on an 
interface presented in an already published paper 
(Volkmann et al., 2018) to ensure consistency within 
the HT project. Since our prototype could not display 
dynamic content, some interface elements had to 
remain static. Thus, some interactions such as 
providing feedback in recording sessions were 
triggered by the experimenter as Wizard of Oz. There 
were four kinds of feedback: 

• 
A visualization based on a VU (volume 
units) meter which is a standard display for 
the signal level in audio equipment (see 
figure 2).  

• 
Warning messages (see figure 3). 

• 
An earcon (ear + icon) which are “abstract, 
synthetic and mostly musical tons or sound 
patterns that can be used in structured 
combination” (Dingler et al., 2008). 

 

Figure 2: VU meter used for audio visualisation. 

 

Figure 3: Warning message. 

108

Figure 4: Voice assistant Lisa speaking. 

• 
A voice assistant in form of an ECA as 
described in 1.2 (see figure 4). 

The assistance is provided in three standardized, 
consecutive steps. First, a problem in audio quality is 
visualized through the VU meter. If the user does not 
perceive the problem and thus does not deal with it, 
an earcon is played and an additional warning 
message was displayed that the recording will be 
stopped. For the last step, the assistance varies. In a 
first implementation, there is no additional warning. 
In a second implementation, an avatar is used to give 
the information about the problem.  

4 EVALUATION 

To assess usability and user experience of the 
interface, a wizard of oz evaluation was conducted. 
The participants were given the task to record a story 
with the provided interface and assistance was 
provided as described in 3.3.  
Two questions were essential for the evaluation: 
(1) Has the assistance been perceived? (2) Which 
assistance was preferred?  
In the evaluation, eight older adults aged between 
61 and 70 (M=66, SD=3) took part, five were male 
and three female. Six participants had already 
participated in the first study. They were recruited 
through personal contacts, mailing lists and notice 
boards. All evaluations took place at the university. 
To give the evaluation an attractive context, a 
Christmas flower and a candle were placed around the 
participants, among other things. Also, cake, water 
and hot drinks were served (Newell et al., 2007). 
Figure 5 shows part of the room in which the 
evaluation was conducted. Behind the participant (A), 
the wizard (B) and the recorder (C) were present in 
the room. 
First, the participants were handed out a 
questionnaire regarding demographic information, 
affinity for technology (Franke et al., 2018) and 
computer literacy (Sengpiel and Dittberner, 2008). 
Then, the participants were confronted with the voice 
input interface. The order of assistance use was 

randomized. Before each run, the microphone was 
secretly placed too far apart from the participants 
creating a problem with audio quality, to justify the 
system warning and trigger a response from the 
participants. Before the run of the classic interface, 
also the microphone cable was unplugged. After the 
recorded interaction with the interface, the User 
Experience Questionnaire (UEQ) (Schrepp, 2015) 
was filled out by the participants. The second 
interface was tested correspondingly. In a post-
interview possible adjustment possibilities and 
preferred interfaces were discussed.  

4.1 
Results 

Overall, the Wizard of Oz prototype proved well 
suited to test the functionality that would have been 
hard to implement, such as the transcription or the 
avatar, although wizard response time was sometimes 
too high to satisfy the participants. The rather simple 
prototype allowed for participants’ immersion in the 
process of storytelling. 

4.1.1 Participants 

Of the 8 older participants (61 – 70 years, M=66, 
SD=3), 5 were women and 3 were men. They mainly 
used computers, tablets and smart phones, mostly for 
text editing, email, internet searching and surfing. For 
their age group, they had relatively high computer 
literacy (CLS: M=21.8, SD: 4.1) and high affinity for 
technology (ATI: M= 3.1, SD=1.1). 

4.1.2 Awareness of Provided Feedback 

The participants used the provided VU meter for 
regular monitoring. The earcon was often ignored or 
not perceived at first, especially by the participants 
immersed in the storytelling. Three out of eight 
participants perceived the earcon from the start, three 
other participants perceived it the second time. It 
seems reasonable to assume that earcons need to be 
learnt before (Dingler et al., 2008). 
All participants perceived the information the 
voice assistant gave about occurring problems, but 
they did not engage in conversation. 
A combined approach considering the importance 
of intervention might work best in this scenario. It is 
generally difficult to give the storyteller information 
about options to improve the quality of the audio 
signal, while maintaining the oral fluency of the 
storytelling process.  
 

109

Figure 5: Sketch and photo of the evaluation's setup. 

4.1.3 Preferred Assistance 

The User Experience Questionnaire (UEQ) revealed 
a strong preference for voice assistance, but only if 
feedback was triggered on time. If it was delayed, 
then discomfort, confusion, and frustration occurred, 
and participants rated the User Experience much 
lower in all UEQ categories. However, using the 
interface without voice assistant, delays had much 
smaller impact on the UEQ score. Figure 6 shows this 
interaction effect for voice assistant x delay based on 
UEQ mean scores across the scales found in Table 2. 

Table 2: Results of the User Experience Questionnaire 
(Scale ranging from -3 to +3) for recordings with and 
without voice assistant either delayed or on time, indicating 
an interaction effect (see figure 6). 

 
On time (N=5) 
Delayed (N=3) 
Aspect 
M 
SD 
M 
SD 
Recordings with voice assistant 
Attractiveness 
1.37 
1.1 
-0.7 
0.8 
Perspicuity 
1.5 
0.8 
-1.2 
0.6 
Efficiency 
1.3 
0.7 
-0.3 
0.3 
Dependability 
0.8 
0.8 
-1.2 
0.4 
Stimulation 
1.15 
0.5 
 0 
0.8 
Novelty 
0.85 
0.6 
 0.2 
0.7 
Recordings without voice assistant 
Attractiveness 
0.77 
1.0 
0.3 
1.0 
Perspicuity 
1.25 
1.3 
1.0 
0.9 
Efficiency 
0.95 
0.8 
1.0 
0.7 
Dependability 
0.35 
1.3 
0.5 
1.1 
Stimulation 
0.95 
1.3 
0.3 
1.2 
Novelty 
0.65 
0.4 
0.0 
1.0 

5 DISCUSSION 

Following the HCD+ approach, possible future users 
were integrated in all steps of the development of the 

voice input component and methods were adjusted to 
accommodate user characteristics of older adults. 
Although the computer literacy score was rather high 
compared to other groups of older adults, due to the 
large heterogeneity within groups the adjustments 
were beneficial to the goal of universal usability, not 
to preclude anyone by design.  
Regarding the first research question “Which type 
of voice input is suitable for older adults”, the 
subsequent transcription was preferred among the 
participants. Participants wanted to have both, text 
and recorded audio, which can be achieved by the 
transcription. However, the quality of the text to 
speech engine used in the tested software was not 
sufficient to maintain uninterrupted oral fluency and 
there were still errors in the transcript. Additional 
studies have to be conducted to assess the maximum 
acceptable fault tolerance and if current technology 
can undercut this line. If that is not possible with 
current technology, we suggest weighing the potential 
benefits to a loss in user experience due to user’s 
frustration.  

 

Figure 6: Interaction effect for voice assistant x delay on 
UEQ mean scores (see table 2 for details). 

For practical purposes, the HT system could 
estimate in the beginning, whether recordings with 
voice assistant could be delivered without noticeable 
delay and conceal it otherwise to avoid the “UX 
penalty” for a delayed voice assistant shown in figure 
6 and table 2. Audio files could be stored and 
transcribed later (with enhanced technology) as well. 
In the HT context, volunteers might also be willing to 
correct errors in the transcripts for the storytellers.  
Regarding the second research question on 
minimal requirements for a conversational agent for 
older adults in the context of Historytelling, users 
should be guided through the recording process. A 
virtual speech assistant giving necessary information 
could be helpful, but it should recede into the 
background during story recording and graphical user 
interface elements should be used for regular 

110

monitoring instead.  Again, a delay in the assistants’ 
feedback should be avoided, because it cripples user 
experience, inverting the benefits of conversational 
agents and leaving the users uncomfortable and 
confused.