1

Supporting direct support professionals 
in enabling people with intellectual 
disabilities to engage in meaningful 
activities: protocol for the Meaningful 
Activities 4 All (MA4A) study based on 
the human-­centred design process

Christophe Wille  ‍ ‍ ,1,2 Ine De Clerck,2 Geert Van Hove,3 Jos Van Loon,3 
Dominique Van de Velde  ‍ ‍ ,1,3 Patricia De Vriendt  ‍ ‍ 2,4

To cite: Wille C, De Clerck I, 
Van Hove G, et al.  Supporting 
direct support professionals 
in enabling people with 
intellectual disabilities to 
engage in meaningful activities: 
protocol for the Meaningful 
Activities 4 All (MA4A) study 
based on the human-­centred 
design process. BMJ Open 
2022;12:e061736. doi:10.1136/
bmjopen-2022-061736

	
►Prepublication history and 
additional supplemental material 
for this paper are available 
online. To view these files, 
please visit the journal online 
(http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/​
bmjopen-2022-061736).

Received 04 February 2022
Accepted 21 July 2022

For numbered affiliations see 
end of article.

Correspondence to
Mr Christophe Wille;  
​chriwill.​Wille@​UGent.​be

Protocol

© Author(s) (or their 
employer(s)) 2022. Re-­use 
permitted under CC BY-­NC. No 
commercial re-­use. See rights 
and permissions. Published by 
BMJ.

ABSTRACT
Introduction  Meaningful activities (MA) have a positive 
impact on identity, well-­being, participation and inclusion. 
Although people with intellectual disabilities (PID) depend 
on their direct support professionals (DSPs) to engage in 
MA, the DSPs need support which could enable them to 
offer more qualitative care and support.
Methods and analysis  To identify DSPs’ needs, and to 
develop a tool/service, an innovative and iterative approach 
is developed, based on the human-­centred design (HCD) 
process, combined with traditional qualitative and quantitative 
research methods. In the inspiration phase (needs analysis), 
in-­depth interviews will be conducted in two day care centres 
in Flanders using an interpretative phenomenological analyses, 
one with a supply-­driven approach and the other with a 
demand-­driven approach, followed by a survey sent to all 
Flemish day care centres. In the ideation phase, the insights of 
phase 1 will guide a cocreation process (comprising a World 
Cafe, brainstorm and prototype sessions) with the DSPs, PID 
and other stakeholders. In the implementation phase, the 
solution will be tested in the two day care centres from phase 
1 by means of living labs and a realist evaluation. By adopting 
this protocol, the functionality, quality, usability and acceptance 
are expected to increase. This protocol adopts all phases of 
the HCD process and shows the complementarity of HCD with 
traditional research methods. PID and the DSPs will benefit 
as the end result is truly grounded in their specific needs and 
wishes.
Ethics and dissemination  Ethical approval by the Ethics 
Committee of the University Hospital Ghent, Belgium (reference 
numbers: B670202042983 and PA2021-­091). All participants 
will sign informed consent forms. Results of this study will be 
submitted for publication in relevant peer-­reviewed journals 
and will be presented at relevant conferences.

INTRODUCTION
It is generally assumed that the prevalence 
of people with intellectual disabilities (PID) 
worldwide varies from 1% to 3% based on 
income, age and origin, with the highest 

rates to be found in low-­income and middle-­
income countries.1 The most widely adopted 
definition of ID is taken from the American 
Association on Intellectual and Develop-
mental Disabilities (AAIDD)2 3: ‘Intellectual 
disability is a disability characterised by signifi-
cant limitations in both intellectual functioning 
and in adaptive behaviour, which covers many 
everyday social and practical skills. This disability 
originates before the age of 18’.4 The AAIDD 
emphasises the multidimensionality of ID,3–5 
enabling direct support professionals (DSPs) 
to get a more comprehensive understanding 
of ID, and allowing them to establish a 
more purposeful approach towards PID.2 
DSPs are called many names such as human 
service workers, disability support workers 
and personal care aids.6 DSPs are a group 
of paid workers who provide care for PID.7 
DSPs work in a variety of settings and provide 
a wide range of complex services which 

STRENGTHS AND LIMITATIONS OF THIS STUDY

	
⇒This Meaningful Activities 4 All study protocol uses a 
complete human-­centred design process and com-
bines it with the strengths of traditional research 
methods.
	
⇒The end users will be involved in the whole project 
from the outset.
	
⇒Cocreation with people with intellectual disabilities 
is challenging and required accessible cocreation 
tools and specific support.
	
⇒Sample sizes are difficult to determine as there are 
no exact numbers of direct support professionals 
working in day care facilities.
	
⇒Prolonged engagement in practice through living 
labs facilitates further development and refinement.

Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

 . 
by guest
 
 

2

include helping people with activities of daily living and 
promoting physical and emotional well-­being. ‘DSPs are 
the “backbone” of long-­term services and supports’6 and 
have an important role in health promotion and influ-
encing healthy behaviour.7

PID have been excluded from society for a long time 
due to their limited abilities in both their intellectual 
capacities and adaptive behaviour.8 Even though PID 
living in communities are associated with having higher 
levels of quality of life (QOL),9 they still need continuous 
additional support to participate in society as equal citi-
zens.3 10 Therefore, PID when not adequately supported 
are at risk of being excluded from society.8 In addition, 
life expectancy of PID increased significantly over the 
last decades.11 12 Older PID represent nearly half of all 
PID.12 Consequently, nearly half of the people in day care 
facilities are of older age12 and have a life expectancy 
close to that of people without disabilities. Most PID lack 
age-­specific support and when they age this can poten-
tially lead to inappropriate placement and loss of social 
networks.11 Older PID are a profoundly diverse group 
with different and complex needs,12 13 which requires 
specific assessment and person-­centred planning and 
support.12 Although specific risk factors such as different 
life course trajectories, older prejudices, networks falling 
apart and age-­related health problems exist, older PID 
can be supported in an active way, with specific interven-
tions adapted to their individual needs.11

One of the most important and influential conven-
tions that address inequality is the ‘United Nations Conven-
tion on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities’.8 By signing 
the convention, all member states agree to implement 
the convention in their national policy on ID.8 14 Since 
the convention was adopted, 164 countries signed the 
convention15 and 94 ratified both the convention and 
the optional protocol.16 The Flemish Agency for Persons 
with Disabilities (VAPH) has developed a policy in accor-
dance with the United Nations (UN) Convention and the 
current vision on ID.17 The ‘quality of life supports model 
paradigm’,18 19 comprising four core values (equity, 
inclusion, self-­determination and empowerment), is at 
the heart of the policy. In Flanders, the Flemish part of 
Belgium with an autonomous government (at the end 
of 2018), 7100 young people received professional help 
and 24 677 adults with disabilities received a personal 
budget.20 21 Around 15.000 people with a disability are 
still on a waiting list for care and support.
Despite the fact that Article 27 of the UN Convention 
states that all people with disabilities have the right to 
work and employment, the majority of PID do not work 
in the regular labour market due to their complex needs 
associated with their disability. Day care is an alternative 
for those people. The VAPH defines day care as ‘assis-
tance and permanence in group during the day, for a number 
of days per week or a whole week’.22 The focus within those 
centres is on enabling PID to participate in activities. This 
is important since activities are assumed to be essential 
for all humans to achieve goals in life and to influence 

their state of health.23–25 One important prerequisite 
for having an impact on the state of one’s health is the 
fact that these activities should be meaningful for the 
individual.26 27 Meaningful activities (MA) are activities 
that an individual consciously engages in to achieve a 
personal sense of meaning and fulfilment28 29 by means 
of choice, control and belonging.24 MAs are associated 
with the personal interests of people and are enjoyable 
by nature.28 30 MAs occur in a specific social, family and 
cultural context and define one as a person and provide 
us with a sense of identity.28 People who experience 
meaning in their activities have a greater sense of well-­
being.24 Engagement in MA of older people specifically 
enables them to feel more productive and connected 
with society31 and is also crucial to improve the QOL of 
PID.32 33 By participating in MA, they gain a better grip 
on their own lives, become more independent and have 
more opportunities to participate in society. If not, PID 
are experiencing deprivation, which is detrimental for 
their health and well-­being.34 Although every person has 
the right to participate in MA,32–34 this is not always the 
case for PID.35

In recent years the personal goals, needs and wishes of 
PID became increasingly important in enabling MA.12 35 36 
It is globally accepted that in a person-­centred support 
system, there should be an alignment between the wishes 
and goals of a person, his or her support needs, the 
support given and his or her QOL outcome,36 yet not all 
PID are able to explicitly communicate their goals.13 35 Too 
often PID are dependent on DSPs’ abilities to commu-
nicate at their level and understand them. Therefore, 
DSPs need to depend on their own experience and those 
of others (family or other proxies) to understand what 
is meaningful for the PID in order to tailor and adapt 
activities to each individual with ID.12 35 The quality of 
the communication between DSPs and PID is associated 
with engagement of PID in MA. More specifically, good 
communication is associated with higher levels of engage-
ment.37 Unfortunately, the bigger the organisation, the 
lower the commitment in MA.33

When asked, PID suggest that quality of care is related 
to their immediate situation in receiving care and services, 
such as the relationship with the DSPs. In particular, 
the consistent fulfilment of promises and commitments 
made by the DSPs. In addition, PID value ambiance 
and cosiness, tailor-­made care and being taken seriously 
regarding their wishes and competencies.38 Furthermore, 
PID experience activities more meaningfully when they 
are treated respectfully and as adults.34 In essence, the 
relationship between the PID and the DSPs is funda-
mental for providing a high quality of care, especially in 
long-­term care.39

In recent years, support for PID has improved signifi-
cantly. Despite this favourable evolution, many PID still 
remain segregated from society and have fewer oppor-
tunities for personal development, participation and 
inclusion.40 In addition, it is imperative to understand 
that PID depend on the quality of support they receive 

Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

 . 
by guest
 
 

3

from DSPs.33 More specifically, the higher the quality of 
the DSP, the more personal outcomes for PID.41 Sadly, 
PID remain underengaged in MA and research on the 
topic is scarce. More research is needed in order to estab-
lish and understand factors that enable or hinder MA.34 
DSPs seems to be left to fend for themselves too often, 
which results in poor quality of support.33 Furthermore, 
a sizeable portion of DSPs are not qualified adequately 
to provide the required effective support.41 In addi-
tion, DSPs are confronted with a great heterogeneity of 
ID and various roles, duties and tasks that are typically 
determined by the centre in which they are employed. 
Depending on their educational background, it is diffi-
cult for DSPs to acquire all skills, knowledge and abili-
ties that are required to effectively perform their roles.42 
In addition, there is a disconnection between evidence-­
based practice and the competencies of DSPs.41 However, 
it is important to underline that working with PID is very 
challenging for all DSPs due to the complex nature of 
ID,43 44 resulting in DSPs being exhausted and not being 
able to meet the demands related to their job, and even 
resulting in burnout.45

The overall objective of this study is to develop a more 
qualitative support for PID, enabling them to participate 
more in MA and by extension in society. The aforemen-
tioned results in the following research question for this 
study: ‘What do DSPs, working in day-­care centres, need 
to enable PID to engage more in meaningful activities?’ 
The desired outcome for this study is a tool or service that 
is tailored to the specific needs and wishes of the DSPs. In 
doing so, DSPs will be able to meet the complex demands, 
inherent to working with PID. In order to develop such 
a tool or service, a specific cocreative and innovative 
research method is needed.

METHODS AND ANALYSIS
Research constantly produces new insights from which 
products or services emerge. It is generally assumed that 
only half of these are implemented in practice and that 
it takes 17 years on average before their use becomes 
routine.46 47 It can be concluded that there is still a 
research-­to-­practice gap.46 48 To overcome that problem, 
new approaches to develop complex interventions are 
needed and should have key principles such as being 
dynamic, iterative, creative, open to change and proac-
tive.48 Therefore, this Meaningful Activities 4 All (MA4A) 
study protocol is based on ‘The field guide to human-­centered 
design (HCD)’ developed by IDEO in 2015. IDEO is a global 
design company that has launched products, services and 
experiences for the profit sector for decades, focusing 
on the human perspective, where needs are assessed, 
and solutions are evaluated based on understanding the 
needs of customers and getting feedback from them.49 
In recent years, IDEO has also focused on the non-­profit 
sector because it felt the social sector was ripe for inno-
vation and needed an approach that has the potential 
to unlock true impact.50 HCD is nowadays increasingly 

accepted in the human services sector51–53; however, when 
used, it is not used in a standardised way or is reduced to 
using some features of HCD.54 55 Furthermore, there is no 
consensus definition.56 Therefore, HCD can be labelled 
as an ‘umbrella term’55 for all approaches grounded in 
the needs of their target population, also called the end 
user, while developing products or services.51 56 57 Despite 
the fact that HCD is sometimes still reduced to a buzz-
word, there is clear agreement that the ‘human’ part 
refers to the participation of stakeholders, and that there 
is a real commitment and focus on human value.55 That, 
and also the fact that HCD really does focus on equity, 
has led to make the HCD process central to this MA4A 
protocol. In essence, HCD puts the needs, expectations, 
desires and experiences of the end user central54 55 58 and 
explicitly searches for the ‘deep story’.49 In addition, it 
especially helps in developing a comprehensive under-
standing of the context in which the service or tool will 
be implemented, and thus helps in facilitating implemen-
tation.53 By adopting these methods in healthcare, one 
clearly steps away from ‘one size fits all-­thinking’ which 
is reflected in the six principles that characterise HCD55: 
(1) the design is explicitly based on the understanding of 
the end user; (2) the end user is involved in the complete 
process of design and development; (3) the design is 
refined by the feedback of the end users; (4) HCD is an 
iterative process; (5) the design is an answer to the entire 
user experience; and (6) including the context. Under-
standing the HCD process is one thing, living it and being 
able to apply it is another. To fully exploit the benefits of 
HCD, it is important that researchers embrace the mind-
sets of HCD. Ideally, the design team consists of multi-
disciplinary skills and perspectives. IDEO describes seven 
mindsets that a human-­centred designer should master: 
empathy, optimism, creative self-­confidence, making, 
embracing ambiguity, keep iterating, and learning from 
failure. In addition, it is important one understands and 
accepts that HCD is not a linear process. No two processes 
are the same; however, each process consists of the same 
three phases: inspiration, ideation and implementa-
tion.49–51 Each phase has specific tools that can be used to 
better understand the end user.50

HCD should not be seen as a strict alternative to other 
approaches but as a complementary strategy that adds 
value.49 In this MA4A study protocol, HCD will therefore 
be combined with the strengths of several traditional 
research methods.

Research team
The HCD research team consists of one lead researcher 
(first author), and supported by two senior researchers 
(last two authors). The lead researcher can rely on seven 
junior researchers per HCD phase to prevent researcher 
bias and to enhance credibility.59 60 Depending on the 
needs at the time, the research team will be supple-
mented with specific profiles. A statistical expert joins the 
research team in phase 1B for advice in the construction 
of the survey and analysis of the data. In addition, the 

Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

 . 
by guest
 
 

4

lead researcher followed an intensive training on HCD 
to learn to master the process and apply it in practice. In 
phase 2A, the second author participates to facilitate the 
ideation phase. The third and fourth authors will actively 
participate in the complete process as experts on ID.

End users
In this study, the DSPs are seen as the end users because 
PID are dependent on their quality of care and support. 
The desired outcome of this study is an effective support 
for DSPs in enabling MA for PID. The DSPs in this study 
are all working in accredited care facilities in Flanders 
(Belgium), more specifically in day care centres. The 
profile of DSPs working in day care is very diverse since 
the current vacancies do not seek specific education, 
but rather people who can identify with the job profile. 
People with a degree in occupational therapy, education, 
social work and many more can apply for a vacant posi-
tion. Both people who have completed their secondary 
education and people with a bachelor’s or master’s degree 
are employed in day care centres. In addition to the DSPs 
as the end users, the most important stakeholders, the 
PID, should not be forgotten in this process. Their voice 
counts every step of the way and therefore we include 
them in the development process step by step, by means 
of a sounding board, a member of the development team 
and as the most important partner in the implementation 
phase.

Phase 1: inspiration
This first phase, the inspiration phase, consists of two 
major parts; phase 1A is a qualitative approach, and phase 
1B a quantitative approach. In phase 1A, a wide variety 
of insights on enabling MA will be sought. In phase 1B, 
these insights will be tested in a larger sample.

Sample
In phase 1A, based on a purposive criteria-­based sampling, 
a minimum of 12 respondents will be retained and 
maximum variation will be strived for. Criteria on which 
participants will be selected are (1) working in day care 
for PID (2) minimal 70% of the job description is focused 
on enabling MA, and (3) minimal experience of 1 year. 
No criteria are set based on age and qualification. Final 
selection will be made in consultation with the immediate 
superior to guarantee the continuity of daytime activi-
ties. Furthermore, extra attention will be paid to recruit 
a diverse population; new colleagues, recent graduates, 
experienced colleagues and working with different levels 
of ID. In phase 1B, the quantitative phase, the same 
criteria will be applied but the percentage of job descrip-
tion is reduced from 70% to a minimum of 50% to allow 
more DSPs to complete the survey.

Phase 1A
Participatory observations, combined with in-­depth inter-
views, will be conducted in two day care centres in Flan-
ders (accredited care providers by the VAPH). A conscious 
decision was made to include the two most common forms 

of day care centres in Flanders: the so-­called ‘traditional 
approach’ (more supply driven) with workshops (organ-
isation 2) and the more ‘inclusive approach’ (which is 
more demand driven) (organisation 1). In organisation 
1, situated in the province of Antwerp, activities can be 
observed in the mornings (12 hours in total). In organ-
isation 2, in the province of East Flanders, there are no 
restrictions, and the researchers have free access to each 
workshop (24 hours in total). The interviews and obser-
vations will be performed by the seven junior researchers, 
under supervision of the lead researcher. The qualitative 
research protocol, the interview guide and participatory 
observation forms are prepared by the lead researcher in 
continuous alignment with the two senior researchers. 
The topics that will be addressed within the in-­depth 
interviews are related to how DSPs experience enabling 
MA, which fostering or obstructing factors there exist, 
and which support needs they have in enabling MA. The 
complete interview guide can be consulted in online 
supplemental material 1.
The qualitative in-­depth interviews and observa-
tions will be analysed in NVivo, using an interpretative 
phenomenological analysis (IPA), since this method is 
suitable for both qualitative in-­depth interviews and for 
the analysis of observations of small samples.59 In addi-
tion, IPA is concerned about how individuals experience 
phenomena and the psychological interpretation of their 
experiences.59 60 Both the junior researchers and the 
lead researcher will perform data analysis independently, 
in continuous alignment with the senior researchers. 
Member check and peer debriefing is scheduled after 
data analysis. The final report will be written by the lead 
researcher (with feedback from all authors) and will be 
used as a basis for the start of the quantitative part of the 
inspiration phase (1B).

Phase 1B
Based on the data from the qualitative part of the inspi-
ration phase (1A), a web-­based online survey will be 
prepared using Qualtrics. The survey will be distributed, 
accompanied with a cover letter, to all accredited care 
providers specialised in day care (n=260). The survey will 
be pilot tested. In total, 24 respondents will fill in the pilot 
questionnaire: 8 DSPs working in day care, 8 healthcare 
students and 8 laymen. The data analysis will be carried 
out via IBM SPSS Statistics V.27 by the lead and junior 
researchers, under supervision of the senior researchers, 
and with assistance from the statistical expert. Final 
report will be written by the lead researcher (again with 
feedback from all authors).

Phase 2: ideation
This phase must be as ‘restriction-­free’ as possible, mainly 
to give a free rein to the creativity needed at this stage.50 By 
means of a purposive criterion-­based sampling, the devel-
opment team will be composed. Recruitment of the team 
will start in the survey (1B). DSPs will be asked whether 
they are willing to cooperate in this phase. Specific extra 

Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

 . 
by guest
 
 

5

profiles will be sought that are assumed to make a unique 
contribution to the project. Profiles that depend on the 
ideas and concepts that arise in this phase (ie, for the 
brainstorm) will be selected that have nothing to do with 
healthcare. In doing so, the development team welcomes 
people who are unbiased and more likely to come up with 
new and innovative ideas.
The ideation phase consists of three major phases. First 
(2A), a World Cafe will be organised for a wide variety of 
stakeholders (see table 1) as it is a suitable way to enhance 
a collaborative dialogue around questions that matter.61 62 
It facilitates an open and intimate discussion within a 
larger group of people.61 Different topics inherent to the 
design challenge will be discussed, guided by the World 
Cafe Reference Guide.62 Before the start of the World 
Cafe, the insights from the inspiration phase (both 1A 
and 1B) are shared with the participants of the World 
Cafe (n=24) to make sure they are aware of the needs 
and wishes of the end users, a basic premise before the 
search for opportunities begins. The major aim of the 
World Cafe is to further elaborate on the insights of phase 
1, and to tune it to every important stakeholder. In the 
second part (2B), a guided brainstorm63 will be held. The 
guided brainstorm is structured in time and approach. 
It starts with generating ideas, followed by selecting the 
best ideas. In the final step, the ideas are translated into a 
project sheet. Based on the project sheet from the guided 

brainstorm, the third and last part of this phase (2C) starts 
and consists of building prototypes in cocreation sessions 
with the end users and stakeholders. The prototypes will 
be presented very quickly to the end users. This fast way 
of asking for feedback is essential and inherent to HCD. 
‘You’ll keep iterating, refining, and building until you’re ready 
to get your solution out into the world’50 (p 75).
Based on the ideal numbers to really get cocreation 
going, to generate as many ideas as possible and to keep 
the creative process going, the guidelines of each specific 
method were consulted. The World Cafe will have four, 
no more than five, participants per table.62 64 The brain-
storm preferably is organised with 12 participants65 and 
the cocreation sessions should have a minimum of six 
participants.57

Once the team is assembled, an inspiring and 
nurturing environment will be sought, an environment 
that welcomes and stimulates creativity. For this study, the 
entire top floor of the building of the Artevelde Univer-
sity of Applied Sciences will be used for that purpose. In 
addition, the FabLab (a makers lab), which is also situated 
in that building, can be used at all times. The complete 
phase 2 will be facilitated by lead and junior researchers. 
More specifically in the World Cafe, the lead researcher 
will be the ‘cafe host’ and the junior researchers will be 
the ‘table hosts’. The lead researcher will facilitate both 
the brainstorm and the cocreation sessions. Also, the final 

Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

 . 
by guest
 
 

6

report will be written by the lead researcher (with feed-
back from all authors).

Phase 3: implementation
Based on the insights of phases 1 and 2, in this final 
phase, the prototype comes to life and will be taken to 
the end user in a real-­world context.49 50 66 In the form of 
a ‘live prototype’, the product or service will be tested, 
followed by a ‘pilot’, which is a longer test than the live 
prototype and is one of the final iterations.50 In order to 
realise a working and sustainable end product or service 
a prolonged test is needed. Therefore, living labs will be 
created as they are very suitable in fostering partnerships, 
validation and sustainability.67 There is no agreed-­upon 
definition of living labs, but it could be best defined 
as both an environment and an approach that enables 
researchers to cocreate and develop with the end users 
and stakeholders.67 68 Both organisations 1 and 2, and if 
necessary supplemented by two other organisations from 
different provinces in Flanders, will serve as living labs. 
As those living labs are social environments, they are 
subject to human volitions, culture and language,69 70 and 
therefore a realist evaluation (RE) is chosen to under-
stand how contextual factors influence our interventions. 
Even though an RE is time consuming, intensive and 
challenging, it has proven to be a method that provides 
a deeper understanding of how, when and for whom a 
programme works.70 Based on scientific literature, the 
data of previous phases (1A and 1B), the ideas and proto-
type (2A, 2B and 2C), an initial programme theory will be 
created. More specifically, contextual factors (C), mecha-
nisms (M) and outcomes (O) will be mapped into a CMO 
configuration69 in order to get a better understanding 
of how, when and for whom the outcome of this HCD 
process (figure 1) works.
Developing a tool or service is often very complex and 
calls for a specific approach.48 This MA4A study protocol 
answers that call and really puts the end users at the heart 
of the development process.54 56 57 71–73 Within this study, 
the DSPs are seen as the end users and the PID as the 

most important beneficiary or stakeholder, which made it 
difficult to determine the role of PID and to what extent 
they should be involved in the process. Working with PID 
in research can be challenging and asks for accessible 
cocreation tools.74 In addition, to maximise and optimise 
the input of PID, a solid ‘architecture of involvement’ is 
needed and preplanning and training of PID is essen-
tial to avoid tokenistic involvement.75 Within this MA4A 
study protocol, PID will be actively involved from phase 2, 
starting with the World Cafe. Concerning the World Cafe, 
no specific training is prepared. However, measures will 
be taken to make the World Cafe accessible for PID. At 
all times, a visual harvester will be present to visualise the 
output of the World Cafe. Every participant on the World 
Cafe is given placemats, which can be drawn or doodled 
on. This can be helpful for PID who have difficulties 
communicating in a verbal manner. Each participant with 
ID can bring a DSP to support them during the World 
Cafe. The table hosts will be given the explicit instruction 
to address the PID, rather than his DSP. In phase 3, the 
PID will be at the centre of the research as the study uses 
a living lab methodology. Since the organisation of the 
living labs can only be prepared once the tool or service 
is known, a specific preplanning and training programme 
for PID can be developed for phase 3 if needed. In addi-
tion, the PID will be in their natural environment, which 
makes it more familiar and predictable. Finally, research 
shows the benefits for PID to participate in cocreation75 
and it also leads to better well-­being and job satisfaction 
for DSPs when they work together with PID.76

Research into the application of the HCD process is 
not evident as it is constantly used interchangeably with 
other (similar) methods, which systematically compli-
cates research.54 72 Studies, however, show that by using 
an HCD process in the correct way, the functionality, 
quality, usability and acceptability increase, which ulti-
mately also causes a decrease in product failure.49 52 An 
HCD process is very intense and challenging,49 66 and that 
is why this MA4A study protocol is so carefully planned. In 
addition, it is enriched with traditional research methods 
to reduce bias and enhance credibility. The use of tradi-
tional research approaches implies that researchers 
follow a research protocol, such as determining sample 
sizes and response rates. Within the qualitative part (1A) 
of the study, it is difficult to determine the sample size 
a priori because exploratory research looks to explore 
phenomena in relation to themes one cannot identify in 
advance.77 Thus, within phase 1A, no estimate of sample 
size can be calculated. The concept of saturation59 is 
more appropriate within phase 1A and therefore the aim 
is to interview until nothing new is being learnt. In phase 
1B, for the web-­based online survey, it is difficult to deter-
mine the response rate needed to prevent sampling bias 
because there are no exact numbers of DSPs working in 
day care facilities. In Flanders, there are 257 licensed care 
providers but there are no available figures of the total 
amount of DSPs. The exact number of DSPs depends on 
the degree of care the person with ID needs (the support 
Figure 1  Overview of the Meaningful Activities 4 All (MA4A) 
study protocol.

Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

 . 
by guest
 
 

7

budget one receives increases with the degree of support 
needed) and this in combination with the level of educa-
tion of the DSPs (the higher educated the DSP, the higher 
the cost). In short, each organisation is free to fill in the 
available vacancies, which means it is impossible to know 
how many DSPs there are in Flanders at any particular 
point in time.78 After the survey is sent, follow-­up mail 
will be sent to enhance response rates.79 In addition, 
findings from the survey will be benchmarked with other 
published data in order to deal with the fact that analysis 
prior to sending out the survey is not possible due to the 
lack of available data.80

By performing this MA4A study protocol, the future 
support for DSPs will be grounded in their own wishes and 
needs, and it will be established by means of an innovative 
cocreative approach, an approach that is more likely to 
be adopted in practice, in comparison to the output of 
traditional research methods. PID will benefit, and fellow 
researchers in the field will have a reference protocol that 
will guide them in their own research. Ultimately, DSPs 
will receive the proper support they deserve. Because in 
the end, they are key in enabling PID to engage in MA.

Patient and public involvement
HCD carries patient and public involvement in the core 
of its approach. In this protocol, we took all possible steps 
to involve PID and the DSP. First, the researchers have 
all a long-­lasting connection with clinical practice and 
the reason why this study is undertaken is based on the 
concrete questions we received from clinical practice. 
PID, who have a strong and trustful relationship with the 
DSP, indicated that they did not always have access to MA. 
Contact with Flemish day care centres showed indeed that 
DSP needed support in enabling MA. The DSP advocated 
the patients’ wishes with the researchers and from these 
perspectives the PID, as well as the DSP, were involved in 
the overall design of the study. The results of the study 
will therefore be grounded in their specific wishes and 
the results will have high potential of being tailored to 
their needs. All results will be shared with all Flemish day 
care centres from the beginning, during and at the end 
of the study.

ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION
Ethical application was submitted to the Ethics Committee 
of University Hospital Ghent (Belgium) and approved on 
6 February 2020 (reference numbers: B670202042983 
and PA2021-­091). Data collection (1A) started in March 
2020. The complete process is expected to continue until 
August 2023. All participants will sign a written informed 
consent form. To ensure confidentiality, all data obtained 
from the participants will be processed and pseudony-
mised. The results of this study will be submitted for 
publication in relevant peer-­reviewed journals and will 
be presented at relevant conferences. This protocol takes 
into account the guiding principles concerning the rights 
of PID at all times.

Author affiliations
1Department of Rehabilitation Sciences and Physiotherapy, Ghent University, Ghent, 
Belgium
2Health and Care, Artevelde University College, Ghent, Belgium
3Special Needs Education, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium
4Department of Gerontology and Frailty in Ageing Research Group, Vrije Universiteit 
Brussel, Brussels, Belgium

Acknowledgements  We are indebted to Mike Jarrey for linguistic advice and for 
proofreading the final manuscript.

Contributors  CW, DVdV and PDV initiated the study, conceptualised the study and 
designed the first draft of the study protocol. IDC, GVH and JVL reviewed the study 
protocol and provided feedback for the refinement of the protocol. CW wrote the 
first draft of the final version of the manuscript. All authors read the manuscript, 
provided feedback and approved the final version.

Funding  The authors have not declared a specific grant for this research from any 
funding agency in the public, commercial or not-­for-­profit sectors.

Patient and public involvement  Patients and/or the public were not involved in 
the design, or conduct, or reporting, or dissemination plans of this research.

Patient consent for publication  Not applicable.

Provenance and peer review  Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.

Supplemental material  This content has been supplied by the author(s). It has 
not been vetted by BMJ Publishing Group Limited (BMJ) and may not have been 
peer-­reviewed. Any opinions or recommendations discussed are solely those 
of the author(s) and are not endorsed by BMJ. BMJ disclaims all liability and 
responsibility arising from any reliance placed on the content. Where the content 
includes any translated material, BMJ does not warrant the accuracy and reliability 
of the translations (including but not limited to local regulations, clinical guidelines, 
terminology, drug names and drug dosages), and is not responsible for any error 
and/or omissions arising from translation and adaptation or otherwise.

Open access  This is an open access article distributed in accordance with the 
Creative Commons Attribution Non Commercial (CC BY-­NC 4.0) license, which 
permits others to distribute, remix, adapt, build upon this work non-­commercially, 
and license their derivative works on different terms, provided the original work is 
properly cited, appropriate credit is given, any changes made indicated, and the use 
is non-­commercial. See: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/.

ORCID iDs
Christophe Wille http://orcid.org/0000-0002-2138-6200
Dominique Van de Velde http://orcid.org/0000-0001-6982-1075
Patricia De Vriendt http://orcid.org/0000-0003-4861-7838