User-Centered Design and Implementation of an
Interoperable FHIR Application for Pediatric
Pneumonia Prognostication in a Randomized Trial

Robert W. Turer1
Stephen C. Gradwohl2
Justine Stassun2
Jakobi Johnson2
Jason M. Slagle4

Carrie Reale4
Russ Beebe4
Hui Nian5
Yuwei Zhu5
Daniel Albert6
Timothy Coffman6
Hala Alaw6

Tom Wilson6
Shari Just6
Perry Peguillan6
Heather Freeman6
Donald H. Arnold2
Judith M. Martin7

Srinivasan Suresh7
Scott Coglio8
Ryan Hixon8
Krow Ampofo3
Andrew T. Pavia3

Matthew B. Weinger4,9
Derek J. Williams2
Asli O. Weitkamp9

1Department of Emergency Medicine and Clinical Informatics Center,
UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, United States
2Department of Pediatrics, Vanderbilt University Medical Center,
Nashville, Tennessee, United States
3Department of Pediatrics, University of Utah Health, Salt Lake City,
Utah, United States
4Department of Anesthesiology and Institute of Medicine and Public
Health, Center for Research and Innovation in Systems Safety,
Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee,
United States
5Department of Biostatistics, Vanderbilt University Medical Center,
Nashville, Tennessee, United States

Appl Clin Inform 2024;15:556–568.

Address for correspondence Robert W. Turer, MD, MS,
Department of Emergency Medicine and Clinical Informatics Center,
UT Southwestern Medical Center, 5323 Harry Hines Blvd, Suite
E4.300, Dallas, TX, 75390, United States
(e-mail: Robert.turer@utsouthwestern.edu).

6HealthIT, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville,
Tennessee, United States
7Department of Pediatrics, University of Pittsburgh and UPMC Children’s
Hospital of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, United States
8Enterprise Development Services, UPMC Children’s Hospital of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, United States
9Department of Biomedical Informatics, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee, United States

Keywords
►FHIR
►user-centered design
►electronic health
record
►interoperability
►research informatics

Abstract
Objectives
To support a pragmatic, electronic health record (EHR)-based randomized
controlled trial, we applied user-centered design (UCD) principles, evidence-based risk
communication strategies, and interoperable software architecture to design, test, and
deploy a prognostic tool for children in emergency departments (EDs) with pneumonia.
Methods
Risk for severe in-hospital outcomes was estimated using a validated ordinal
logistic regression model to classify pneumonia severity. To render the results usable for ED
clinicians, we created an integrated SMART on Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resources
(FHIR) web application built for interoperable use in two pediatric EDs using different EHR
vendors: Epic and Cerner. We followed a UCD framework, including problem analysis and
user research, conceptual design and early prototyping, user interface development,
formative evaluation, and postdeployment summative evaluation.
Results
Problem analysis and user research from 39 clinicians and nurses revealed
user preferences for risk aversion, accessibility, and timing of risk communication. Early
prototyping and iterative design incorporated evidence-based design principles,
including numeracy, risk framing, and best-practice visualization techniques. After
rigorous unit and end-to-end testing, the application was successfully deployed in both
EDs, which facilitated enrollment, randomization, model visualization, data capture,
and reporting for trial purposes.

received
November 21, 2023
accepted after revision
March 27, 2024
accepted manuscript online
April 2, 2024

Georg Thieme Verlag KG,
Rüdigerstraße 14,
70469 Stuttgart, Germany

DOI https://doi.org/
10.1055/a-2297-9129.
ISSN 1869-0327.

Research Article
556

Accepted Manuscript online: 2024-04-02   Article published online: 2024-07-17

Background and Signiﬁcance

Pneumonia is the most common serious infection in children
and ranks among the top reasons for pediatric hospitaliza-
tion.1 Hospitalization rates vary widely among children’s
hospitals, even after accounting for differences in population
or illness severity.1 Risk prediction tools using real-time
clinical data may improve care consistency and identify
impending critical illness. Working toward that end, our
team previously developed and validated a proportional
odds ordinal logistic regression model using electronic
health record (EHR) data to predict pneumonia severity in
hospitalized children.1,2

Effective models require timely, integrated, and interpret-
able presentation within EHR workﬂows for optimal utility.
Users’ perceived risk is inﬂuenced by risk presentation, with
contributing factors including numerical presentation, risk
framing, and visual design elements. Accurate interpretation
and effective communication of risk can be achieved by
following the best practices in visually presenting the results
of clinical prediction models, as suggested by Van Belle and
colleagues.3,4

Each scenario is unique, requiring informed and thought-
ful design to ensure model results are displayed in an
interpretable way to the right person at the right time in
workﬂow. User-centered design (UCD) frameworks can op-
timize the chance for clear communication by combining the
best practices and iterative prototyping into the design
process.5
The
Vanderbilt
University
Medical
Center
(VUMC) Center for Research and Innovation in Systems
Safety (CRISS) has previously demonstrated the successful
use of such frameworks.6,7

Design scalability relies on cross-system interoperability.
Health Level Seven’s Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resour-
ces (FHIR) standard aims to provide consistent data stand-
ards and application programming interfaces (APIs) for
health care interoperability.8 SMART on FHIR extends FHIR
by setting API standards and leveraging web standards for
user authorization and authentication.8

As part of the Improving CarE for Community Acquired
Pneumonia in Children (ICE-CAP) pragmatic randomized clin-
ical trial (identiﬁer: NCT06033079), we were tasked with
integrating the previously derived prognostic model for chil-
dren with pneumonia into clinical workﬂows for real-time use
in two pediatric emergency departments (EDs). The trial
required implementation with two different vendor systems:
Epic (Epic Systems Corporation, Verona, Wisconsin, United

States) at the Monroe Carell Jr. Children’s Hospital at the VUMC
and Cerner (Cerner Corporation, North Kansas City, Missouri,
United States) at the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center
Children’s Hospital of Pittsburgh (UPMC).
This study describes the design, implementation, and
testing of an interoperable, EHR-integrated, SMART on
FHIR-based tool for clinicians caring for children with pneu-
monia in the ED. We ﬁrst present our four-part sequential
design process: interface design, architectural design, test-
ing, and deployment at VUMC. We then describe the process
of deploying the application at UPMC.

Objective

To support a pragmatic, EHR-based randomized controlled
trial, we applied UCD methods, evidence-based risk commu-
nication strategies, and interoperable software architecture
to design, test, and deploy a prognostic tool for children with
pneumonia in the ED. In the following sections, we describe
four critical phases of the project: User Interface Design,
Software Architecture, Evaluation and Deployment, and
Second Site Deployment with each containing its respective
Methods and Results.

User Interface Design

Methods
We followed national standards9 and a UCD framework
(►Fig.
1)
consisting
of
the following
steps:
problem
analysis and user research, conceptual design and early
prototyping, user interface development with iterative re-
view and high-ﬁdelity prototyping, formative evaluation,
and postdeployment summative evaluation. Herein, we
describe the application of each phase to the design of
our prognostic tool.

Setting
VUMC and UPMC are large, academic quaternary referral
centers in Nashville, Tennessee, Unites States and Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania, United States, respectively. VUMC performed
model design and validation, application design, and initial
deployment. UPMC subsequently adapted and deployed
the tool.

Prognostic Model Information
The previously described multivariable proportional odds
logistic regression model uses age, sex, race, temperature,

Conclusion
The successful implementation of a custom application for pneumonia
prognosis and clinical trial support in two health systems on different EHRs demon-
strates the importance of UCD, adherence to modern clinical data standards, and
rigorous testing. Key lessons included the need for understanding users’ real-world
needs, regular knowledge management, application maintenance, and the recognition
that FHIR applications require careful conﬁguration for interoperability.

Applied Clinical Informatics
Vol. 15

557

heart rate, respiratory rate, systolic blood pressure, and ratio
of partial pressure of arterial oxygen to fraction of inspired
oxygen
(PaO2:FiO2)
as
predictors,
applying
restricted
cubic splines for continuous variables to relax linearity
assumptions and interaction terms to account for age-de-
pendent vital sign norms.2 When true PaO2 and FiO2 meas-
urements were unavailable, we estimated them using
oxygen ﬂow rates and arterial oxygen saturation.10–13 The
model predicts three severity classes based on the most
severe outcome experienced during the encounter: very
severe represents respiratory failure requiring invasive
mechanical ventilation, shock requiring vasopressors, or
death; severe represents other intensive care units (ICU)-
level care; and mild–moderate represents all other admitted
or discharged children not requiring ICU care. Our team
previously validated the model, which demonstrated very
good discrimination and calibration in the ED setting.2,14

Problem Analysis and User Research
We conducted user research at VUMC, UPMC, and Primary
Children’s Hospital in Salt Lake City, Utah, United States. (The
Utah team contributed to user research but did not partici-
pate in the implementation aim described in this manu-
script). User research consisted of ﬁeld observations with
interactive probing (i.e., contextual inquiry) as well as formal
interviews with individual providers and nurses in the EDs
and ICUs.15 We examined care processes for children with
pneumonia and how clinicians make prognostic- and dispo-
sition-related decisions. Participants included faculty physi-
cians, resident and fellow physicians, advanced practice
providers (APPs), and nurses.

Conceptual Design and Early Prototyping
Based on the results of problem analysis and user research
(discussed in “Results”), we proceeded to wireframe develop-
ment followed by iterative reﬁnement informed by formative
usability testing.16 We incorporated evidence-based design
principles into our prototypes with attention paid to numer-
acy, risk-framing, and visual communication strategies. In-
formed by user preference for risk aversion, we employed
negative framing in presenting our predicted outcomes. Neg-
ative framing emphasizes the potential downside, such as
stating there is a “5% probability of a very severe outcome,”
rather than highlighting the positive, like a “95% probability of
alesssevereoutcome.” WeincorporatedVanBelle’stechniques
for presenting risk models, including the use of lines for
representation of relative risks, use of hue for categorical
differences and saturation/brightness for scale changes, and
simultaneous use of both numbers and graphs.3,4

Close collaboration between the design, development,
and analytic teams assured accurate backend functionality
and feasible user interfaces. Originally, we intended to
perform in-person user evaluations. However, due to the
coronavirus disease 2019 pandemic, we adapted our ap-
proach and conducted individual virtual usability tests,
allowing users to interact with high-ﬁdelity prototypes
over a videoconferencing platform.

Results

Problem Analysis and User Research
The CRISS team observed or interviewed 39 pediatric emer-
gency medicine team members: 12 faculty physicians, 9

Fig. 1
User-centered design framework. Reproduced with permission of Matthew Weinger MD, Russ Beebe, & Vanderbilt University Medical
Center 2014.

Applied Clinical Informatics
Vol. 15

558

fellows, 11 residents, 4 APPs, and 3 triage nurses. Overall user
preference themes included risk averseness, accessibility, and
importance of timing. Risk averseness refers to clinicians’
reluctance to agree with lower risk estimates from a tool
than suggested by their clinical gestalt. Quotes suggestive of
this theme included: “…people are unlikely to downgrade…”
and “the tool should focus on catching misses.” Accessibility
referstotheneedfor riskcommunicationstobeembeddedand
easily accessed within the EHR itself (i.e., clinicians would not
leave the EHR to obtain risk scores). The importance of timing
refers to the need to display model results after testing, such as
labs or chest X-rays, was completed, but before committing to
disposition decisions.

Conceptual Design and Early Prototyping
Early design efforts yielded several prototypes, progressing
from paper prototypes to wireframe diagrams and, ﬁnally,
high-ﬁdelity prototypes. An image of the high-ﬁdelity pro-
totype is available in the ►Supplementary Materials (avail-
able in the online version).

Software Architecture

As we approached the ﬁnal design, we turned our attention
to software architecture and EHR integration. This section
details our implementation in Epic at VUMC. Interoperability
issues faced when adapting the application for Cerner at
UPMC are discussed later in the manuscript.

Methods

Clinical Decision Support Considerations
Design requirements and constraints mandated that the sys-
tem: (1) integrate with an existing pneumonia identiﬁcation
system (PIS) [VUMC only]; (2) facilitate trial enrollment and
randomization; (3) allow for downstream reporting; and (4)
function within both Epic and Cerner.
The PIS at the VUMC is a natural language processing
(NLP) system employing a random forest model that predicts
the likelihood of pneumonia based on chest X-ray radiology
reports and ﬁles its results to Epic ﬂowsheet rows, which can
then trigger clinical decision support (CDS).17,18

To address these constraints, we began our architectural
design using the ﬁve “rights” of CDS (►Table 1).19

Given the PIS’s ability to trigger native EHR workﬂows, we
chose to use an interruptive alert (Epic BestPractice Advisory
or BPA) to initiate the CDS workﬂow. We then considered how
to implement model calculations, the user interface for model
result display, and the randomization and enrollment module.
For model calculation, we ﬁrst considered Epic and
Cerner-native clinical scoring systems but neither could
handle ordinal outcomes at the time. We then considered
Epic’s Cognitive Computing platform—a proprietary system
that integrates advanced predictive models into EHR work-
ﬂows, but enterprise-level licensing costs, trial deadlines,
and interoperability concerns made this impractical. We
ultimately chose to create a custom application designed
to address our statistical, interface, and interoperability
needs. During the design phase of this project, both Epic
and Cerner maintained FHIR APIs, which facilitated interop-
erable design. Therefore, we chose the SMART on FHIR
platform to integrate the application with the EHR.8

At VUMC, we used Epic’s Active Guidelines functionality to
launch our custom application. Active guidelines allows for
simpliﬁed authentication and authorization, communication
of application context information, and application interface
rendering directly within an Epic browser window. Local
expertise and server infrastructure led us to implement the
application using JavaScript via the Angular framework (Goo-
gle, LLC, Mountain View, California, United States).

Knowledge Management Considerations
Prior to development efforts, we performed Epic FHIR server
validation. We ﬁrst located predictor variables in Epic based
on observational and interview-based user research, which
allowed for veriﬁcation of clinical workﬂows and variation in
documentation practice. We successfully identiﬁed all pre-
dictors as data elements in Epic.
We then built an application entry in Epic’s App Orchard
to serve as a test harness for the FHIR server and its exposed
APIs. This entry point facilitated the creation of unique client
identiﬁers, the exposure of FHIR web services, server end-
points, and other application settings. Later, the application
entry facilitated application deployment.

Table 1 Five “rights” design requirements for pediatric pneumonia prognostic tool

Abbreviation: EHR, electronic health record.

Applied Clinical Informatics
Vol. 15

559

We used Postman (Postman Inc, San Francisco, California,
United States) to evaluate web services exposed by Epic’s
FHIR server. Local expertise with the FHIR version STU3 (as
well as anticipated changes in the R4 version during the time
course of application development) led us to use this version.
We explored the following FHIR resource requests:

• Patient.Search
• Patient.Read
• Encounter.Search
• Encounter.Read
• Observation.Search (U.S. Core vital-signs proﬁle, Lines/
Drains/Airways proﬁle)
• Observation.Read

While most patient data—including name, age, demo-
graphics, and vital signs—could be retrieved through stan-
dard FHIR requests using either default or U.S. Core proﬁles,
we encountered barriers concerning oxygen supplementa-
tion
data,
which
were
not
available
through
Epic’s
FHIR implementation. To resolve this issue, we used the
“Observation.Search” request to extract the required data
fromEpic’snativeﬂowsheets,whicharen’t partof thestandard
core proﬁles, successfully meeting our validation criteria.
A screenshot of the API validation process of an Observation.
Search request is included in the ►Supplementary Materials
(available in the online version).
The Observation.Search request will return multiple
values that meet the speciﬁed criteria. For most predictors
(age, sex, temperature, heart rate, respiratory rate, systolic
blood pressure), we used the ﬁrst documented values
during the visit. Our estimation of the PaO2:FiO2 ratio
requires contemporaneous SpO2 measurements and FiO2
measurements or estimates depending on the modality of
oxygen provided. To account for this, we used the ﬁrst
measured SpO2 value and the closest PaO2 or FiO2 value
within 1 hour of the SpO2 measurement. If a measured or
estimated PaO2 or FiO2 was unavailable during that win-
dow, room air was assumed.

Enrollment and Randomization Module
The pragmatic nature of the clinical trial required enrollment
to be EHR based and embedded within clinical care under
waiver of informed consent. The waiver of informed consent
was justiﬁed based on feasibility concerns. Given the narrow
time window for clinical decision-making, it was critical that
clinicians be the ones to enroll patients. It would have been
neither practical nor safe from a human timing standpoint or
user interface standpoint for a research assistant to act as the
middleperson and interrupt the clinical decision-making
process. Given the conservative framing of the tool from a
clinical decision-making standpoint, this strategy was con-
sidered to confer the least risk to the patient.
We designed the system to handle encounter enrollment
and randomization to control and intervention groups. To
facilitate EHR-based randomization, we used a random
number generator within Epic via MUMPS code to ﬁle a
random integer between 0 and 1 to a patient-level data

structure (SmartData Element), which corresponded to con-
trol and intervention arms, respectively, in a roughly 1:1
ratio (subject to variation from the random number genera-
tor). We used interruptive alerts (BPAs) to implement the
randomization and enrollment module and to launch the
custom app within Epic. Upon successful randomization and
enrollment, the application launched immediately and au-
tomatically via ActiveGuidelines.

Reporting Considerations
From conception, we designed the system to use EHR-native
data structures to enable downstream reporting. Speciﬁcal-
ly, our platform needed to write back enrollment, randomi-
zation, and model result data. Since Epic’s FHIR servers were
able to write to study-speciﬁc data elements using ﬂowsheet
rows via the Observation.Create FHIR resource request, we
used this approach. ►Table 2 shows the data elements the
application returns to Epic.
We also considered several other platforms. We refrained
from using an external database managed by the custom
development team, given the required downstream federation
of data sources and the absence of a longitudinally available
database administrator. We similarly forewent using RED-
Cap,20 as there were anticipated challenges with integrating
REDCap data with Epic-native structures in an automated
fashion without the need for additional custom development.
Finally, a dashboard was created using Tableau (Tableau
Software, Mountain View, California, United States) as the
presentation layer and Epic’s Clarity database as the backend
layer for longitudinal study reporting.

Results
The ﬁnal architectural design is shown in ►Fig. 2. The enroll-
ment and randomization alert are displayed in ►Fig. 3. The
custom application is shown in ►Fig. 4. A screenshot of the
reporting dashboard is shown in ►Fig. 5. A video of the ﬁnal
workﬂow is included in the ►Supplementary Materials
(available in the online version).

Evaluation and Deployment

Methods
All modules underwent rigorous testing in distinct environ-
ments: development for initial code checks, proof of concept
for feasibility, and test for functionality. They were ﬁrst
examined individually (component testing) and then together
through integrated end-to-end testing prior to migration to
the production environment. End-to-end integration testing
required real-time collaboration from the following teams:

• Local EHR client access team for enabling FHIR endpoints
within the EHR.
• EHR integration team for application access.
• Custom development team for real-time debugging and
application deployment.
• Server administration for app migration.
• EHR ED team for EHR build migration through develop-
ment, test, and production environments.

Applied Clinical Informatics
Vol. 15

560

• Clinical subject matter experts for evaluating score valid-
ity and app behavior.

User acceptance testing was performed before the appli-
cation was available to end users. Test cases were written
using clinical scenarios extracted from a prior study within
the same grant.

Results
We unit tested the CDS system, FHIR app, and FHIR app data-
ﬂows separately, which identiﬁed several conﬁguration prob-
lems requiring correction prior to end-to-end testing. During
end-to-end testing, we identiﬁed environmental differences
between test and production environments requiring correc-
tionfortheapptofunction.Havingthedevelopmentandclinical
teams present in real time during end-to-end testing sessions
allowed for prompt resolution and successful deployment.
The prognostic tool was successfully deployed to a produc-
tion environment in November 2020. Between then and study
completion in November 2022, the enrollment workﬂow at
VUMC triggered during 1,310 patient encounters, of which
333 (25.4%) were deemed eligible by clinicians for enroll-
ment. Of these, 147 (44.1%) were randomized to the inter-
vention group. Among the intervention group, the model
was viewed in the FHIR application by at least one user for
120 (81.6%) encounters. Enrollment for the trial is now
complete, and results associated with clinician decision-
making and formal usability evaluation with iterative

updates will be submitted for publication upon completion
of the primary analyses.

Second Site Deployment (University of
Pittsburgh Medical Center)

Methods
Technology, interoperability, workﬂow, and interface chal-
lenges arose when transitioning the application for use at
UPMC. The application was developed using the Angular
framework, with which UPMC’s developers were unfamiliar.
The necessary training and familiarization took additional
time that had not been anticipated. Regular meetings
between the development teams from both sites minimized
this time cost.
The VUMC application server was deployed in a Linux
environment, whereas UPMC employs primarily Windows
Internet Information Services servers (Microsoft Corpora-
tion, Redmond, Washington, United States). Deployment at
UPMC therefore required the deployment of a new Linux
server and the Nginx web server (F5 Inc, Seattle, Washington,
United States) for app delivery.
There were between site variations in vendor FHIR server
implementations resulting in inconsistent FHIR resource
availability. Some variables like oxygen delivery required a
“back door” through Epic’s native web services and Cerner’s
FHIR server lacked equivalent functions. To address this,

Table 2 Application data elements returned to Epic via FHIR interface

Abbreviations: BP, blood pressure; FHIR, Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resources; ICU, intensive care unit; HR, heart rate; RR, respiratory rate.

Applied Clinical Informatics
Vol. 15

561

UPMC developers carefully mapped concepts using LOINC
(Logical Observation Identiﬁers Names and Codes) codes and
extracted many candidate variables using a mix of FHIR and
Cerner-native web services.
Beyond the challenges from an application and server
standpoint, one-to-one mappable CDS workﬂows do not
exist between Epic and Cerner for triggering and displaying
the application and there was differing infrastructure for
randomizing and enrolling patients. For instance, since the
NLP-based workﬂow was not available at UPMC, we re-
quired a different approach to enrollment. Using Cerner’s
Discern rule-based framework, we initiated the workﬂow
when a clinician opened the patient’s chart and the follow-
ing criteria were present: resulted chest X-ray and an ED
chief
complaint
of
respiratory
problem,
cough,
or
congestion/upper respiratory infection. Patients were ran-

domized to proceed further based on whether their en-
counter ID was even or odd. If randomized, the EHR
displayed a passive alert via an icon on the Cerner ED track
board (a department-level spreadsheet style tool that
allows clinicians to monitor ED care). If this icon was
selected, clinicians would be shown a Cerner Powerform
(data entry module) that described eligibility criteria and
facilitated enrollment the patient in the study. If enrolled,
the FHIR application was launched using Cerner’s mPage
(web integration) functionality and the remainder of the
workﬂow was like VUMC’s. ►Fig. 6 depicts the workﬂow
and architecture at UPMC.
Weekly meetings with the clinical, UCD, and development
teams from both sites ensured both application and EHR
workﬂow versions matched as closely as possible while
maintaining the integrity of key metrics for downstream

Fig. 2
Final software architectural design at VUMC for custom application. VUMC, The Vanderbilt University Medical Center.

Applied Clinical Informatics
Vol. 15

562

reporting. Ultimately, a similar test strategy was employed
for testing each component and end-to-end integration of
the app at UPMC before the tool was deployed in production.

Results
A PowerPoint ﬁle depicting the UPMC workﬂow is included
in the ►Supplementary Materials (available in the online
version). The pediatric pneumonia prognostic tool was
deployed in a production environment from November
2020 through November 2022. During the study period,
the UPMC EHR interface triggered during 3,117 encounters.
Clinicians deemed 201 of 3,117 (6.4%) patients eligible for
enrollment, of whom 117 (58.2%) were randomized to the

intervention group. Among the intervention group, the
model was viewed in the FHIR application by at least one
user during 81 (69.2%) encounters.

Discussion

We employed UCD and CDS principles to design, imple-
ment, test, and deploy a custom, EHR-integrated FHIR
application facilitating enrollment, randomization, model
visualization, data capture, and reporting in support of a
randomized pragmatic clinical trial. We learned many
lessons during this process related to knowledge manage-
ment,
integrated
custom
app
maintenance,
and

Fig. 3
Epic-based enrollment and randomization module via BestPractice Advisory interruptive alert.

Applied Clinical Informatics
Vol. 15

563

interoperability. We suspect the differences in enrollment
rates between sites was related to differences in the enroll-
ment workﬂow (i.e., the presence or absence of the PIS NLP
tool), which could lead to a broader range of patients being
included at the UPMC than at VUMC. This highlights the
value in tools such as the PIS for focusing enrollment and
reducing alert fatigue.

Knowledge Management
Due to the dynamic nature of medical knowledge and
representation, EHR data structures and features change
regularly. Ideally, upcoming EHR upgrades or local conﬁgu-
ration changes, such as where vital signs are recorded, would
be perfectly communicated to all teams who use them.
However, communication failures are inevitable with down-
stream consequences for custom apps. For instance, between
implementing the PIS and the custom application, many

ﬂowsheet rows in Epic at the VUMC representing oxygen
delivery changed due to clinical needs. This change was only
detected by observing clinicians and nurses at the point of
care. Communication with end users and frequent regression
testing can identify these changes early.
Another knowledge management challenge relates to
changing standards (e.g., FHIR) and individual standard
implementations (e.g., by vendor systems). Support teams
usually broadcast these changes, but communication failures
or nonbroadcast developer level feature changes (e.g., ﬂow-
sheet access in Epic) can lead to unidentiﬁed bugs. For
example, after deploying our app, Epic changed how its
FHIR Server handled patient encounter information during
application launch, which led to application failure and the
erroneous exclusion of an eligible encounter. Furthermore,
this error was only detected after our team noticed aberrant
behavior from the application and collaborated with our

Fig. 4 Final application user interface integrated within Epic EHR workﬂow at VUMC. This is a test patient in a test environment. EHR, electronic
health record; VUMC, The Vanderbilt University Medical Center.

Applied Clinical Informatics
Vol. 15

564

developers and the EHR vendor to identify the bug. Solutions
to minimize the impact of these changes include scheduled
regression testing of both custom apps and launch harnesses,
frequent communication with vendor technical support
staff, and ensuring that custom development teams are
included in new feature reviews from vendor systems.

Integrated Custom App Maintenance
In contrast to a traditional software development environ-
ment where detailed automated unit tests can be deployed,
EHR systems typically use what-you-see-is-what-you-get
editors that reduce barriers to entry but allow for small
environmental differences to go undetected. For instance,
during the implementation of this project, there were several
times where inconsistent browser allow lists, data structure
identiﬁers, and user security settings between development,
test, and production environments variably impacted our
app in each environment. Furthermore, variable enabling
of vendor FHIR server features can unexpectedly impact
integrated applications. Strategies for managing these chal-
lenges include rigorous regression testing performed in
each environment and robust application logging to facili-
tate debugging after unexpected clinical events, which are

often hard to simulate or anticipate in test environments.
An example where logging was helpful was a case where a
patient had more than 1,000 vital signs charted over several
visits, which exceeded the FHIR server’s capacity. This had
not been anticipated during design, and the audit log
allowed us to detect and address this issue. Finally, imple-
menting a “debug mode” for developers in production
environments (without writing to production data struc-
tures) was useful for identifying conﬁguration idiosyncra-
sies between environments. Formal risk analysis during
architectural design might help teams designing similar
applications anticipate some of the challenges we encoun-
tered prior to deployment.21

Interoperability Concerns
Converting our app for use at a second health system with
differences in expertise, preferred web development frame-
works, operating systems, web server platforms, and EHR
vendors presented many challenges. While the site-speciﬁc
differences were anticipated early during the design phase,
the FHIR-related challenges were not. Marketing materials
sometimes present FHIR as a simple solution for interopera-
bility betweenvendor systemsorbetweensitesusing thesame

Fig. 5
Enrollment dashboard deployed using Tableau Server to monitor ongoing enrollment, randomization, and model views.

Applied Clinical Informatics
Vol. 15

565

EHR. However, substantial differences exist in FHIR server
implementation and conﬁguration between vendor systems
and even different sites using the same system. Therefore,
conﬁguration at a new site can be quite time intensive due to
data validation and application testing requirements.
Furthermore, the knowledge management burden for
maintaininganintegratedapplicationissubstantialforasingle
site, but longitudinal surveillance for drift in how clinical
concepts are represented across multiple systems is an even

greater challenge requiring longitudinal, intentional surveil-
lance. In the same vein, we recommend teams developing
similar applications in thefuture should prospectively identify
necessary data structures natively within each EHR and each
EHR’s FHIR server before architectural design, as this approach
would identify problems early (such as the representation of
oxygen delivery in our application). Dorr et al describe a useful
approach to assessing data adequacy using FHIR in the setting
of hypertension management that would be useful for teams

Fig. 6
Parallel software architectural design at UPMC describing enrollment and application launch. UPMC, University of Pittsburgh Medical
Center.

Applied Clinical Informatics
Vol. 15

566

pursuing projects like ours in the future.22 Lobach et al provide
another useful example of how future investigators can evalu-
ate and report the viability of FHIR app integration in an EHR
environment during application design.23

Finally, the FHIR standard, while robustly designed for
customizability, still has gaps in the U.S. Core proﬁle (as
demonstrated by the amount of effort needed to model oxy-
genation) that adds substantial complexity when using the
standard. In short, FHIR applications are not simply plug-
and-play and require informaticians and developers with
expertise in the FHIR standard, local EHR and FHIR conﬁgura-
tion, and local custom development resources for successful
interoperability.

Regulatory Concerns
In 2022, after we designed and deployed our application, the
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) released recommenda-
tions about what type of CDS software is subject to FDA
oversight as a device.24 While our application was not subject
to these guidelines due to our timeline, it likely would not
have been considered a device under the FDA criteria. Future
developers of applications like ours should be mindful of
these guidelines and review them with their local legal and
compliance ofﬁces.

Conclusion

The union of UCD principles, modern clinical data standards,
and a multilayer testing plan facilitated implementation of a
real-time CDS application that displays prognostic informa-
tion for children presenting to the ED with pneumonia while
facilitating a pragmatic, EHR-based randomized clinical trial
at two health systems with different EHR vendors. Careful
planning, iterative design, knowledge management, and
rigorous testing were critical for successful implementation.

Clinical Relevance Statement

This study demonstrates the feasibility of an interoperable
FHIR application in enhancing pediatric pneumonia prog-
nostication in real time in multiple EDs using different EHR
vendor systems for use in a randomized clinical trial. It serves
as an example of how the synergy between UCD, risk
communication best practices, and the application of inter-
operable clinical data standards can lead to more effective
health care applications. However, this research also under-
scores the complexities inherent in developing such systems,
emphasizing the necessity for meticulous planning and
collaboration to ensure successful implementation and
operation.

Multiple-Choice Questions

1. In deploying an interoperable FHIR application for pedi-
atric pneumonia prognostication, which aspect is crucial
for ensuring effective data exchange across diverse EHR
systems?

a. EHR vendor server interoperability standards availability
b. Familiarity with interoperability standards
c. Health information exchange integration
d. Predictive analytics models

Correct Answer: The correct answer is option b. Interoper-
ability standards like FHIR are essential for enabling effec-
tive data exchange across different EHR systems. Given
recent legislature, nearly all systems offer these abilities,
including FHIR servers. However, developer familiarity
with the nuances that distinguish between each vendor’s
implementation is key for successful interoperability.

2. Which principle is most critical in the UCD of health care
applications
like
the
FHIR
application
for
pediatric
pneumonia?
a. Knowledge of pediatric pneumoniatreatmentguidelines
b. Compliance with best design practices for clinicians
with visual impairment
c. Alignment with clinical workﬂow and user needs
d. Implementation
of
advanced
machine
learning
algorithms

Correct Answer: The correct answer is option c. Aligning
the design of health care applications with clinical work-
ﬂowand user needs is vital in a UCDapproach. This requires
extensive user research, iterative prototyping, and repeated
testing. This ensures that the application supports clini-
cians’ actual work processes and preferences, thereby en-
hancing usability and effectiveness in clinical settings.

Protection of Human and Animal Subjects
This study was approved by the Vanderbilt University
Medical Center Institutional Review Board.

Note
Code related to this project is unable to be shared publicly
due to security concerns. Investigators interested in gen-
erating similar applications may contact the authorship
team to discuss technical details.