Review

Medical Decision Making
2021, Vol. 41(3) 261–274
 The Author(s) 2021
Article reuse guidelines:
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
DOI: 10.1177/0272989X20984134
journals.sagepub.com/home/mdm
User Involvement in the Design and
Development of Patient Decision Aids and
Other Personal Health Tools: A Systematic
Review

Gratianne Vaisson, Thierry Provencher
, Miche` le Dugas
, Marie-E` ve Trottier,
Selma Chipenda Dansokho, Heather Colquhoun, Angela Fagerlin,
Anik M. C. Giguere, Hina Hakim, Lynne Haslett, Aubri S. Hoffman
,
Noah M. Ivers, Anne-Sophie Julien, France Le´ gare´
, Jean-Se´ bastien Renaud,
Dawn Stacey
, Robert J. Volk
, and Holly O. Witteman

Background. When designing and developing patient decision aids, guidelines recommend involving patients and sta-
keholders. There are myriad ways to do this. We aimed to describe how such involvement occurs by synthesizing
reports of patient decision aid design and development within a user-centered design framework and to provide con-
text by synthesizing reports of user-centered design applied to other personal health tools. Methods. We included
articles describing at least one development step of 1) a patient decision aid, 2) user- or human-centered design of
another personal health tool, or 3) evaluation of these. We organized data within a user-centered design framework
comprising 3 elements in iterative cycles: understanding users, developing/refining prototype, and observing users.
Results. We included 607 articles describing 325 patient decision aid projects and 65 other personal health tool proj-
ects. Fifty percent of patient decision aid projects reported involving users in at least 1 step for understanding users,
35% in at least 1 step for developing/refining the prototype, and 84% in at least 1 step for observing users’ interac-
tion with the prototype. In comparison, other personal health tool projects reported 91%, 49%, and 92%, respec-
tively. A total of 74% of patient decision aid projects and 92% of other personal health tool projects reported
iterative processes, both with a median of 3 iterative cycles. Preliminary evaluations such as usability or feasibility
testing were reported in 66% of patient decision aid projects and 89% of other personal health tool projects.
Conclusions. By synthesizing design and development practices, we offer evidence-based portraits of user involve-
ment. Those wishing to further align patient decision aid design and development with user-centered design methods
could involve users earlier, design and develop iteratively, and report processes in greater detail.

Keywords
decision making, decision support techniques, health services research, humans, patient-centered care, patient edu-
cation, patient participation

Date received: June 12, 2019; accepted: September 14, 2020

Patient decision aids are key tools for supporting shared
decision making, a practice described as ‘‘the pinnacle of
patient-centered care’’1 and advocated as a solution to
the ‘‘silent misdiagnosis’’ of patient preferences.2 These
tools are intended to complement counseling from a
healthcare
professional by making health decisions

Holly O. Witteman, Universite´ Laval, 1050 Avenue de la Me´ decine,
Pavillon Ferdinand-Vandry, Que´ bec City, QC G1V 0A6, Canada.
(holly.witteman@fmed.ulaval.ca)

explicit, providing balanced information on potential bene-
fits and harms of options, and helping people clarify what
matters to them in their own context and circumstances.
Their growing number3 and legislative power4 are precursors
of their probable ever-increasing development. Little is
known about whether and how users of patient decision aids
are involved in their development. There is interest in and
enthusiasm for participatory approaches such as user-
centered design but little empirical evidence of how user-
centered design might be applied in this context.
User-centered design is a long-standing, well-established
approach5 that has been used to develop products, ser-
vices, and systems,6–10 including health tools for personal
use.11–14 Examples of personal health tools developed
using this approach range from programs inciting good
health habits such as smoking and alcohol cessation,15,16

Internet-based support systems for chronic disease self-
management,17–19 and computer interfaces adapted for
people with severe motor paralysis.20,21

User-centered
design
is
an
iterative
method
of
involving
prospective
users
in
repeated
cycles
of
development. Our framework synthesizes foundational
literature6,8,10,22–24
and
defines
3
elements
in
each

iterative cycle: 1) understanding users, their needs, and
their environment; 2) developing/refining the prototype;
and 3) observing the users interacting with the prototype.
As shown in Figure 1, each of these elements can include
multiple methodological steps, and steps may be repeated
across multiple iterations. For example, although a needs
assessment may be conducted early to help define the con-
tent of a patient decision aid, iterative testing may reveal
additional needs that were not identified originally, requir-
ing adjustment to the results of the needs assessment.
Traditional methods of developing patient decision aids
were described as a more linear process in the 2013 update
of the International Patient Decision Aid Standards. The
model development process included scoping, design, pro-
totype development, alpha testing with patients and clini-
cians, and beta or field testing in real-world settings with
patients and clinicians, with a steering committee possibly
adjusting the design after alpha testing.25

In this systematic review, we aimed to synthesize
how patient decision aids are designed and developed,
situating practices in the context of a framework of
user-centered design26 and putting results in further
context by also synthesizing the development processes
of other personal health tools for which authors expli-
citly named user-centered or human-centered design as
their guiding model. We included this additional context
because there are likely practical limits to user involve-
ment. Reported practices when explicitly using user-
centered or human-centered design may therefore pro-
vide realistic benchmarks for consideration in the design
and development of patient decision aids.

Methods

The overall study design included synthesizing published
articles describing the design and development process
of a patient decision aid and articles describing the
user-centered design and development of any other per-
sonal health tool. We report this review according to
PRISMA guidelines (Supplementary Appendix 1).

Protocol and Registration

We previously registered this review in PROSPERO (http://
www.crd.york.ac.uk/PROSPERO/display_record.asp?ID=C
RD42014013241) and published the protocol describ-
ing our systematic review methodology.26

Eligibility Criteria

We identified articles that describe at least 1 develop-
ment step and/or any type of evaluation of a patient
decision aid intended to support a personal health

Universite Laval Faculte de Medicine, Quebec City, QC, Canada
(GV, MD, MT, HH, FL, JR, HOW); Laval University Faculty of
Medicine, Quebec, QC, Canada (TP, SCD); University of Toronto
Faculty of Medicine, Toronto, ON, Canada (HC); University of Utah
School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT, USA (AF); McMaster
University Faculty of Health Sciences, Quebec, QC, Canada
(AMCG); East End Community Health Centre, Toronto, ON,
Canada (LH); The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX, USA (ASH, RJV); Women’s College Hospital,
Toronto, ON, Canada (NMI); Universite Laval Faculte des Sciences
et de Genie, Quebec, QC, Canada (AJ); University of Ottawa Faculty
of Health Sciences, Ottawa, ON, Canada (DS). The authors declared
no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, author-
ship, and/or publication of this article. The authors disclosed receipt
of the following financial support for the research, authorship, and/or
publication of this article: This study was funded by the Patient-
Centered Outcomes Research Institute (PCORI): ME-1306-03174
(principal investigator: Witteman) and the Canadian Institutes of
Health Research (CIHR): FDN-148246 (principal investigator:
Witteman). PCORI and CIHR had no role in determining the study
design, plans for data collection or analysis, decision to publish, or
preparation of this manuscript. NMI is funded by a Tier 2 Canada
Research Chair in Implementation of Evidence-Based Practice and
received salary support during this work from a New Investigator
Award by the CIHR as well as a New Investigator Award from the
Department of Family and Community Medicine, University of
Toronto. FL is funded by a Tier 1 Canada Research Chair in Shared
Decision Making and Knowledge Translation. DS holds a University
of Ottawa Research Chair in Knowledge Translation to Patients.
HOW is funded by a Tier 2 Canada Research Chair in Human-
Centred Digital Health and received salary support during this work
from Research Scholar Junior 1 and 2 Career Development Awards
by the Fonds de Recherche du Que´ bec—Sante´ (FRQS).

262

decision or that explicitly used one of the 4 terms—
user-centered design, user-centred design, human-centered
design, or human-centred design to develop a personal
health tool (e.g., tools for education, social support,
self-management, or daily health-related activities). We
excluded articles focused on tools solely intended for
clinicians. We also screened additional articles suggested
by authors of included articles when we contacted them
to validate the data we extracted from their article(s).
We applied no language or date restrictions.

Information Sources and Search

Our search strategy expanded slightly from our initial
plans. Between April 30, 2014, and May 11, 2014, we
conducted initial database searches for articles describ-
ing patient decision aid development and evaluation.
On September 29, 2014, we searched for articles describ-
ing other personal health tools developed with user-
centered design. Because the Cochrane review of patient
decision aids available at the time27 included patient
decision aids that addressed screening or treatment deci-
sions but not other decisions included in our study, we
rescreened articles excluded from that Cochrane review.
We then replicated Stacey and colleagues’ search strat-
egy for randomized controlled trials of patient decision
aids on July 9, 2015, using nearly the same inclusion
and exclusion criteria, except that we sought articles
describing other types of decisions. Our originally
planned search strategy did not include evaluation of

other personal health tools. This created an imbalance
in data about evaluation, because we captured more
publications describing the evaluation of patient deci-
sion aids than publications describing the evaluation of
other personal health tools developed in other personal
health tool projects. To rectify this, on June 20, 2017,
we used Google Scholar to search for articles describing
the evaluation of the other personal health tools devel-
oped via user-centered design by searching for articles
that cited the included papers. All search strategies
(Supplementary Appendix 2) were developed by an
information specialist (W.W.) and peer-reviewed by an
independent information specialist (M.E., M.F., see the
Acknowledgments).

Study Selection

We conducted the screening process in accordance with
standard methods for systematic reviews.28 After a train-
ing period in which all screeners practiced on randomly
selected subsets of search results, pairs of independent
screeners reviewed each title and abstract for inclusion
or exclusion. Two independent reviewers then reviewed
the full text of retained articles and classified them into
3 categories: include and retain for data extraction,
retain for a screen of the references but do not include
for data extraction, and exclude. At all stages of screen-
ing, if the 2 independent screeners disagreed and were
unable to come to agreement in discussion, a third per-
son adjudicated.

Figure 1 User-centered design framework and associated development steps.

Vaisson et al.
263

Data Extraction

Based on our conceptual framework of user-centered
design and with reviews among authors of this article
and 15 additional experts in the field, we created and
iteratively revised our extraction form with 4 cycles of
testing, using sets of 5 randomly selected articles identi-
fied in our search and selection process (total 20 articles)
to ensure the form captured key aspects of design and
development described in the included articles. Throughout
the data extraction process, when a field allowed the
option to indicate ‘‘Other,’’ we created new categories from
this open text whenever there were at least 10 occurrences
of a response. The final extraction form (Supplementary
Appendix 3) therefore reflected reported practices when
designing and developing patient decision aids or other
personal health tools, organized according to a user-
centered design framework.
Trained pairs of data analysts extracted key factors
(Table 1) and other data from each included article
using this standardized form. Lack of agreement was
resolved through adjudication by a third analyst or
discussion with the team until consensus was reached.
Major questions were referred for discussion with the
project’s steering committee.
We were unable to capture data for 2 planned ele-
ments in our protocol because of low reporting of these
elements. Specifically, we were unable to extract infor-
mation about users’ needs and personal contexts (item
numbered IV in our protocol) and about measures of
feasibility, acceptability, and usability.

Data Quality Assessment

The quality of each article was assessed by 2 indepen-
dent reviewers guided by a scoring system developed to
appraise studies in a mixed method review.29 We
adapted and modified this scoring system by adding
specific criteria for intervention development studies, a
study type not represented in the original system.
Because of the exploratory, descriptive nature of our
study and because there were no established thresholds
in this area, we did not set thresholds for quality.

Data Validation

Because of the heterogeneity of reporting of design and
development processes, we contacted all authors to ver-
ify our extraction of key variables, including the mer-
ging of articles into projects, and to collect any data
that we were unable to extract from publications. We
also invited authors to provide additional articles that
might further inform our understanding of their design
and development process. We began by sending each

with up to 3 reminder emails spaced 1 to 2 wk apart.
For nonresponding corresponding authors of rando-
mized controlled trials, we also followed up with phone
calls. When authors provided additional information or
corrected extracted data, we inserted the authors’ state-
ments into our data matrix. When authors submitted
new articles, we extracted new data from those articles

Table 1 Key Factors Extracted

Key factors extracted, grounded in our conceptual framework of user-centered design:

What steps were conducted as part of development
Whether patients and other stakeholders were involved in the development
If patients and other stakeholders were involved in the development:

who they were (e.g., people who had previously faced the issue, people who might potentially face this issue, patients who
were actually facing this issue, caregivers, clinicians who were not part of the research team)

how they were identified and recruited

how many were recruited
Whether there were iterative cycles of consultation
If there were iterative cycles of consultation:

how many cycles

at what point(s) in the process were patients and other stakeholders involved
What patients’ and other stakeholders’ involvement consisted of (i.e., were they observed interacting with the decision aid in a
naturalistic fashion or were they asked to speculate on how they might use it)
Types of feedback sought from patients and other stakeholders (i.e., comprehensiveness or appropriateness of content, format,
other)
How patients’ and other stakeholders’ feedback was incorporated into the design
Whether or not each article cited a relevant guideline, theory, or framework
From articles describing the evaluation of a tool, information about the type of evaluation, including whether or not outcomes
such as feasibility, acceptability, and usability were reported

264

into our data matrix using the data extraction process
described above.
After updates were made based on the authors’ feed-
back, an independent analyst who had not been involved
in data extraction screened all changes and classified
them into 1 of 4 categories: 1) addition of previously
missing data, 2) precision of data we had extracted more
vaguely (e.g., we extracted ‘‘at least 3 iterative cycles’’
and the author informed us that they conducted 5
cycles), 3) correction of incorrect data, or 4) differences
that did not materially affect the extracted data (e.g., we
had extracted a development step as ‘‘not reported,’’
which would be analyzed as lack of information that the
step was done, and the authors confirmed that it was
not done, changing our data entry to ‘‘not done.’’)
If, after data extraction and validation, we had no
indication that a development step had been conducted,
we analyzed the step as not done. We applied this same
approach to all data extracted. For example, if a step
had been reported as being done but we had no data
that users had been involved in it, we recorded that users
had not been involved in the step, even if the combina-
tion was unusual; for example, if authors reported con-
ducting a pilot test but did not report any participants
being involving in the pilot test.

Combining Papers into Projects

For some projects, data were distributed across multiple
papers. Before data analysis, we linked all articles
describing different aspects of the same projects to
develop and/or evaluate a given patient decision aid or
other personal health tool. We first grouped papers by
clinical context, authors, and, when available, name of
the tool. We then manually linked papers and verified
our linkages when we contacted authors. Our unit of
analysis is therefore each project of designing and devel-
oping one patient decision aid or other personal health
tool.

Synthesis of Results

To understand our data sets describing the design and
development of patient decision aids (hereafter referred
to as ‘‘patient decision aid projects’’) and the application
of user-centered design to other personal health tools
(hereafter referred to as ‘‘other personal health tool
projects’’) we first assessed the frequencies of their basic
characteristics such as clinical context and timing of
each tool’s intended use.
We then conducted descriptive analyses, overall and
by extraction element. We elected not to conduct formal

hypothesis testing between patient decision aid projects
and other personal health tool projects for 3 reasons.
First, even with adjusting for multiple comparisons, the
large number of variables would likely result in spurious
findings. Second, the purpose of presenting both groups
of results was to offer context from actual practices in
user-centered design when situating patient decision aid
projects within this framework, not to formally compare
approaches. It may be that there is a threshold of invol-
vement that optimizes a tool for use while respecting
limited resources such as users’ time, developers’ time,
and funds for development. If so, it is plausible that
projects explicitly applying user-centered design may be
operating around that threshold. Third, other personal
health tool projects designed and developed different
kinds of tools than patient decision aids. Namely, such
projects frequently had to do with physical assistive
devices or tools designed for daily use. In contrast,
patient decision aids are personal health tools intended
to be used as a complement to a clinical consultation.
Therefore, any differences we observed could simply
reflect different types of tools.
We also conducted further exploratory descriptive
analyses to examine the data according to level of user
involvement, latest year of publication, type of evalua-
tion (Supplementary Appendix 4), and exploratory
meta-analyses to explore possible relationships between
design and development methods of patient decision
aids and outcomes of those patient decision aids in ran-
domized controlled trials (Supplementary Appendix 5).
We conducted these analyses on projects that expli-
citly reported at least 1 step of their development pro-
cess. We performed analyses in R, version 3.2.330; SAS,
version 9.4; and RevMan, version 5.3.

Results

Study Selection

In total, our searches identified 83,441 unique poten-
tially eligible articles. Of these, we retained 1032 articles
for full-text screening, to which we added 53 articles
identified through author suggestions and 93 articles
from our hand searches. After full-text screening, we
retained and extracted data from 607 articles. The search
results and reasons for exclusion are presented in the
PRISMA flow diagram in Figure 2.
The 607 included articles described 390 distinct proj-
ects. Each project represented 1 unique patient decision
aid
or
other
personal
health
tool
(Supplementary
Appendices 6 and 7). Three hundred twenty-five (83%)
were patient decision aid projects; 65 (17%) were other

Vaisson et al.
265

personal health tool projects. Within patient decision
aid projects (n = 325), 283 projects’ papers described
at least 1 development step, whereas 42 exclusively

described the tool’s evaluation. Of the 283 patient deci-
sion aid development projects, 2 descriptions explicitly
stated
the
development
process
was
user-centered

Figure 2 PRISMA flow diagram.

266

design. We had predetermined in our protocol that we
would group these with patient decision aid projects.

Data quality assessment. The quality of studies is sum-
marized in Supplementary Appendix 8. Overall, quality
was acceptable, although with some weaknesses in eva-
luation studies, such as low rates of controlling for
potentially confounding variables in nonexperimental
studies.

Data validation. Two hundred thirty-four project authors
(60%) responded to validate or correct data. Within those
projects, authors’ comments changed 4.3% of all extracted
data. This 4.3% consisted of 2.7% for addition of previ-
ously missing data, 0.05% for precision of data, 0.2% for
correction of incorrect data, and 1.3% for differences that
did not materially affect the extracted data.

Project and Tool Characteristics

Overall, projects were reported in articles published
from 1976 (patient decision aid projects) or 1997 (other
personal health tool projects) to 2016 (Figure 3). Half
of patient decision aid projects (51%) cited no theory,
model, framework, or standards. The 2 most commonly
cited such foundations were the International Patient
Decision Aid Standards (19%) and the Ottawa Decision
Support Framework (17%).

Among the 325 patient decision aids, 61% were paper
based. The most common clinical contexts addressed were
breast cancer (20%) and reproductive health (19%). The
most common purposes were to support a treatment (57%)
or screening (21%) decision. Regarding intended context of
use, almost half of the patient decision aids (46%) were
designed for use at home or in a private setting. Patient
decision aids were designed to be used before (38%), dur-
ing (31%), or between (23%) clinical encounters.
Among the 65 other personal health tools developed
via user-centered design, 42% used an online application
format. The most common clinical contexts addressed
were disabilities (25%), and the most common purposes
were to support everyday activities (45%) or other activ-
ities such as monitoring, self-management, or self-
monitoring (40%). Most tools (68%) were designed to
be used in an everyday context, wherever the person
happened to be.

Development Steps, Overall and
by User-Centered Design Element

In the following sections, we present 1) frequencies with
which development steps were reported (with or without
user involvement), 2) frequencies with which develop-
ment steps were reported with user involvement, and 3)
the number of reported users involved in development
steps. For this latter reporting element, because many
projects did not report the numbers of users involved,

Figure 3 Time plot for patient decision aid projects and other personal health tool projects by the latest year of
publication.**For projects with only 1 publication, the latest year is the year of that publication. For multipublication projects,
the latest year of publication is the latest year across all publications about that project. Because the bulk of our searches were
conducted in 2014, the counts for the 2012–2016 category are likely undercounts.

Vaisson et al.
267

we present data only from projects in which a specific
number of users was reported. When we report the
median number of users involved in particular develop-
ment steps, this is the median among projects that
reported how many users were involved. Further details
not reported below are available in Supplementary
Appendix 8.

Overall

Among projects that described at least 1 development
step (n = 348), 89% reported at least 1 step for under-
standing users, 91% for developing/refining prototype,
and 93% for observing users interacting with the proto-
type. Patient decision aid projects with at least 1 step of
development (n = 283) reported a median of 5 steps
(interquartile range 4–7, full range 1–11) of the 12 possi-
ble development steps. Other personal health tool proj-
ects (n = 65) reported a median of 6 steps (interquartile
range 4–8, full range 2–12). Patient decision aid projects
reported involving users in a median of 2 steps (inter-
quartile range 1–3, full range 0–7), whereas other per-
sonal health tool projects reported involving users in a
median of 3 steps (interquartile range 2–5, full range 0–
8). Of all 348 projects that described development, 261
reported a specific number of users involved. Within
these 261 projects, 201 patient decision aid projects

involved a median of 39 users (interquartile range 23–
82, full range 1–1210), and 60 other personal health tool
projects involved a median of 35 users (interquartile
range 16–65, full range 2–3770). Tables 2 and 3 provide
details by development steps.

Iteration

Most projects reported iterative development processes
(74% of patient decision aid projects, 92% of other per-
sonal health tool projects). The median number of itera-
tive cycles was 3 (interquartile range: 2–4) for patient
decision aid projects and 3 (interquartile range: 2–3) for
other personal health tool projects. Changes between
versions of prototypes were described in 23% of reports
of patient decision aid projects and 52% of reports of
other personal health tool projects.

Users Involved

Primary users: patients, family members, caregivers,
surrogates. Most patient decision aid projects (95%)
and other personal health tool projects (98%) reported
involving
individuals
who
previously,
currently,
or
potentially will face the health issue. Most of these users
were reported as currently facing the health issue
(85% for patient decision aid projects and 94% for

Table 2 Development Steps: Steps and Users’ Involvement

Development Steps Reported
Users Reported as Being
Involved in Step(s)

Patient
Decision Aid Projects
(n = 283),
n (%)

Other Personal
Health
Tool Projects
(n = 65), n (%)

Patient
Decision Aid Projects
(n = 283),
n (%)

Other Personal
Health Tool
Projects (n = 65),
n (%)

Understanding user
Literature review
230 (81)
41 (63)
5 (2)
0 (0)
Observation of existing processes
(e.g., ethnography)
35 (12)
30 (46)
18 (6)
27 (42)

Formal needs assessment
43 (15)
23 (35)
38 (13)
22 (34)
Informal needs assessment
133 (47)
47 (72)
110 (39)
42 (65)
Developing/refining prototype
Develop and/or validate underlying model
47 (17)
3 (5)
0 (0)
0 (0)
Storyboarding/wireframing
69 (24)
39 (60)
11 (4)
13 (20)
Adapt/translate tool
95 (34)
12 (18)
4 (1)
0 (0)
Content/format review prior to prototyping
157 (55)
33 (51)
48 (17)
21 (32)
Prototype development
248 (88)
62 (95)
53 (19)
9 (14)
Observing prospective user’s interaction
with prototype
Content/format review after
189 (67)
33 (51)
101 (36)
24 (37)
Pilot/usability testing
231 (82)
58 (89)
208 (73)
58 (89)
Second pilot/usability testing
32 (11)
12 (18)
29 (10)
9 (14)

268

other personal health tool projects). Surrogate decision
makers were involved in 2% of patient decision aid
projects and 0% of other personal health tool projects.
Caregivers and family members or friends were involved
in 5% and 11% of patient decision aid projects, respec-
tively, and 22% and 20% of other personal health tool
projects. As we reported elsewhere, 16% of patient deci-
sion aid projects specifically involved members of vul-
nerable populations in the development process.31

Clinician users. Many patient decision aid projects
(63%) and other personal health tool projects (55%)
reported involving clinician users, meaning health care
professionals who might interact with the tools in differ-
ent ways than primary users. The median numbers of
clinician users involved in total were 10 (interquartile
range: 5–22) and 9 (interquartile range: 4–20), respec-
tively. Clinician user involvement was typically not
reported with the same level of detail as primary user
involvement. Teams consulted clinician users mainly
before developing a first prototype (64% patient deci-
sion aid projects, 64% other personal health tool proj-
ects) and/or between prototype versions (69% patient

decision aid projects, 53% other personal health tool
projects). Most projects reported changing the tool
based on clinicians’ feedback (73% patient decision aid
projects, 72% other personal health tool projects).

Advisory panels, organizations, and expert panels. Nine
percent of patient decision aid projects and 6% of other
personal health tool projects reported working with a
formal patient, family, caregiver, or surrogate user advi-
sory panel. In addition, in patient decision aid and other
personal health tool projects, 12% and 14%, respec-
tively, reported working with at least 1 formal, named
patient organization, and 2% in each group reported
working with at least 1 formal, named health profes-
sional organization. Forty-seven percent of patient deci-
sion aid projects and 38% of other personal health tool
projects reported engaging an expert panel that might
include academic researchers, health professionals, and
experts in other areas (e.g., plain language experts, web
developers, designers).

Recruitment
and
compensation. Most
(82%)
patient
decision aid projects recruited convenience samples of

Table 3 Development Steps: Number of Users Involved

Number of Users Involved in the Step(s), When Numbers of Users Were Reported

Patient Decision Aid
Projects: Median (IQR) (Range)
(n Projects Reporting
Number of Users Involved
in This Step/283 Projects)

Other Personal Health Tool
Projects: Median (IQR) (Range)
(n Projects Reporting Number
of Users Involved in
This Step/65 Projects)

Understanding user
Literature review
—
—
Observation of existing processes
(e.g., ethnography)
36 (12–56) (4–605) (n = 9)
13 (9–18) (1–100) (n = 10)

Formal needs assessment
24 (16–44) (8–400) (n = 24)
20 (15–23) (8–3710) (n = 13)
Informal needs assessment
30 (15–43) (3–1119) (n = 38)
18 (9–33) (1–325) (n = 22)
Developing/refining prototype
Develop and/or validate
underlying model
—
—

Storyboarding/wireframing
—
10 (5–13) (2–18) (n = 7)
Adapt/translate tool
35 (33–38) (30–40) (n = 2)
—
Content/format review prior
to prototyping
14 (8–25) (2–153) (n = 16)
16 (15–18) (5–20) (n = 8)

Prototype development
10 (6–26) (1–44) (n = 14)
10 (2–11) (1–44) (n = 5)
Observing prospective users’
interactions with prototype
Content/format review after
20 (9–30) (1–90) (n = 61)
8 (7–10) (4–23) (n = 14)
Pilot/usability testing
28 (15–45) (1–605) (n = 161)
12 (6–20) (1–202) (n = 49)
Second pilot/usability testing
17 (12–40) (7–188) (n = 26)
6 (4–13) (1–18) (n = 7)

IQR, interquartile range.

Vaisson et al.
269

primary users. About half (55%) of the other personal
health tool projects recruited primary users with this
method. Five percent of patient decision aid projects
did not report how they recruited primary users; 32%
of other personal health tool projects did not report
recruitment methods.
Primary users were compensated in 27% of patient
decision aid projects and 26% of other personal health
tool projects. Cash was the most common form of com-
pensation. Cash was used in 19% of patient decision aid
and 12% of other personal health tool projects.

Type of user involvement in development steps. For con-
tent and format reviews before and after the prototype
development, projects reported involving primary users
in groups, for example, in focus groups (20% for patient
decision aid projects, 25% for other personal health tool
projects). Otherwise, users were typically involved indi-
vidually, for example, in interviews.

Degree of involvement. Primary users were reported as
being involved as participants in studies in nearly every
project (more than 99% of patient decision aid projects;
97% of other personal health tool projects). They were
sometimes reported as being involved in an advisory
capacity (27% patient decision aid projects versus 22%
other personal health tool projects). Fewer projects
reported involving users on an advisory panel (9% ver-
sus 6%) or as partners on the research or development
team (8% versus 14%).

Methods of eliciting users’ responses to the tool. User-
centered design methods often include direct observa-
tion of users (e.g., ethnographic observation prior to
developing a tool, conducting usability testing with
methods such as think aloud) and asking users their opi-
nions (e.g., focus groups, interviews, surveys), whereas
more traditional health services research tends toward
indirect observation of users by assessing the effects of a
tool on users (e.g., testing knowledge and decisional
conflict in pre-post studies or randomized controlled
trials). Therefore, in addition to the mode of involve-
ment, we also observed the nature of involvement.
Most patient decision aid projects (75%) and other
personal health tool projects (94%) reported asking
users their thoughts and opinions of a tool. Forty-one
percent of patient decision aid projects and 72% of
other personal health tool projects reported observing
users interacting with the tool. Eighty-eight percent of
patient decision aid projects and 45% of other personal

health tool projects reported assessing the impact of the
tool on users.

Evaluation. In capturing data about what tools had
been evaluated, we first determined whether projects
assessed any preliminary metrics such as feasibility,
acceptability, satisfaction with the tool, usability, or
other metrics typically measured before launching a trial
or product. Sixty-six percent of patient decision aid
projects reported conducting this type of evaluation of
preliminary metrics, as did 89% of other personal health
tool projects. We then determined whether the project
had conducted any evaluation of the efficacy of the tool
(for example, via an explanatory randomized controlled
trial) or the effectiveness of the tool (for example, via a
pragmatic trial). Eighty-nine percent of patient decision
aid projects reported conducting this type of efficacy or
effectiveness evaluation, as did 45% of other personal
health tool projects. Finally, we determined whether
projects assessed the implementation of tools in any
way, including their integration into routine care, bar-
riers and facilitators to usage, uptake, and usage statis-
tics. Nine percent of patient decision aid projects and
12% of other personal health tool projects reported
having evaluated the implementation of tools.

Discussion

Responding to a call for more information on user-
centered design for patient decision aid development in
the International Patient Decision Aid Standards,32–34

this systematic review offers a portrait of patient deci-
sion aid design and development using human- or user-
centered design as a methodological framework, present-
ing related projects that explicitly applied that frame-
work alongside as realistic context. We offer 4 main
observations.
First, there is substantial variation in the design and
development processes of patient decision aids and in
user involvement in those processes. For new patient
decision
aid
developers,
our
synthesis
of
practices
reported in the literature may serve as a useful guide for
project planning. For new and existing developers, this
synthesis may offer formal or informal benchmarks.
Based on our data, a patient decision aid project that
prioritized user involvement at a moderate to high level
would involve users in formal or informal needs assess-
ment, reviewing draft content and format prior develop-
ing a prototype, developing a prototype, reviewing
content and format after a prototype is developed, and
pilot testing or usability testing. The number of users

270

involved in each step could be on the order of 1 to 3
dozen people.
Second, our findings suggest that other personal
health tool projects explicitly applying user- or human-
centered design may involve users more often and ear-
lier. This finding aligns with definitions and standards of
user-centered design, which specify that such a process
must incorporate users’ needs early and throughout an
iterative process.6,10 A patient decision aid project that
aimed to involve users on a level of a human- or user-
centered design process would therefore likely differ
from the process described in the previous paragraph in
4 ways. First, it would include more user research. User
research could include ethnographic observation or
other means of understanding how people approach
health decisions intuitively and the contexts in which
health decisions are made, including, for example, finan-
cial, social, and family contexts. Second, projects might
involve users in storyboarding or wireframing to include
users’ insights in early drafts prior to developing a full
prototype. Seeking such feedback earlier using media as
simple as pencil and paper sketches35–37 may be cost-
and time-effective by allowing for changes before signifi-
cant investment in developing the patient decision aid.
Third, projects could conduct preliminary evaluations
by asking users for their feedback (for example, via
semistructured interviews, focus groups, or surveys),
observing users interacting with prototype patient deci-
sion aids (for example, via think aloud), and including
specific questions during user testing about what users
understood from the prototype and how it made them
feel about the decision. Fourth, and finally, projects
could be more iterative and report changes between
iterations. Reporting on changes between versions serves
multiple purposes. It provides a record of concepts and
ideas that have been attempted and how users responded
to them, helps explain the design rationale for the final
version,38 and incentivizes rigorous iterative practices in
which teams make efficient use of users’ time and
expertise.
Third, there may be room for all projects to involve
patient users and clinician users more in advisory or
partnership roles. Patient participation and engagement
in research teams has been recently encouraged and
required by national funding bodies in the United
States and elsewhere.39–41 As partnerships take time to
build, our systematic review of the existing literature
might simply be too early to observe the effects of these
initiatives.
Finally, the findings of this study support previous
calls
for
more
complete
reporting
of
design
and

development
processes
of
patient
decision
aids.25

Guidelines may be needed to structure such reporting.

Limitations

Our review has 3 main limitations. First, like all sys-
tematic reviews, our original data were limited to what
was reported in publications. This limitation may be
especially important in our review given we were seeking
data about development processes, which are reported
in different ways and sometimes with unclear or mini-
mal details. It is possible that, in some cases, project
teams undertook a development step or involved users
without reporting it. It is also possible that publication
bias occurred if those who published about their process
tended to have more user involvement. We chose to
require explicit reporting of steps and user involvement
because we posit that when authors take methodological
steps seriously, they are more likely to ensure that such
steps are reflected in publications about their project.
We deliberately used an expansive search strategy and
made concerted efforts to contact all authors to maxi-
mize opportunities to capture all relevant data. Analyses
of authors’ responses for 60% of projects suggested very
low rates of data omission (2.7%) or error (0.25%) in
our data extraction process. However, we cannot be cer-
tain that the low rates of omission or error observed in
these projects also apply to the other 40% of projects.
Second, there are limits to the context we offer by
synthesizing other personal health tool projects. User-
centered design has been applied more in cases such as
a person using a wheelchair or navigating a website. In
such cases, the user’s interaction with the tool is likely
easier for a designer or researcher to observe directly.
Patient decision aids, on the other hand, are designed to
facilitate processes that are largely internal (e.g., learn-
ing, decision making) and difficult to observe directly.
To observe processes in patient decision aids, teams
may use approaches such as think aloud and ensure
interviews include more specific questions about how
someone interpreted elements of the prototype (e.g., the
presented potential benefits and harms of each option)
and how it made them feel to interact with those
elements.
Lastly, although it is reasonable to suggest that user-
centered design methods may help ensure that tools
such as patient decision aids are well-adapted to their
intended users, this study was not intended to evaluate
the quality of development processes of patient decision
aids, only to describe them. We note that even among
other personal health tool projects, users were not

Vaisson et al.
271

involved to the maximum extent. Our review did not
study barriers to user engagement in development.
Future studies may focus on such questions.

Conclusions

Patient decision aid projects and other personal health
tool projects involve users during their design and
development processes in a wide variety of ways. By
systematically cataloging and synthesizing these pro-
cesses, we offer descriptive portraits to inform future
practice and research. Between these 2 groups of proj-
ects, differences may exist regarding the stage of invol-
vement, the methods of eliciting users’ responses to
the tool, and the timing of users’ involvement. Some
of these differences may reflect differences between the
types and purposes of tools and traditions in different
domains. Other differences may offer opportunities
for learning and improvement. Our data set is publicly
available alongside this article to allow further analy-
ses by interested readers. Future research should detail
design and development processes. Improving our
understanding of how to optimize user involvement
within
resource
constraints
may
serve
to
further
improve personal health tools’ quality, health decision
making, and health.