Upgrading physical activity counselling in primary
care in the Netherlands

Renée Verwey1,2,*, Sanne van der Weegen1, Marieke Spreeuwenberg1,
Huibert Tange3, Trudy van der Weijden3, and Luc de Witte1,2

1Department of Health Services Research (HSR), School for Public Health and Primary Care (CAPHRI),
Faculty of Health Medicine and Life Sciences, Maastricht University, Maastricht, The Netherlands,
2Research Centre for Technology in Care, Zuyd University of Applied Sciences, Heerlen, The Netherlands,
and 3Department of General Practice (HAG), School for Public Health and Primary Care (CAPHRI), Faculty
of Health Medicine and Life Sciences, Maastricht University, Maastricht, The Netherlands

Summary

The systematic development of a counselling protocol in primary care combined with a monitoring and
feedback tool to support chronically ill patients to achieve a more active lifestyle. An iterative user-
centred design method was used to develop a counselling protocol: the Self-management Support
Programme (SSP). The needs and preferences of future users of this protocol were identiﬁed by ana-
lysing the literature, through qualitative research, and by consulting an expert panel. The counselling
protocol is based on the Five A’s model. Practice nurses apply motivational interviewing, risk commu-
nication and goal setting to support self-management of patients in planning how to achieve a more
active lifestyle. The protocol consists of a limited number of behaviour change consultations inter-
twined with interaction with and responses from the It’s LiFe! monitoring and feedback tool. This
tool provides feedback on patients’ physical activity levels via an app on their smartphone. A summary
of these levels is automatically sent to the general practice so that practice nurses can respond to this
information. A SSP to stimulate physical activity was deﬁned based on user requirements of care pro-
viders and patients, followed by a review by a panel of experts. By following this user-centred approach,
the organization of care was carefully taken into account, which has led to a practical and affordable
protocol for physical activity counselling combined with mobile technology.

Key words: physical activity, self-management, remote sensing technology, primary care nursing

INTRODUCTION

Increased physical activity of people with chronic diseases
has positive effects on prognosis and quality of life (World
Health Organization, 2009; World Health Organization,
2010). It is, however, a challenge to adhere to guidelines
for healthy exercise (Heijmans et al., 2010; NISB, 2010).

By integrating physical activity counselling into routine
practice, primary care providers can support patients in
meeting this challenge (Eakin et al., 2000; Khan et al.,
2011). The majority of chronically ill people in the
Netherlands are treated by practice nurses, supervised by
their general practitioner (GP). The effects of lifestyle

Health Promotion International, 2016;31:344–354
doi: 10.1093/heapro/dau107

Advance Access Publication Date: 23 December 2014

counselling depend mainly on the degree to which patients
succeed in executing their self-management role. Therefore,
healthcare providers should involve patients in self-
management decisions and seek lifestyle interventions that
ﬁt the motivation, needs and capabilities of the patient
(Bodenheimer et al., 2002a, b; CBO, 2011).
Physical activity counselling has the potential to pro-
duce increases in activity levels in the short term
(Neidrick et al., 2012). However, the evidence about
which methods of exercise promotion work best in the
long term is still limited (Foster et al., 2009). Although pri-
mary care providers recognize the importance of physical
activity counselling (Bock et al., 2012; Orrow et al., 2012),
numerous barriers need to be addressed. The Five A’s
model (Assess, Advise, Agree, Assist and Arrange) is a
counselling protocol that could be helpful in supporting
self-management in a primary care setting (Whitlock
et al., 2002; Glasgow et al., 2006). In the Five A’s speciﬁed
model for physical activity promotion, the care provider
ﬁrst assesses the patient’s current physical activity level,
as well as any contraindications to physical activity and
the patient’s readiness to change, followed by providing
a tailored counselling message and an agreement with
the patient by collaborating on a plan of action. Finally,
the care provider provides educational materials to sup-
port change and arranges a follow-up visit to motivate
the patient and to evaluate progress (Peterson, 2007;
Meriwether et al., 2008). The Five A model is based
on several behaviour change theories, namely the Theory
of Planned Behaviour (Ajzen, 1991), the Goal-Setting
Theory (Latham and Locke, 1991), the Self-Determination
Theory (Deci and Ryan, 2002) and Motivational
Interviewing (Miller and Rollnick, 2002). The most com-
mon method of physical activity promotion is verbal
advice, followed by print- and computer-based interven-
tions (Orrow et al., 2012). Computer-based physical activ-
ity interventions may be an effective way to provide
physical activity counselling without increasing the time
demands on primary care providers (Marcus et al.,
2009). Although computer-based counselling may be feas-
ible, the circumstances of use with respect to the target
group and its integration into the care process have to be
clariﬁed during the development of new technology
(Becker et al., 2011; Black et al., 2011). Therefore, it is re-
commended to develop technology in a user-centred way
and to collect user requirements by composing use cases
(Jacobson, 2007). Use cases are narrative scenario’s with
the description of four main elements (PACT): the people
involved (P), their activities (A), the context (C) and the
technology used (T) (Huis in ‘t Veld et al., 2010).
Interventions incorporating technology that is readily
accessible on a daily basis for monitoring activity levels,

such as computers or mobile phones, may facilitate long-
term follow-up (Tudor-Locke and Lutes, 2009; Neidrick
et al., 2012) and may also support care providers to
coach
patients
in
establishing
behavioural
change
(Broekhuizen et al., 2012). We therefore developed a mon-
itoring and feedback tool called It’s LiFe! with the aim of
integrating this tool in physical activity counselling in pri-
mary care. The basic ideas behind the tool were providing
an objective measurement of physical activity via an
accelerometer for patients and their care providers, and
collaborative goal setting and automatic feedback via an
application on a smartphone, combined with human feed-
back from the care provider.
It is not known how to combine the use of this mobile
technology with face-to-face counselling based on the Five
A’s model, and how this combination could be integrated in
routine practice, according to primary care providers and pa-
tients. Therefore, the following research questions were posed

• How can the use of the monitoring and feedback tool
to stimulate physical activity be integrated in a counsel-
ling protocol based on the Five A’s model?

• How can this counselling protocol be integrated in the
care process?

METHODS

Approach
The project focused on patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) or type 2 diabetes and their
care providers in primary care. A user-centred design pro-
cess (Figure 1) was followed to elicit the requirements of
the counselling protocol and the tool. Two patient repre-
sentatives, from the Netherlands Asthma Foundation and
the Dutch Diabetes Association, participated in the research
group to provide feedback on every development stage.
This group consisted of researchers with expertise in nurs-
ing, movement science, psychology, family medicine and
implementation science.
The arrows in Figure 1 indicate that the development
was an iterative process. This paper reports the results
from phase A (Stages 1–3), in which the objective was
to establish a counselling protocol named the Self-
management Support Programme (SSP), based on current
insights from the literature, preferences of users and com-
ments from experts. Simultaneously in collecting the user
requirements for the SSP also the user requirements for the
tool were collected (van der Weegen et al., 2010).

Recruitment and respondents
Sixteen care providers, representing all the involved disci-
plines working in primary care and treating patients with

345

COPD and/or type 2 diabetes, 15 patients and 12 experts
were recruited by a snowball sampling approach through
the network of researchers and the patient representatives.

Data collection and analysis
The user requirements for the SSP were collected over
three stages, from November 2010 until December
2011. Various qualitative methods of data collection
were used (Figure 1).

Stage 1
Stage 1 started with a literature review to identify the users
and their context, resulting in a user and context descrip-
tion. Users were projected into the Five A’s model and its
contextual restraints were identiﬁed. Based on care stan-
dards for COPD and type 2 diabetes care, a use case was
written by the researchers, and this document was veriﬁed
by the patient representatives and by two physicians and a
nurse practitioner. The use case consisted of a description of
patients, healthcare providers and assumptions about care
as usual, plus the basic ideas of the technology, followed by
a narrative story of the course of all consultations in which
all elements of the Five A’s model were incorporated, in-
cluding fragments of the conversation between a patient
who started to use the tool and his practice nurse and GP.

Stage 2
During Stage 2, the care providers were interviewed
about the use case in two rounds (Polit and Beck,
2008). In the ﬁrst round we interviewed a cross section

of professionals involved in the care for COPD and
type 2 diabetes patients, in the second round only those
responsible for self-management support. In the ﬁrst
round, 11 care providers were interviewed with open
questions. In the second round, ﬁve practice nurses
were interviewed with more speciﬁc questions that
emerged from the open interviews (Table 1, interview
questions) and photos of a prototype of the tool were
shown to them. The user requirements for the SSP were
completed with results from interviews with 15 patients
with COPD or type 2 diabetes. Interviews were audio-
taped and transcribed. Open coding was applied to the
ﬁrst four interviews by two reviewers separately (R.V.,
S.v.d.W.), using the QSR NVivo 2 software package.
Differences were discussed and revised based on mutual
agreement, and a coding scheme was determined. The re-
maining interviews were coded accordingly and analysed
following a directed content analysis method (Hsieh and
Shannon, 2005). As a next step, the results of the inter-
views were discussed in the research team together with
the patient representatives and with the technical team.
Decisions about the issues were made based on progres-
sive insight and in mutual consensus. Based on the results
of the interviews and the minutes of these meetings the
global use case was speciﬁed.

Stage 3
During Stage 3, the speciﬁc elaboration of the Five A’s
model towards physical activity promotion was used to

Fig. 1: The It’s LiFe! User Centred Design process.

346

write detailed instructions for practice nurses per consult-
ation (Peterson, 2007; Meriwether et al., 2008), and the
counselling techniques were speciﬁed according to the be-
haviour change techniques as deﬁned in the taxonomy of

Abraham and Michie (Abraham and Michie, 2008).
Subsequently, 12 experts with a wide range of expertise
were asked for their opinion about this draft SSP
(Table 2). This detailed counselling protocol, with a

Table 1: Interview questions

Stage 2: Interview topics ﬁrst round
What does it mean: maintaining a healthy lifestyle (physical activity) while suffering from type 2 diabetes or from COPD?
What does “care as usual” for people with type 2 DM or COPD look like in this region of the Netherlands and what new
developments could interact with the project?
How do careproviders support self-management of patients with DM type 2 or COPD concerning physical activity, which disciplines
are involved in this process and how do they cooperate with each other?
What is the opinion of careproviders towards the main aspects of the Self-management Support Program: motivational interviewing,
risk assessment and goal setting?
What is the general attitude of careproviders to using technology in health care and what are their ideas about using technology to
support self-management in maintaining a healthy lifestyle?
How do careproviders deﬁne their role when using such technology?
What is the opinion of careproviders towards the global use case?

Interview topics second round
What is the opinion of practice nurses towards the speciﬁed use case?
Which speciﬁc patient characteristics should be taken into account when developing the SSP and which patients could beneﬁt most
from this way of supporting self-management using the intended technology?
What is the usual content and duration of the consultations and how could the practice nurse give more attention towards supporting
the physical activity of patients?
What is the opinion of practice nurses about applying behavior change techniques such as risk assessment and motivational
interviewing?
How would practice nurses like to use the technology and what is their opinion about giving feedback in between consultations?
What enhancing and constraining factors do practice nurses foresee when implementing this program?

Stage 3: Questions to the experts
What is your opinion about:
• The self-management support programme?
• The developed technology, the It’s LiFe! tool?
• The combination of both?
Are speciﬁc aspects with regard to exercise of patients with type 2 diabetes and COPD taken into account?
What do you think of the description of the current demand and supply of care for those patients? Do you have any suggestions for
additions or improvements that may affect the application of the intervention?
Is becoming more physically active optimally supported with this intervention in the two groups? Do you have any ideas for additions
or improvements?
Is self-management optimally supported by the target groups? Do you have any ideas for additions or improvements?
The consultations follow a certain approach, called the Five A model. What is your opinion about this model? Do you ﬁnd this model
suitable for this situation?
The intervention includes several behaviour modiﬁcation techniques. What is your opinion? Are those applicable in this context? Is it
possible to integrate these techniques in the consultations?
The intervention will be carried out by the practice nurse. What do you think of that choice? Do you consider practice nurses capable
to perform this after the described introduction of the intervention?
The intervention includes some (extra) consultations with the practice nurse. What do you think of that? Is this enough or too much?
Is this feasible?
In some cases, the consultation approach will also be performed during the regular consultations, which than will take 10 min longer.
Is this feasible? Is this desirable?
What do you think of the period (6 months) and the distribution of the consultations over this period?
What is your opinion about the way the intervention will be introduced to the practice nurses? Do you recommend speciﬁc attention
to certain aspects?

347

description of the activities of the patient and the practice
nurse, instructions for the course of the consultations and
a theoretical underpinning of the main issues, was the
input for the experts’ consultation. It was commented
upon by a group of 12 experts during face-to-face and tele-
phone consultations and mail correspondence. Using open

questions their opinion was asked about the aim of the
protocol, the number and content of consultations needed,
the counselling techniques and about the introduction of
the protocol to practice nurses (Table 1, interview ques-
tions). Expert consultations were audiotaped and summar-
ized and a member check was carried out, by asking the

Table 2: Characteristics of the respondents

Care providers

Overall (n = 16)
First round (n = 11)
Second round (n = 5)

Stage 2. Interviews
Profession
Number
Number
Number
Practice Nurse (PN)
7
2
5
Diabetes Nurse (DN)
2
2
0
Pulmonary Nurse (PN)
2
2
0
General Practitioner (GP)
3
3
0
Physiotherapist (PT)
2
2
0
Age
Years
42 (26–58)
42 (26–58)
42 (29–53)
Sex
Number
Number
Number
Male
4
4
0
Female
12
7
5
Treating patients with
Number
Number
Number
COPD
6
6
0
DM
4
2
2
Both
6
3
3

Patients

Overall (n = 15)
First round (n = 8)
Second round (n = 7)

Diagnosed with
Number
Number
Number
COPD
7
4
3
DM
8
4
4
Age
Years
62 (46–76)
63 (55–76)
62 (46–72)
Sex
Number
Number
Number
Male
6
4
2
Female
9
4
5

Stage 3. Expert consultation
Experts

Expertise
Number (n12)

Movement science, physical activity
3
Primary care
2
Health education and promotion and use of e-health
2
Medical specialists in COPD and diabetic care
2
Self-management
1
Motivational interviewing
1
Goal setting
1

348

experts if they agreed upon this summary. Subsequently the
results of the expert consultations were discussed in the re-
search team together with the patient representatives. Based
on the consultations of the experts and the minutes of this
meeting, the counselling protocol was then adjusted into a
ﬁnal version, which is presented in this paper.

RESULTS

The results are reported based on the successive steps
which were taken during the stages.

Stage 1: the global use case
The practice nurse, in collaboration with the GP, identiﬁes
patients who could beneﬁt from increased physical activ-
ity. These patients are invited for an extra consultation to
assess their physical activity and their motivation to
change, to inform them about the risks of a sedentary life-
style and to provide them with the tool. In the following 3
months, another four consultations take place to support
patients with setting concrete personal activity goals, and
giving feedback on the physical activity results, which are
accessible to the practice nurse via a secured website.

Stage 2: a detailed use case based on interviews
with care providers
The characteristics of the interviewees are summarized in
Table 2. The mean age of the professional respondents was
42, most were female and 10 out of 16 treated both COPD
and diabetes patients. The results of the interviews were di-
vided into three themes: care as usual, the SSP and the com-
bination of the tool with the SSP. The subjects which were
discussed more often (main issues) are summarized in Table 3.

Care as usual
Barriers for paying attention to physical activity during
regular consultations are co-morbidity or other limitations
of patients, and the assumption of the respondents that
nowadays the patient decides on the topics of the consult-
ation. Many patients do not perceive physical activity as
an important issue and tend to overestimate their own
physical activity.
Respondents agreed that the standard for healthy exer-
cise (30 min moderate intensity per day, 5 days per week)
is an unrealistic goal for most patients, and nobody uses a
standardized assessment for physical activity.
According to the respondents, people with COPD
(GOLD 1 and 2) experience a low disease burden. They
adapt unnoticed to their declining physical condition
and often perceive that they are doing pretty well. This
group could beneﬁt most from an active lifestyle.
Exacerbations and related hospitalizations are viewed as
trigger points to start a lifestyle intervention.

The SSP
Respondents all agreed that the SSP should focus on pa-
tients at an early stage of the disease, before the emergence
of potential co-morbidity. They indicated that giving the
practice nurse a central role in the SSP is right, although
the physiotherapists had doubts about their ability to ad-
equately assess the physical activity level. The majority
saw only a role for the physiotherapist in the case of severe
breathing problems of COPD patients. Also, the role of the
GP in lifestyle counselling was regarded as limited.

It is the task of the practice nurse, she is much better than
me at doing that; by the way, she has time for it.
(GP, aged 51, interview 9)

Motivational interviewing is considered a positive way of
approaching people with chronic diseases and this tech-
nique is often used. But respondents differed in deﬁning
this technique.

The patient sets the agenda of the consultation.
(PN, aged 57, interview 1)
I search for intrinsic motivation, tickle them: ‘Are you real-
ly feeling OK?’
(GP, aged 42, interview 11)

Most of the respondents were sceptical about the effects of
risk communication. Comments were that it is counter-
productive, that there are often too few clinical data avail-
able to clearly outline certain risk factors and that talking
about risks frightens people.
Although all respondents were positive about self-
management support, some suggested that there is a cat-
egory of patients who do not take responsibility for self-
management, but simply ask for clear directives. Overall,
however, giving straight advice is not seen as the best way
of supporting patients. Respondents indicated that collab-
orative goal setting is an essential part of counselling.
Most respondents were generally positive about the use
case, but they indicated that three or four extra consulta-
tions were far too many. Furthermore, a few practice
nurses were not enthusiastic at all about the focus on phys-
ical activity.

It is the responsibility of the patient to see to it that he or
she gets enough exercise. That is not my responsibility; I
have more than enough other tasks to do.
(DN, aged 34, interview 10)

Application of the tool within the SSP
Most respondents liked the idea that using the tool would
give both patient and practice nurse the ability to monitor
physical activity levels.

349

Table 3: Main issues about the use case

Stage 1. Global use case
Stage 2. Detailed use case
Stage 3. Draft protocol
Final SSP

Aim of the programme
Increase PA towards the norm
Increase PA, less towards the norm
and more focused on personal
abilities

More focus on PA in daily living, less
towards exercise and sports
Also prevent longer periods of continuous
inactivity

Approach
Professional driven
Professional driven
Professional and patient driven. More
ﬂexibility
More patient driven
More ﬂexibility
Patients’ characteristics
All COPD and DM patients
without severe
co-morbidities

All COPD and DM patients aged
<70 without severe co-morbidities
All COPD and DM patients (aged <70)
without severe co-morbidities
All COPD and DM patients (aged <70)
without severe co-morbidities, willing to
change their lifestyle
Assessment of physical
activity level
On professional indication
without standardized
assessment

Collaborative using a standardized
assessment and objective results of
the tool

Collaborative using a self-assessment
questionnaire and objective results of
the tool

Collaborative using a self-assessment
questionnaire and objective results of
the tool
When to apply the
programme
To all patients
Preferable at an early stage of the
disease
Preferable at an early stage of the disease
Every patient who is motivated

Which professional
applies the
programme

The general practitioner,
practice nurse and/or the
physiotherapist

Preferably the practice nurse
Practice nurse
Practice nurse

Which behaviour
change techniques
are used

Motivational interviewing
Risk communication
Goal setting

Motivational interviewing
Risk communication
Goal setting based on subjective
baseline measurement and
objective measurement by the tool

Motivational interviewing
Risk communication
Goal setting based on subjective baseline
measurement and objective
measurement by the tool, extended
with a dairy

Motivational interviewing
Risk communication
Goal setting based on subjective baseline
measurement and objective
measurement by the tool, extended with
a dairy
Time frame
3 months
3 months
3 months
6 months
How many
consultations and in
what way

5 (3–4 extra), 2 by telephone
4 (2–3 extra), all face-to-face
4 (2–3 extra), 2 by telephone or mail
depending on the preference of
the patient

Min 2 and max 3 (1–2 extra) number on
preference of the patient
2 by telephone or mail depending on the
preference of the patient
Monitoring and
feedback in between
consultations

Yes
No, but voluntary, depending on
preference of the practice nurse
Voluntary, depending on preference of the
patient/practice nurse and intermittent
automatic feedback by the tool

Voluntary, depending on preference of the
patient /practice nurse and intermittent
automatic feedback by the tool

350

With this tool I can give these patients something tangible
to help them improve their daily activity levels.
(PN, aged 47, interview 12)

They saw the added value compared with self-reported
activity, but practice nurses had doubts about giving
feedback in between consultations. Furthermore, they ar-
gued that the tool was probably more suitable for young-
er patients who are used to mobile technology. The most
important arguments against the SSP were a lack of time
and money. Respondents indicated that the programme
should be reimbursed by insurance companies, and al-
most every practice nurse complained about a heavy
caseload.
As a next step, the use case was speciﬁed and adjusted by

• adding a standardized questionnaire to assess the level
of physical activity of patients;

• specifying risk communication through an information
chart with both the advantages of an active lifestyle
and the disadvantages of a sedentary lifestyle;

• reducing the number of visits; and

• providing the patients with interactive sessions via the
tool instead of a real consultation, to inform them
about the pros and cons of physical activity, conﬁ-
dence, behaviour change strategies, self-efﬁcacy, family
and peer inﬂuences, enjoyment, activity choices and
environmental inﬂuences related to physical activity
(based on the PACE) (Calfas et al., 1997).

Stage 3: towards a ‘draft SSP’
Experts were, to a large extent, positive about the draft
SSP and the focus on stimulating physical activity in
daily life. Two experts emphasized the growing evidence
about the negative effects of long unbroken periods of
inactivity, which is also mentioned in the literature
(Yates et al., 2011). Comments were most critical about
the feasibility of the extra consultations, and the expertise
of practice nurses to apply motivational interviewing.
Another comment was that the programme was too direct-
ive and therefore not really supporting self-management
and not focusing on patients’ own needs and choices.
Given the feedback, the SSP was adjusted on the following
points by

• giving more attention towards personal abilities of pa-
tients and the need to avoid periods of continuous
inactivity;

• giving more clarity about the motivational interview-
ing technique and mainly focusing on patients who
are in the contemplation and preparation stages of

change of the transtheoretical model of behaviour
change (Prochaska et al., 1994);

• extending
the
programme
over
a
period
of
6 months (so that more than one regular consultation
is included);

• providing the patient with a leaﬂet with local facilities
for physical exercise;

• giving the programme more ﬂexibility (number and
timing of consultations) to follow the needs and prefer-
ences of the patients and

• supporting the patient with automatic feedback via the
tool so that the practice nurse can focus on giving per-
sonal feedback during consultations.

The end result: a SSP
The end result of Stage 3 of the requirements analysis is
summarized in the column ‘Final SSP’ in Table 3. The
combination of the programme with the tool is depicted
in Figure 2.
The aim of the SSP is to increase physical activity in
daily living and to prevent longer periods of continuous
inactivity. The programme is characterized by collabor-
ation between patient and practice nurse. It is a patient or-
iented, ﬂexible way to support self-management of all
COPD and type 2 diabetes patients who are willing to
change their lifestyle. During a maximum of one to three
extra consultations spread over a period of at least 6
months, the practice nurse performs an assessment of
the patient’s activity pattern using a self-assessment ques-
tionnaire, supported by information from a baseline meas-
urement and a diary supplied by the tool. The nurse
provides information about the risks of a sedentary life-
style and the beneﬁts of physical activity on disease prog-
nosis, using an information card. In collaboration with the
patient, an activity goal in minutes per day is set, based on
personal abilities. Both the practice nurse and interactive
sessions supplied by the tool facilitate the patient in writ-
ing a plan on how to become more physically active. The
patient receives a list of local exercise opportunities.
Feedback on physical activity performance is given by
the practice nurse during consultations, while the tool
gives automatic feedback on this performance in between.

DISCUSSION

We hypothesized that stimulating physical activity of
chronically ill patients in primary care could be improved
by using a physical activity counselling protocol together
with a monitoring and feedback tool. Practice nurses are
well aware of the need to stimulate physical activity,
but the necessary attention is lacking. It is expected

351

that through the integration of the monitoring and feed-
back tool in primary care, practice nurses will be more
focused on exercise promotion. The tool is equipped
with automated feedback based on predeﬁned and perso-
nalized activity goals. Further investigation should reveal
information about the best balance between this form of
feedback and the feedback given during consultations.
It remains a challenge to inform patients about the risk
of a sedentary lifestyle in such a way that patients take re-
sponsibility for this behaviour change. Success will largely
depend on the personal circumstances of patients; their
lifestyles are inﬂuenced by their culture and social status
and their understandings of physical exercise and how
they associate this with health issues (Perrin et al.,
2002). Furthermore, success will also depend on the com-
petences of practice nurses in performing the counselling
techniques. This is why the SSP gives directives about
the number and content of the consultations. If the SSP
succeeds in bringing about change, it is expected that
this will be sustained in the long term, because chronically

ill patients usually have a long-term relationship with their
practice nurse.
Different opinions were expressed about monitoring
physical activity results in between planned consultations,
notwithstanding the fact that the technology supports this.
Unfortunately, lifestyle counselling for chronically ill pa-
tients in the Netherlands is organized and reimbursed
based on regular scheduled consultations, not yet on sup-
porting self-management by continuous monitoring con-
ditions in collaboration with patients (Wagner et al.,
2001).
Some methodological limitations should be considered
when interpreting the ﬁndings of the study. The purpose-
ful recruitment of respondents ensures internal validity,
but the external validity is threatened because respondents
who participated had an innovative attitude towards tech-
nology. However, the expert consultation was undertaken
to enhance the external validity. A strength of the study
is that from the start of the development, future users
were involved in deﬁning the requirements for the SSP

Fig. 2: The ﬁnal SSP combined with the use of the tool.

352

(van Gemert-Pijnen et al., 2011). The circumstances of use
with respect to the target group and its integration into the
management process were investigated in a profound way
by collecting user requirements from both patient and care
provider’s perspective. This was achieved through an it-
erative development process characterized by ﬁnding a
match between evidence-based healthcare on the one
hand and practical and affordable care on the other. The
feasibility of the SSP will be tested in a pilot study in two
general practices followed by a randomized controlled
trial to test the effects of its use.