Participatory Design of Historytelling
Voice Assistance with Older Adults

Torben Volkmann(B), Michael Sengpiel, Rita Karam, and Nicole Jochems

Universit¨at zu L¨ubeck, Ratzeburger Allee 160, 23562 L¨ubeck, Germany

Abstract. Using information and communication technology (ICT)
becomes increasingly important for older adults, yet designers often fail
to develop usable software for this group, creating a strong incentive to
include older adults in a participatory development process. This paper
describes how older adults have been included throughout the develop-
ment process of a storytelling input component for the Historytelling
(HT) project, to attain the best possible usability for older adults. HT
provides a digital interactive platform for older adults to share life sto-
ries across generations, potentially improving their health and well-being
and follows the HCD+ (Human Centered Design for Aging) approach. 19
older adults (M = 68 years old) participated in three studies to analyze,
evaluate and design a storytelling voice assistance including a conver-
sational agent. They contributed substantially to the development of
the HT project by their involvement in the design process with meth-
ods adjusted to comprise characteristics of older adults, addressing three
central research questions regarding the type of voice input suitable for
older adults, the minimal requirements for a conversational agent and
the design of a suitable dialogue system.

Keywords: Human-centered design for aging · Participatory design ·
Voice user interface

1
Introduction

With the demographic change, the percentage of older adults steadily increases,
while new information and communication technology (ICT) emerges at an ever
faster pace. To attain the best possible usability for older adults, it has become
imperative to include them in the development process and value them as possi-
ble co-designers [32], for who would know better about their needs and desires?
The Historytelling project (HT) is a research project building on the
strengths of older adults, providing a tool to tell their life stories on a digi-
tal platform and to share them with other people. HT seeks to have a positive
inﬂuence on three levels: (1) On the societal level, HT fosters multi-perspective
historiography, (2) on the group level it strengthens family bonds and friend-
ships, and (3) on the individual level it provides a place to actively reminisce

c
⃝Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
M. Zieﬂe and L. A. Maciaszek (Eds.): ICT4AWE 2019, CCIS 1219, pp. 101–118, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-52677-1_6

102

and reach out to others. The HT-project addresses these levels with a digital
social platform speciﬁcally designed for and with older adults, giving them the
power to record, visualize and share their life stories.
One key aspect of HT is the actual storytelling, for which speech seems
to be the most natural channel, since stories are mostly passed on in face to
face conversations, which have potentially positive eﬀects on the listeners [2,15,
43]. Transferring this conversational element to technology in the best manner
possible is a particular challenge for the HT project.
Alongside the development of a voice component for HT, three research ques-
tions were explored: (Q1) Which type of voice input is suitable for older adults?
(Q2) What are minimal requirements for a conversational agent for older adults
in the context of Historytelling? (Q3) How could the conversational agent dia-
logue be designed?1 To answer these research questions and develop the actual
HT with voice input, we followed the HCD+ (Human Centered Design for Aging)
approach, focusing on participatory design and consideration of user character-
istics [32], and including older adults throughout the development process.

1.1
Voice Communication Technology

Schafer [30] as well as Cohen and Oviatt [5] specify advantages of voice input: it
is the natural way to communicate; it is usable even if the hands or eyes are busy;
it is accessible for handicapped people; sometimes natural language interaction
is preferred and “pronunciation is the subject matter of computer use” [5].
Schafer [30] also lists four challenges regarding voice communication technol-
ogy: (1) hardware/software implementation of the system, (2) synthesis for voice
output, (3) speech recognition and understanding voice input, and (4) usability
factors related to how humans interact with machines.
Digital voice assistants such as Amazon Echo, Google Home and Apple Siri
have recently been developed and marketed to increase the overall usage of
voice input systems. Insofar, the longstanding problem of speech recognition
and understanding of voice input has been solved for the consumer market, at
least in a narrow context [13,14,20] and new developments of neural networks
keep improving voice recognition [1].
Technologically, there are three options to handle voice input: audio record-
ing, speech-to-text processing and automatic transcription. Audio recording is
possible using various ICT, such as laptops, tablets and smartphones. Speech-
to-text processing converts spoken words instantaneously into text, whereas the
automatic transcription converts the recorded audio to text afterwards and is
often used for automatic interview transcription.

1 The ﬁrst two questions have already been addressed in the conference proceeding
[41], on which this chapter is largely based. Q3 has been a later addition to the
project and reﬂects our ongoing HT research and development.

Participatory Design of Historytelling Voice Assistance with Older Adults
103

1.2
Embodied Conversational Agents

With HTs focus on reminiscing and passing on life stories, users’ emotional reac-
tions should be expected and accommodated in the user interface (UI) design.
For example, avatars could respond to emotional stories with facial expressions
and gestures [35]. Sutcliﬀe [35] proposes a taxonomy based on 22 emotions, split
into reactions to events, agents (other people) and objects to design suitable
reactions of systems using the OCC (Ortny, Clore, Collins) model.
Embodied conversational agents (ECA) could integrate these emotions via
faces, gaining recent research attention [36]. ECAs are virtual characters having
the same properties as humans in face-to-face communication and they have
been integrated successfully into projects with older adults [4]. Older adults
followed ECAs instructions better than those provided by classic user interfaces
and they had a subjectively positive inﬂuence in recall tasks [27,37]. Isbister &
Doyle [16] developed a taxonomy relevant for the development of an ECA. It
consists of ﬁve categories to classify and evaluate ECAs: (1) Believability, (2)
Social interface, (3) Application domains, (4) Agency and computational issues
and (5) Production.

1.3
Cooperative Conversation Principle

Cooperation and dialogue principles play a central role in the design of an embod-
ied conversational agent [9,39], and communication theory can be very useful in
the development of computer systems in general, as a symbiosis of these ﬁelds
can help to enrich and clarify concepts of both [7,25]. Communication research
established maxims of communication to describe challenges and general goals
in the multiplicity of communication. Especially well-known and useful are the
communication maxims of Grice [12], stating that conversations are to some

Table 1. Grice’s maxims of the cooperative principle pursuing eﬀective communication.

104

extent purpose-oriented, are based on cooperative eﬀorts and consist of discon-
nected remarks where each participants recognizes a “mutually accepted direc-
tion”. They are divided into four maxims shown in Table 1: (1) quantity, (2)
quality, (3) relation and (4) manner. These maxims can guide the behavior of
conversation partners and contribute to a purposeful conversation.

1.4
Participatory Design Process

Participatory design is often seen as a third space of human computer interac-
tion, combining diﬀerent stakeholders’ (e.g. user and developer) knowledge to
attain new insights and perform new actions [23]. Participatory design involves
prospective users in a discussion about functionality, features or look-and-feel
of a future product to support fundamental design decisions. It is particularly
useful if the developers are not specialists in the observed ﬁeld. Involving older
adults in participatory design creates special demands on the methods. Some
conventional design methods may even be inappropriate for them [10].
For HT-development, the HCD+ approach [32] was used, emphasizing the
importance of involving users in every critical design step. HCD+ also provides
guidelines regarding the recruitment of participants, the atmosphere when work-
ing with older adults and required adaptations concerning the concrete execution
of methods.
Orso et al. [26] found in a literature review, that especially the following
methods are used when older adults are involved in designing interactive tech-
nology: (1) visual prompts (graphical representation of an abstract concept), (2)
experiencing (giving a direct ﬁrst-person perspective, i.e. with video sketches),
(3) hands on (evoking the reaction and opinion on a tool by providing a physical
object instead of a conceptual prototype) and (4) natural tasks (performing a
task that is similar to the ﬁnal context of use).
This paper describes the process of developing a storytelling input compo-
nent. Thus, older adults tested and evaluated current technological approaches
in the analysis phase. An experimental game was conducted to develop speciﬁc
design elements in the design and conception phase, a conversational agent’s dia-
logue sequence was developed and ﬁnally, a task-based evaluation of the devel-
oped interface was conducted.

2
Voice Input Analysis

2.1
Method

State-of-the-art software was reviewed to answer the ﬁrst research question
(“Which type of voice input is suitable for older adults?”), focusing on the three
diﬀerent input technologies. In the initial study, a task-based evaluation was
conducted due to the potential lack of computer literacy among older adults
[6,31]. Particularly in the beginning [44], interviews are an important method in
the HCD process.

Participatory Design of Historytelling Voice Assistance with Older Adults
105

Eight older adults, four men and four women, aged between 60 and 73
(M = 67.5, SD = 3.7) participated in the evaluation. They were recruited through
personal contacts, mailing lists and notice boards. Seven interviews took place
at the university, and one at home due to physical handicap.
The evaluation comprised three parts: (1) In the introduction, participants
introduced themselves and were asked about key aspects of their life and tech-
nology usage. (2) In the practical work phase, participants solved tasks using
three diﬀerent input approaches. “Google docs” was used to demonstrate the
speech-to-text capabilities and the software “Speak a Message” was used for
audio recording and transcription. Qualitative post-interviews were conducted
after every task. (3) As a follow-up, participants were asked for their favorite
input approach and ﬁlled in a questionnaire testing their computer literacy [31]
and aﬃnity for technology [11].

2.2
Results

All participants stated that an assistance system and better feedback by the
software would be appreciated. Since feedback preferences varied, visual and
auditory assistance should be combined. In particular, participants knew little
about current audio transcription methods and technical capabilities and were
positively surprised about the initial quality of the automatic transcription.
Participants’ computer literacy and aﬃnity towards technology varied
greatly. While some participants were conﬁdent using the presented software,
others needed more time to adjust to the tasks. Faster participants showed a
higher computer literacy and aﬃnity towards technology and stated that they
tend to ﬁnd solutions on their own when problems occur.
All (N = 8) participants had either a laptop (6) or a computer (3) at home
and used either a smartphone (5) or a cell phone (3). They used computers for an
average of 19 hours (SD = 7) per week, mainly for word processing, emailing and
targeted information search. They scored an average of M = 20.4 (SD = 4.17) on
the computer literacy scale (CLS, max = 26), which is low compared to a younger
group (M = 23.9), but high compared to other older adults (M = 14.4, [31]). Also,
they scored an average of M = 2.8 on the aﬃnity for technology interaction scale
(ATI, SD = 0.9, scale ranging from 1 to 6).

Participants. Participants stated that their technical diﬃculties were situa-
tional and rather hard to describe. When problems occurred, they would mainly
turn to friends or family or seek professional help. Three participants stated they
would ﬁrst try to ﬁnd the solution on their own, yet they also desired assistance
provided by the device itself. Alternatively, integrated tutorials as videos would
be appreciated, an approach that has been described by Sengpiel & Wandke [33]
among others. The practical part of the study was conducted with 7 of the 8
participants.

106

Speech-to-Text. Five of the seven participants had never used speech-to-text
input, and even the two participants who had used this technology before were
surprised by the accuracy of the results. Three participants declared that the
conversion from speech to text was too slow, impairing oral ﬂuency. Also, some
problems with speech were ambiguous and in some cases problems were not
noticed by the participants at all. The software was not “user friendly”, since
ﬁnding functionality was diﬃcult and it was not clear when the recording had
started.

Speech-to-Audio. Six of the seven participants had used a dictation device
to record audio before. Most notably, they liked the simplicity of dictation, the
option to replay and edit recordings later, and the authentically captured audio
atmosphere.

Transcription. No participant had used audio transcription before, but ﬁve
out of seven participants liked the option to have both, audio and text. The
unobtrusiveness of the method was particularly well received, for it allowed to
maintain oral ﬂuency. Even so, the quality of the initial transcription was crucial
for further adoption.

Preferred Input Method. Participants’ method preferences were largely
inﬂuenced by overall quality and usability aspects, while intended audience and
purpose were key drivers as well. If the goal was to quickly write a short story,
participants chose the speech-to-text input. The transcription technology was
preferred for longer, more meaningful stories. Table 2 shows the frequencies of
acceptance with participants indicating acceptance for one or more methods.
Since older adults preferred the transcription technology, it will be used for fur-
ther development.

Table 2. Frequencies of indicated acceptance for one or more input methods (N = 8).

3
Age-Appropriate Design

3.1
Method

To address the second research question (“What are minimal requirements for
a conversational agent for older adults in the context of Historytelling?”), a

Participatory Design of Historytelling Voice Assistance with Older Adults
107

A

B

C

D
D

Fig. 1. Photograph and sketch of the simulation game’s setup; A = Storyteller,
B = Assistant, C = Observer, D = Examiner.

workshop with three diﬀerent groups was conducted. Since participants were
expected to have lower computer literacy, technology was partly replaced by a
real-life example (see also [21,32]).
There are a variety of methods using real life examples as prototypes for
technology development, among them “invisible technology videos” [21], (Cul-
tural) Probes [3], and Forum Theater [29]. We used a simulation game often
used in educational context, more speciﬁcally a modiﬁed simulation game used
by Reich [18]. He states that the ideal simulation game consists of seven phases:
(1) introduction, (2) information and reading, (3) opinion-forming and strategy
planning, (4) interaction within the groups, (5) preparation of a plenum, (6)
conducting a plenum, (7) game evaluation. To save time in the workshop, the
phases two and three were removed and conducted by the researchers beforehand,
while phase seven was conducted by the researchers after the workshop. Nine
older women (M = 68) were recruited as participants through the “Deutscher
Frauenring e.V.”, a leading women’s organization in Germany. They took part in
three rounds within a larger full day workshop with multiple parts on the Uni-
versity campus. A desktop microphone and the software “Speak a Message”
running on a laptop with external screen and mouse was used to record their
interactions.
The simulation game lasted 15 min per round and was followed by seven
minutes for discussion. Then, participants were interviewed according to their

108

respective roles: (A) Storyteller: “Please read aloud this shortened version of
“Mother Hulda”. The assistant will help you with the recording.” (B) Assis-
tant:“Please simulate a voice assistant. Remain within your role and react to
anything you notice.” (C) Observer: “Please observe the interaction between the
assistant and the storyteller and ﬁll in this observation sheet.” The storyteller
and the assistant were positioned to have no direct eye contact, while the observer
was asked to sit seeing both, assistant and storyteller, as shown in Fig. 1.

3.2
Results

The simulation game revealed that participants were good at taking perspective,
eager to provide meaningful information and help with their expertise and had no
problems solving the tasks given. In the follow-ups there were lively discussions
about possible improvements, which will inform requirements for the assistance
system.

Participants.
All nine older adults aged between 57 and 77 (M = 68.3,
SD = 5,1) were women. They all owned a smartphone and seven used it fre-
quently. Also, eight of them used their computer or laptop frequently, mostly
for communication and targeted information search. As expected for their age
group, they scored relatively low on the computer literacy scale (CLS: M = 16,
SD = 3.67) but (unexpectedly) high on the aﬃnity for technology scale (ATI:
M = 3.8, SD = 0.8).

Simulation Game. Simulation game results are quite diverse between groups,
showing very diﬀerent behavior. For example, group 2 had a ﬂuent dialogue,
while the other groups had rather functional dialogues, e.g.:
Group 2: Assistant: “I am the voice assistant. My name is...” Storyteller: “I
am the storyteller. My name is... and I will start right away.”
Groups 1 & 3: Assistant: “I am the voice assistant. My name is... Have you
turned on your microphone?” Storyteller: “Yes, should I press the record but-
ton?” Assistant: “Yes”
Group 1 did not establish a ﬂuent dialogue, yet in the interview the storyteller
said she would have liked a more ﬂuent dialogue and better feedback from the
assistant, especially regarding recording quality.
Group 2 established a ﬂuent dialogue from the start and immediately reacted
to the assistant’s remark to speak louder. However, in the interview the story-
teller considered this interruption unpleasant and said she would prefer visual
help and remarks, for any interruption in the ﬂow of storytelling should be
avoided.
Group 3 started with a longer dialogue, but the storyteller had forgotten to
record it. The assistant said in the interview that she had noticed it, but did not
want to interrupt the storyteller, conceding afterwards that it would have been
better to do so. They also appreciated the dialogue in the beginning and wished
it could have been continued in the study as well as with the technical system
to be developed.

Participatory Design of Historytelling Voice Assistance with Older Adults
109

Resulting Interface Requirements. Based on the simulation game, some
requirements were developed for the assistance system: It should answer user
questions with a ﬂuent verbal dialogue, being able to assess events’ relevance
and adapt kind and timing of communication to avoid unnecessary interrup-
tions. In essence, the participants hoped for an assistance system behaving like
a polite competent human, perhaps pushing the boundaries of today’s technol-
ogy. Especially the recording ﬂow should be supported from start to ﬁnish. There
are further requirements for voice input communication in the literature, some
of which were pointed out in Sect. 1.1.

3.3
Resulting Interface

The resulting high-ﬁdelity prototype is based on an interface published in a 2019
paper [40] to ensure consistency within the HT project. Since the prototype could
not display dynamic content, interface elements had to remain static. Thus, some
interactions such as providing feedback in recording sessions were triggered by
the experimenter as Wizard of Oz. There were four kinds of feedback:

– Visualization based on a VU (volume units) meter (a standard display for
the signal level in audio equipment, see Fig. 2 top left).
– Warning messages (see Fig. 2 bottom).
– An earcon (ear + icon [34], which are “abstract, synthetic and mostly musical
tones or sound patterns that can be used in structured combination” [8]).
– A voice assistant in form of an ECA as described in Sect. 1.2 (see Fig. 2 top
right).

Fig. 2. Interface elements of the prototype developed. top left: VU meter used for audio
visualization, top right: Voice assistant Lisa speaking, bottom: warning message.

Assistance is provided in three standardized, consecutive steps. First, a prob-
lem in audio quality is visualized through the VU meter. If the user does not

110

perceive the problem and thus cannot deal with it, an earcon was played and
an additional warning message displayed, announcing that the recording will
be stopped. For the last step, the assistance varied. First there was no addi-
tional warning. In a second implementation, an avatar gave information about
the problem.

4
Dialogue Design

4.1
Method

To address the third research question on how a conversational agent’s dialogue
could be designed, a Hierarchical Task Analysis (HTA) regarding the story cre-
ation process of the Historytelling project was conducted. The (spoken) dia-
logue integrates all Historytelling components, assisting users in every step of
the (hi)storytelling process. HTA helps to visualize the various tasks and to
derive individual dialogue steps (see Fig. 3). From the HTA, three main aspects
emerged: (1) The user should be greeted by name. If the name is unknown, it
should be asked for to improve personalization of the assistant. (2) The assistant
should ask if the user wants to write or read a story. (3) If the user wants to
write a new story, the assistant should guide the user through the story creation
process described on the bottom of Fig. 3.
Additional challenges for the agent include older adults’ diﬃculties to remem-
ber details of their life stories while telling them. Naturally, the stories could
also trigger various (intense) emotions, necessitating adequate reactions from
the agent. These challenges have to be taken into account when developing the
dialogue system, which should also be evaluated based on the cooperative con-
versation principle.

4.2
Results

Based on the HTA, a dialogue sequence was developed bearing Paul Grice’s prin-
ciples of conversation [12] in mind, aiming to support older adults telling their
life stories. It consists of 29 items in multiple branches, creating the impression
of a conversation in natural language. First, a non-embodied chatbot was devel-
oped, that will later be enhanced to an embodied virtual agent. Items of the
dialogue sequence can be categorized as shown in Table 3.

First Implementation. The ﬁrst prototype of the dialogue system was imple-
mented based on web technologies. Its basic system model is shown in Fig. 4.
Mozilla Web Speech API [22] was used for automatic speech recognition and
speech synthesis via text-to-speech. Natural language understanding and gener-
ation were implemented using RiveScript [28], a scripting language developed for
chatbots. First tests with the user group showed that response times were often
too high and the designed dialogue sequence has to be improved iteratively.

Participatory Design of Historytelling Voice Assistance with Older Adults
111

Fig. 3. Hierarchical Task Analysis (HTA) for a conversational agent’s dialogue.

Table 3. Categorized items of the conversational agent’s dialogue sequence.

Fig. 4. Basic system model of the dialogue system; based on [17].

112

5
Evaluation

To assess usability and user experience of the interface, a Wizard of Oz evalua-
tion was conducted, where participants had to record a story with the provided
interface and assistance as described in Sect. 3.3. Two questions were essential
for this evaluation: (1) Has the assistance been perceived? (2) Which assistance
was preferred?
Eight older adults aged between 61 and 70 years (M = 66, SD = 3) took part
in the evaluation, ﬁve of them were male and three female, and six had already
participated in the ﬁrst study. They were recruited through personal contacts,
mailing lists and notice boards.
All evaluations took place at the university. A Christmas ﬂower and a candle
were placed around the participants and cake, water and hot drinks were served
[24] to create a comfortable atmosphere.
Figure 5 shows part of the room in which the evaluation was conducted.
Behind the participant (A), the wizard (B) and the recorder (C) were present
in the room. First, participants received questionnaires regarding demographic
information, aﬃnity for technology [11] and computer literacy [31]. Then, the
participants used the voice input interface with randomized order of assistance
interface. Before each run, the microphone was secretly placed too far from
the participants, causing a problem with audio quality, to justify the system
warning and trigger a response from the participants. Before the run of the
classic interface, the microphone cable was unplugged as well. After the recorded
interaction with the user interface, participants ﬁlled out the User Experience
Questionnaire (UEQ [19]). The second interface was tested accordingly. Lastly,
adjustment options and preferred interfaces were discussed in an interview.

5.1
Results

Overall, the Wizard of Oz prototype proved useful to test functionality that
would have been diﬃcult to implement, such as the transcription or the avatar.
The simple prototype allowed for participants’ immersion in the storytelling
process, although wizard response time was sometimes too high to satisfy par-
ticipants.

Participants. The eight older participants aged 61 to 70 years (M = 66, SD = 3,
ﬁve women and three men), mainly used computers, tablets and smart phones,
mostly for text editing, email, internet searching and surﬁng. Considering their
age, they had relatively high computer literacy (CLS: M = 21.8, SD = 4.1) and
high aﬃnity for technology (ATI: M = 3.1, SD = 1.1).

Awareness of Provided Feedback. All participants perceived the informa-
tion provided by the voice assistant about occurring problems, but they did not
engage in conversation. They used the provided VU meter for regular monitor-
ing, yet the earcon was often ignored or not perceived at ﬁrst, especially by those

Participatory Design of Historytelling Voice Assistance with Older Adults
113

Fig. 5. Photograph and sketch of the evaluation setup; based on [41].

immersed in storytelling. Only three of eight participants perceived the earcon
from the start, three more perceived it the second time. It seems that earcons
need to be learnt before use [8]. A combined approach considering the impor-
tance of the intervention might work best in this scenario. Giving the storyteller
information how to improve the quality of the audio signal, while maintaining
oral ﬂuency of the storytelling process, seems to be very challenging.

Preferred Assistance. The User Experience Questionnaire (UEQ) revealed
a strong preference for voice assistance, but only if feedback was triggered on
time. If it was delayed, then discomfort, confusion, and frustration occurred,
and participants rated the User Experience much lower in all UEQ categories.
However, delays had much smaller impact on the UEQ score when the inter-
face was used without voice assistant. Figure 6 shows this interaction eﬀect for
voice assistant x delay based on UEQ mean scores across the scales found in
Table 4.

114

Fig. 6. Interaction eﬀect for voice assistant x delay on User Experience Questionnaire
(UEQ) mean scores (see Table 4 for details); see [41].

Table 4. Results of the User Experience Questionnaire (Scale ranging from −3 to +3)
for recordings with and without voice assistant, either delayed or on time, indicating
an interaction eﬀect also seen in Fig. 6.

6
Discussion

In a participatory design project for the Historytelling system, older adults were
integrated as potential users in all steps of development of the voice input com-
ponent and methods were adjusted to accommodate their user characteristics
as described in the HCD+ approach [32]. Even though the older study partici-
pants scored comparatively high on the computer literacy scale, there was also
large heterogeneity within the group, which shows that age as sole indicator for
recruiting is not suﬃcient and questionnaires such as the CLS [31] should be
considered to categorize participants. Overall, the adjustments made for includ-
ing older adults proved beneﬁcial toward the goal of universal usability not to
exclude anyone by design. Through the adaptation and method selection, we
have managed to create a vibrant atmosphere and engaged the participants in
lively discussions which fostered a wide range of results.

Participatory Design of Historytelling Voice Assistance with Older Adults
115

Addressing the ﬁrst research question “Which type of voice input is suitable
for older adults”, the subsequent transcription was preferred among participants,
as they wanted to have both, text and recorded audio. Sadly, there were many
errors in the transcript, since the quality of the text to speech engine used in
the tested software was not suﬃcient to maintain uninterrupted oral ﬂuency. To
assess the acceptable fault tolerance, additional studies have to be conducted and
it remains to be seen if current technology can attain it. Until then, we suggest
weighing its potential beneﬁts to the loss in user experience due to frustration.
Addressing the second research question on minimal requirements for a con-
versational agent for older adults in the context of HT, users should be guided
through the recording process. A virtual speech assistant giving necessary infor-
mation could be helpful, but it should recede into the background during story
recording and graphical user interface elements should be used for regular moni-
toring instead. The evaluation has shown that the assistance provided as Wizard
of Oz prototype was immersive, but a delay in the assistants’ feedback should be
avoided, because it cripples user experience, upending the beneﬁts of conversa-
tional agents and leaving the users uncomfortable and confused. Moreover, users
faced with the virtual speech assistant prototype acted diﬀerently than those faced
with the simulation game used for requirement analysis. With the prototype, users
concentrated more on story telling, whereas the simulation often provoked real
conversations between human story teller and human voice assistant.
For practical application, the HT system could (continuously) monitor
whether voice assistance can be delivered without noticeable delay (e.g. due to
low available bandwidth, bad sound input quality, noisy surroundings or users
speaking too softly), and conceal it otherwise to avoid the “UX penalty” for
a delayed voice assistant shown in Fig. 6 and Table 4. However, this could also
necessitate a removal of such functionality, which could in itself be more frus-
trating to the user than not knowing a voice assistant existed. To alleviate such
frustration, the HT system would need to communicate the reasons to the user
transparently and comprehensibly. Also, audio ﬁles could be stored and tran-
scribed later (with enhanced technology). In the HT context, volunteers might
also be willing to correct errors in the transcripts for the storytellers.
Regarding the third research question on how a conversational agent’s dia-
logue could be designed, it became apparent that a combination of graphical
user interface and voice user interfaces could address the needs of older adults—
a combined approach is not yet supported in commercial products such as Alexa
and Siri, but has been investigated in research projects including our own and
seems very promising especially for older users.
Finally, privacy concerns play an important role in technology acceptance
and adoption, especially for older users. For that reason, cloud based commer-
cial systems such as Alexa and Siri may not be suitable for them and could
eventually be replaced by alternatives such as Mozilla Web Speech. Future HT
development and research will also investigate the combination of graphical and
voice interfaces and extend the already established style guide [42]. As HT devel-
opment continues, our progress will be published on the project website [38] and
in future publications.

116