Research and Applications

Designing interactive visualizations for analyzing chronic 
lung diseases in a user-centered approach

Rene Pascal Warnking 
, MSc1,2,, Jan Scheer 
, MSc2, Franziska Becker 
, MSc3,  
Fabian Siegel 
, PhD1, Frederik Trinkmann 
, PhD1,4, Till Nagel 
, PhD2 

1Department of Biomedical Informatics at the Center for Preventive Medicine and Digital Health, Medical Faculty Mannheim, Heidelberg 
University, 68167 Mannheim, Germany, 2Human Data Interaction Lab, Mannheim University of Applied Sciences, 68163 Mannheim, Germany, 
3Institute for Visualization and Interactive Systems (VIS), University of Stuttgart, 70569 Stuttgart, Germany, 4Department of Pneumology and 
Critical Care Medicine, Thoraxklinik, University of Heidelberg, Translational Lung Research Center Heidelberg (TLRC), German Center for 
Lung Research (DZL), 69126 Heidelberg, Germany
Corresponding author: Rene Pascal Warnking, MSc, Department of Biomedical Informatics at the Center for Preventive Medicine and Digital Health, 
Medical Faculty Mannheim, Heidelberg University, Theodor-Kutzer-Ufer 1-3, 68167 Mannheim, Germany (Rene.Warnking@medma.uni-heidelberg.de)

Abstract

Objectives: Medical practitioners analyze numerous types of data, often using archaic representations that do not meet their needs. Pneumolo­
gists who analyze lung function exams must often consult multiple exam records manually, making comparisons cumbersome. Such shortcom­
ings can be addressed with interactive visualizations, but these must be designed carefully with practitioners’ needs in mind.

Materials and Methods: A workshop with experts was conducted to gather user requirements and common tasks. Based on the workshop 
results, we iteratively designed a web-based prototype, continuously consulting experts along the way. The resulting application was evaluated 
in a formative study via expert interviews with 3 medical practitioners.
Results: Participants in our study were able to solve all tasks in accordance with experts’ expectations and generally viewed our system posi­
tively, though there were some usability and utility issues in the initial prototype. An improved version of our system solves these issues and 
includes additional customization functionalities.

Discussion: The study results showed that participants were able to use our system effectively to solve domain-relevant tasks, even though 
some shortcomings could be observed. Using a different framework with more fine-grained control over interactions and visual elements, we 
implemented design changes in an improved version of our prototype that needs to be evaluated in future work.

Conclusion: Employing a user-centered design approach, we developed a visual analytics system for lung function data that allows medical 
practitioners to more easily analyze the progression of several key parameters over time.
Key words: visual analytics; lung function tests; qualitative research; time series visualization; disease progression. 

Introduction

Visual analytics has found application in many different con­
texts, including the health sector. In the University Hospital 
Mannheim, the evolving landscape of healthcare demands sys­
tems capable of facilitating the visual analysis of patient data. 
This need is particularly pronounced in primary care, where 
physicians face the challenge of integrating comprehensive 
patient data efficiently. Existing IT infrastructure does not pro­
vide a unified view of multiple lung function tests, forcing 
physicians to individually locate and review each relevant docu­
ment for a patient (see Figure 1 for an example document)—a 
process that is both time-consuming and prone to mistakes.

The interpretation of lung function test results is a complex 
task that requires specialized expertise. These tests involve a 
range of numerical scales for various parameters, each with 
their own reference values. Although current systems indicate 
such reference values and normal ranges, they do not offer a 
unified view that integrates these diverse data points. 

Furthermore, the severity classification of results is often rele­
gated to remote sections of the system, if it is included at all. 
Compounding these issues is a lack of data integration from 
different source systems, necessitating manual retrieval of 
critical clinical data such as laboratory values.

In response to these challenges, this article outlines our 
contributions in 3 key areas: (1) the description of a user- 
centered design process, tailored to gather requirements and 
tasks specific to patient care in a pulmonology setting, along­
side the iterative design of 2 visualization prototypes; (2) a 
formative evaluation of our initial prototype, providing 
insights and guiding further refinement; and (3) the introduc­
tion of a novel system designed to enhance the visual analysis 
of patient progress, particularly for those with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary diseases (COPD) like asthma. This 
system aims to streamline the data review process, offering a 
cohesive and integrated view of patient information. A partial 
version of our application is described in a EuroVis poster.1

Received: February 5, 2024. Revised: April 22, 2024. Editorial Decision: May 2, 2024. Accepted: May 8, 2024 
# The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the American Medical Informatics Association.  

Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, 2024, 31(11), 2486–2495 
https://doi.org/10.1093/jamia/ocae113 
Advance access publication 25 May 2024 
Research and Applications 

Background and significance

Software continues to impact users’ interaction with medical 
data and patient care. The field of visualization is no excep­
tion, having produced many different applications that sup­
port domain experts by visualizing electronic health records 
(EHR)2,3 or electronic medical records (EMR).4 However, 
designing applications for medical practitioners can be diffi­
cult, as they often fail to capture the complexity of clinical 
practices, showing the importance of user-centered design 
approaches.5

When focusing on time-oriented medical data, many topics 
emerge: While VISITORS6 employs domain ontologies to derive 
meaningful abstractions for groups of patients and TIMESPAN7

visualizes treatment times for multiple stroke patients, other 
works look at the geographic distribution of various dis­
eases.8–10 Although aggregation can be employed to make 
larger 
collections 
of 
data 
tractable 
and 
easy 
to 

understand,11,12 Caballero et al.13 visualize hospital event 
logs to let users explore clinical pathways and patient data.

For the visualization of time-oriented medical data of sin­
gle patients, many approaches use timelines as they were 
introduced by software like LIFELINES.14 When time is of the 
essence, eg, for those working in Intensive or Emergency 
Care Units, some tools allow users to keep track of vital signs 
or other critical data efficiently.15–18 Similar to our scenario, 
some visualizations focus on the analysis of the long-term 
progression of a specific disease or state of a patient.19–22 In 
particular, Pieczkiewicz et al.23 use multiple line charts to vis­
ualize lung function data after a lung transplantation was 
performed. In contrast to our application, they focus on data 
obtained over a shorter period of time that contains a larger 
number of data points. Additionally, our system displays 
reversibility testing data to let practitioners assess the effec­
tiveness of medical treatments. Reversibility tests denote the 

Figure 1. Exemplary document of a lung function test from the Thoraxklinik in Heidelberg, similar to those that medical practitioners at the University 
Hospital Mannheim use.

2487 

process of taking several lung function exams with a spiro­
meter before and after a medication has been administered. 
Such tests allow medical practitioners to observe potential 
changes that result from a medication.

For more in-depth overviews of available literature, we 
refer to Rind et al.,24 Wang et al.,25 Rostamzadeh et al.,26,27

and Blandford5 or the scoping review by Scheer et al.,28 who 
surveyed visualizations for the comparison of individual 
patients to other patients or their cohorts.

Materials and methods

This section describes both the design process and evaluation 
of our developed visual analytics system that aims to improve 
patient care and reduce the workload practitioners face in 
clinical settings.

System design
We employed a user-centered design (UCD) approach29 to 
understand and incorporate physicians’ needs into the design 
process, as is common for problem-driven visualization 
research that supports domain experts. During collaboration, 
practitioners provide the necessary insight into domain prob­
lems and workflows that visualization experts can translate 
into appropriate designs for visualizations and interactions. 
To start off, we performed a requirement analysis in a collab­
orative workshop. Taking the workshop results as our foun­
dation, we developed a prototype system that integrates 
feedback from regular expert consultations.

Expert workshop
In collaboration with 5 pneumologists and 2 visualization 
experts, we collected requirements and common tasks in a 
2-hour workshop. The workshop was conducted remotely as 
a video conference due to the Coronavirus pandemic and 

used a whiteboard system to allow participants to collabo­
rate. After introducing the interface, we employed a step-by- 
step workflow. First, the domain experts were tasked with 
filling out post-it notes that describe common tasks and rou­
tinely asked questions that arise in their day-to-day working 
activities. To aid participants during this process, we pro­
vided 3 guiding questions:

 What do you want to know? 
 What do you want to do? 
 What do you want to see? 

Participants organized the resulting post-it notes into 3 cat­
egories: patient care, research, or both (see Figure 2). Each 
expert had to vote for the most relevant notes based on their 
experience and needs. Afterwards, 2 groups with 1 visualiza­
tion expert each were formed, which then chose 2 of the high­
est voted notes and fitting data from available real-world 
datasets. Finally, the groups co-created visualization drafts 
based on their chosen data that should help to answer ques­
tions or perform tasks from the selected notes.

Design goals and tasks
Based on the results from the workshop, we formulated 6 
high-level design goals and identified 4 tasks oriented 
towards patient care that served as a guideline throughout 
the implementation process of our system.

DG-1: Show up-to-date information about the patient 
(age, gender, height, weight);

DG-2: Provide an overview of all performed lung function 
exams over time;

DG-3: Provide an overview of all lung function parameters 
over time;

DG-4: Visualize the progression of each lung function 
parameter and enable inspection of details;

Figure 2. Screenshot of the whiteboard and post-it notes from the workshop, showing how different notes are placed in the 3 available categories.

2488                                                                                                  

DG-5: Visualize reversibility testing results for each lung 
function parameter to assess effectiveness;

DG-6: Visualize laboratory results over the time span of all 
lung function exams.

T1: Analyze the long-term progression of a disease;
T2: Provide a quick medical report for each lung function 
exam;

T3: Identify severe or problematic lung function 
parameters;

T4: Assess effectiveness of reversibility tests.

Data description
Data for our application were fetched from a clinical data 
warehouse (CDW) in Mannheim. The CDW contains pre- 
processed data and staged source databases from the clinical 
source systems CLINICAL WIN DATA (lung function test results) 
and IMED (laboratory information system). The lung function 
dataset was extracted from the staged source databases and 
additional data items from other tables of the healthcare 
information system. For the extraction, we set up an SQL 
query with the constraints described in Table 1.

The resulting dataset comprises 160 columns and contains 
all lung function parameters, including pre- and post- 
broncholytic value pairs. The initial prototype was made to 
accommodate up to 10 exams per patient, based on expert 
advice and data from the warehouse. For our system, we 
selected laboratory data and the most important parameters 
of 4 different groups based on expert feedback, which are 
listed in Table 2. Severity classes for the different parameters 
are based on established rules that can be found here: http:// 
lungenfunktion.eu/index.htm.

Visual analytics system
As a foundation for our system, we created several sketches 
using the workshop results and our design goals. By fre­
quently discussing our ideas with 1 physician, we were able 
to refine them to fit users’ needs. The final draft was imple­
mented as an interactive prototype and presented to work­
shop participants and additional experts to collect more 
feedback. Since usability has a high priority, we built a web- 
based system, which increases the application’s mobility and 
removes the need for software installations—both of which 
were voiced as desirable features. In the backend, we opted 
for a python based flask server that uses SQL to fetch data, 
which is loaded, cleaned, and aggregated using pandas.30 To 
create the different visualizations, we use Altair,31 which is 
based on Vega Lite.32 Its simplicity allows for rapid prototyp­
ing to quickly test and modify design ideas. For the first pro­
totype, we prioritized those features over the adaptability of 
low-level libraries like D3.33 The complete system consists of 

multiple connected components that allow users to interpret 
and analyze medical exams and lung function parameters 
over time. Figure 3 shows an exemplary screenshot of our 
prototype, and the following paragraphs give in-depth 
descriptions 
of 
its 
different 
components 
and 
their 
functionalities.

Patient details
At the top of the page, a header lets users select a patient and 
see related information about them (DG-1). Patient selection 
is performed using a dropdown widget and the patient infor­
mation, such as age and gender, is displayed right next to the 
dropdown (see Figure 3A).

Overview charts
In accordance with DG-3, the overview charts provide a 
holistic view of all available measurements. The measure­
ments are visualized as small multiples34 in the form of area 
charts (see Figure 3B). Due to their small size, all measure­
ments can be seen at a glance. Since no specific values can be 
read from these charts, the last measured value is displayed as 
text next to each chart.

Timeline
To provide information about the temporal dimension of the 
data and related medical records (DG-2, T2), we created a 
timeline component with a grey circle for each performed 
lung function exam (see Figure 3C). Hovering over a circle 
shows the text of the medical report findings in a tooltip.

Parameter charts
In line with design objectives DG-4, DG-6, and task T1, the 
main component displays a line chart for each selected 
parameter (see Figure 3D). The charts are arranged vertically 
and show the complete progression of a parameter over time. 
Data points are displayed as colored circles connected by a 
line. Different measurements can be analyzed in detail 
through interactions like zooming and panning. All line 
charts are grouped into category sections, ranging from spiro­
metry to blood gas values and laboratory data (see Table 2). 
In case multiple data points are associated with one exam, 
the displayed circle represents the last value (for example 
after bronchodilation). To view detailed information, users 
can hover over a data point which yields the absolute value 
and, if available, the percentage of the recommended value in 
a tooltip. Parameters that have associated severity categories 
have the background of their line chart color-coded to show 

Table 2. The different categories of lung functions parameters and 
laboratory data employed in our system.

Category
Parameters

Spirometry
FEV1, FVCex, IC, FEV/IC1
Body plethysmography
RV, RV/TLC, sRAWtot
Transfer factor
DLCOSB, KCO
Blood gas
pH, PAO2, PACO2
Laboratory data
Eosinophiles, Immunoglobulin (in serum)

Abbreviations: DLCOSB, single-breath carbon monoxide diffusing 
capacity; FEV1, forced expiratory volume over 1 second; FVCex, forced 
expiratory vital capacity; IC, inspiratory capacity; KCO, Krogh factor; 
PACO2, partial pressure of carbon dioxide; PAO2, partial pressure of 
oxygen; pH, potentia Hydrogenii; RV, residual volume; sRAWtot, specific 
total airway resistance; TLC, total lung capacity.

Table 1. The data features and related criteria that were used to query 
the staged source databases.

Data feature
Constraints

Time
Between January 1, 2018 and June 31, 2021
Diagnosis
Main or secondary ICD-10 diagnosis key 
corresponds to J44
Hospital department
Patient had an encounter at a ward associ­

ated with a specific department code (inner 
medicine, gastro, etc)
Lung function dataset
At least 1 record in the lung function  
database table exists for the patient

2489 

the varying categories (eg, reduced, normal, and elevated) 
based on established classifications (see Figure 3F).

Slope charts
The final component focuses on reversibility tests. An exam can 
contain 2 values, for example before (pre) and after (post) 
administration of a medication. Since the parameter chart only 
presents the post value, but does not visualize changes between 
values associated with an exam, slope charts were added (DG- 
5, T4). They are positioned on the right side of their respective 
parameter chart and allow users to inspect and analyze the 
changes resulting from a treatment (see Figure 3E). While a sin­
gle slope chart represents the bronchospasmolytic test at the 
given date, multiple slope charts let experts examine the results 
over time. Each chart directly encodes the relative improvement 
or deterioration through the angle between the pre- and post- 
value circles, which are connected with a line. Circle colors indi­
cate the measured severity using the same color scale as before 
and border styles are varied to distinguish the pre (dashed) and 
post (solid) values. As a response to T3 and based on published 
medical guidelines, we chose to include an additional visual 
indicator for the FEV1 and FVCex parameters, an angled arrow 
allows for quick identification of broncholysis success. 

Additionally, the slope charts support 2 hover interactions: 
Hovering over the slope chart background shows a tooltip that 
displays the value difference between before and after broncho­
dilation. Hovering over a circle shows details for the measured 
parameter in a tooltip.

Evaluation
We conducted a formative study using expert interviews to eval­
uate the usability of our developed prototype. To that end, we 
remotely interviewed 4 male pneumologists who work at differ­
ent hospitals across Germany via Zoom. Each session lasted 30 
minutes, was recorded on video and employed the think-aloud 
method35 to collect participants’ thoughts. This approach 
removed the need for travel, which would have severely compli­
cated finding participants. Questions for the interview were 
designed in collaboration with an expert for the assessment of 
lung function data, who also provided correct answers for each 
question. Our aim was to test common scenarios that might 
arise during the day-to-day working activities of our target 
group. The same expert also took part in the selection process 
of the patient data used for the evaluation. All final questions 
and answers were additionally validated by a second expert.

Figure 3. An exemplary view of our initial prototype, showing (A) the patient details, (B) overview charts for all lung function parameters, (C) a timeline of 
the patient’s medical record, (D) detailed line charts for each lung function parameter ordered by category, (E) slope charts visualizing reversibility test 
values, and (F) severity classes for different parameters.

2490                                                                                                  

Study procedure
At the start of each session, the interviewer introduced the 
study and demonstrated the main features of the prototype, 
after which participants familiarized themselves with the 
application on their own. Next, participants had to complete 
2 tasks, with a different dataset for both, consisting of 6 ques­
tions each. In the first task, these questions had low to 
medium difficulty while the second task also included high 
difficulty questions. Lastly, there was room for feedback and 
participants were asked to fill out the system usability score 
(SUS)36 questionnaire.

To curate data for the study, a domain expert selected dif­
ferent data for each task from a set of real-world patient 
records, all of which represent typical cases but with different 
characteristics. Before importing the data into our system, 
records were anonymized to maintain patient privacy. In col­
laboration with said expert, a question catalog was designed 
which closely mimics tasks that practitioners encounter in 
their everyday working activities. Each question was assigned 
a difficulty label, a degree of importance and a solution— 
example questions can be found in Table 3 while the com­
plete catalog is available as supplementary material. Another 
domain expert reviewed the question catalog to affirm both 
its relevance and validity. Moreover, an external usability 
expert reviewed and approved our proposed study procedure. 
After all of the interviews were conducted, the recordings 
were manually transcribed and analyzed in-depth by one of 
the authors, eg, looking for common remarks and grouping 
them by content. One interview (P4) was discarded due to 
technical problems with the recording.

Results

All interviews were analyzed for usability feedback and par­
ticipants’ answers to the 12 task questions were compared to 
the solutions proposed by experts. In the following, we give a 
detailed account of our analysis results.

Evaluation results
Analysis of the interview recordings showed that participants 
largely gave valid answers that either matched experts’ 
expectation or were open for debate. All participants came to 
the same conclusion for 9 out of 12 questions and only 
expressed minor differences for the high difficulty questions 
that required interpretation. Overall feedback was mostly 
positive, with participants emphasizing the easy comparison 
between exams and the fast access to data. This is well- 
illustrated by a comment participant P3 made: “For the tool 
itself, I find it relatively clear at first glance to see the value 
progression over time. This is (. . .) actually made quite clear 
by the curve (. . .) with the color coding.” Two participants 
explicitly mentioned the time-oriented design as a useful fea­
ture, whereas a third participant favorably noted the practi­
cality for everyday life. Moreover, the scores from the SUS 

questionnaires indicate that participants found the system 
usable, with 3 out of 4 participants rating it with high values 
over 85 (P1: 87.5, P3: 92.5, P41: 95) and 1 participant rating 
it slightly below 80 (P2: 77.5).

With regard to limitations, multiple opportunities for 
improvements were mentioned or could be extracted from 
the recordings. These were categorized by topic and are 
described in the following paragraphs, supplemented by 
related quotes from participants.

I1: Identifying the date of a measurement
Even though the visualization always displays a time-axis, 
some users struggled to identify the date of a data point on 
several occasions. This led to redundant interactions with the 
visualization and made comparing multiple data points with 
a specific date more difficult, since only 1 tooltip is visible at 
a time when hovering.

Participant P3 remark: “(. . .) sometimes I needed to take a 
look, where exactly which date can be found, (. . .)”

Original: “(. . .) ich musste immer so‘n bisschen gucken, wo 
genau welches Datum jetzt ist, (. . .)”

I2: Overview chart usage
While the overview charts are very prominent in the applica­
tion, they were barely used by participants, if at all. This 
could be related to the questions we asked, since none of 
them specifically targeted the use of this component.

Participant P2 remark: “And secondly I was not sure, for 
what exactly the curves at the top—in this case the number 
0.45 FEV1—how it is correlated to the measurements.”

Original: “Und als zweites mir war nicht ganz klar, wof€ur 
diese Kurven hier oben—also was die Ziffer 0.45 FEV1—in 
welcher Korrelation die hier zu den Messwerten steht.”

I3: High need for vertical space
Due to the parameter charts being stacked vertically and the 
large amount of information being displayed, it was not 
always possible to see a specific pair of charts at the same 
time. Therefore, users were required to scroll the page, which 
made it more difficult to compare values or connect 
information.

Participant P1 remark: “(. . .) now I need to shortly try to 
get both on one page (. . .)”

Original: “(. . .) jetzt muss ich einmal ganz kurz ein bis­
schen hier beides auf eine Seite kriegen (. . .)”

I4: Data-dependent horizontal width
Another issue was the variable width, which depended on the 
number of exams contained in the datasets. Since each exam 
creates an associated slope chart with a fixed size that is dis­
played next to the parameter chart, the needed width depends 
on the number of exams. The visualization may therefore not 

Table 3. Selection of translated questions with varying degree of difficulty used during the interviews of the study.

Difficulty
Question
Goal

Low
What is the FEV1 value of the patient for his last medical exam?
Find and read values using the visualization.
Medium
How did the obstruction develop over time?
Comparing multiple values and degrees of severity over time.
High
Did the findings improve in between time point A and time point B?
Interpretation of all available data.

1
Only the SUS questionnaire is available for this participant. The inter­
view was discarded due to technical difficulties.

2491 

fill the complete width or may not fit without horizontal 
scrolling. Both conditions are inconvenient and can make 
comparison cumbersome.

Design improvements
We re-evaluated several design choices and devised multiple 
improvements in order to address issues found during the 
evaluation. These improvements required a technological 
reorientation, as Altair was not capable of the functionalities 
our improvements required. As a consequence, we switched 
to D3 for the implementation of the visualization frontend.  
Figure 4 shows an exemplary view of the improved system. In 
the following, we describe the most important changes and 
how they relate to the issues identified in the previous 
subsection.

Timeline and parameter charts
The timeline is now displayed as a sticky header (see  
Figure 4A), resulting in a fixed point when searching for a 
related date (I1). In addition, clicking on a data point in a line 
chart permanently marks it as selected, visually indicated by 
increasing its radius across all charts. Hovering over any data 
point in the timeline displays a dashed indicator line in all 
parameter charts (see Figure 4C). Finally, the timeline is 
synchronized with the parameter charts’ zoom transform.

Overview charts
We opted to move this component from the top to the left of 
the application as a sticky sidebar with a fixed width to con­
serve vertical space (I3). In addition, we gave these charts 

new functionalities (I2). Clicking on any of the charts allows 
users to toggle between showing or hiding the associated 
parameter chart (see Figure 4B). Furthermore, users can now 
reorder the parameter charts by dragging the corresponding 
overview chart to a different position. These changes let users 
control which data is shown at which location in the applica­
tion, making direct comparison easy and letting them hide 
unneeded data. If a data point is clicked on or hovered over 
in a line chart, the related values are displayed above each 
overview chart and corresponding circles are increased in 
size.

Slope charts
To address issue I4 and improve the usability of the slope 
charts, we explored several new approaches to visualize the 
reversibility testing results. The new options we considered in 
more detail were layering and repositioning.

Layering incorporates the data directly into the line 
chart, similar to candlestick charts. This removes the slope 
charts altogether, resulting in a more compact visualization, 
but also creates overdraw and visual clutter. For example, 
minor changes might not be visible due to overdraw, which 
can result in misinterpretation by the user. Figure 5 
illustrates different variations that we considered for this 
approach.

The second option was to reposition the slope charts above 
each parameter chart, which allows the latter to occupy more 
screen width. Furthermore, it connects each slope chart 
directly to its corresponding time point, displaying it at a sim­
ilar horizontal position. This approach was initially discarded 

Figure 4. View of the revised system with improved (A) timeline, (B) overview charts, (C) parameter charts, and (D) slope charts. In this example, 2 
parameter charts and the slope charts for RV/TLC are hidden, but they can be shown again on demand. A limited version of the revised system with hard- 
coded data is available at https://rwarnking.github.io/lufuvis-light.

2492                                                                                                  

due to limitations of the Altair framework and concerns 
regarding overdraw between charts. Switching to D3 solved 
both problems and allowed for displacement of the slope 
charts in a force-directed manner. Each slope chart is first 
positioned at the exact horizontal location of its related data 
point. Then, a force-directed simulation is run, similar to a 
force-directed graph layout.37 Neighboring slope charts repel 
each other, while being pulled towards their correct horizon­
tal position. In this manner, the charts deviate as little as pos­
sible from their original position but also avoid overlap, as 
illustrated in Figure 6. To emphasize its exact point in time, 
each chart is connected to its related data point using a trian­
gular indicator that points to the correct horizontal position. 
When users zoom or pan in the parameter charts, the system 
adjusts the positions of all slope charts and re-runs the simu­
lation. After exploring both options, we settled on reposition­
ing the slope charts, since it does not drastically modify the 
line charts and more directly addresses participants’ critiques. 
While this choice increases the need for vertical space, this is 
counteracted by allowing users to hide the slope charts on 
demand.

Discussion

Practitioners could comfortably use our prototype to solve 
tasks of varying difficulty, which were designed to closely 
resemble their day-to-day working activities related to lung 
function data. They generally liked the system and had little 
trouble navigating it, even with limited training. However, 
participants’ interactions with the system uncovered some 

usability and utility issues that we addressed in an improved 
iteration of our prototype. Most notably, the overview 
charts were repurposed to give users more freedom in 
arranging visualizations in the application. Additionally, the 
slope charts were repositioned to strengthen the connection 
to their related exam. Several modification were made to 
improve the general layout and space requirements. How 
these changes affect user experience needs to be investigated 
in more detail in future work. Such an evaluation could also 
provide the opportunity to test our system against standard 
tools currently employed by practitioners or to investigate 
the different slope chart designs. The user-centered design 
approach we employed helped us create a system that 
addresses users’ real needs and could be used in other con­
texts where required knowledge is distributed across differ­
ent experts. Finally, we can envision more usage scenarios 
for our application, eg, to communicate findings to patients 
directly or to help medical students learn about lung func­
tion data analysis.

Conclusion

Collaborating with medical practitioners, we designed and 
implemented an interactive visualization system that supports 
medical experts who analyze lung function data across multi­
ple medical exams. We employ connected line charts and 
incorporate domain knowledge in the form of parameter- 
dependent severity categories, offering a cohesive and inte­
grated view of the patient’s disease progression.

Our formative study showed that the system provides easy 
access to relevant data and that it supports temporal data 
analysis, which could help practitioners in their day-to-day 
work activities. Participants of the study liked using our sys­
tem and correctly answered domain-relevant questions with 
varying levels of difficulty. The study results additionally 
uncovered several areas for improvement, such as inconven­
ient interactions for the comparison of lung function parame­
ters that are far apart in the layout. Consequently, we 
redesigned several components to give users greater flexibil­
ity, thereby making comparisons effortless. Based on these 
overall encouraging results, we aim to evaluate our rede­
signed system to study its effectiveness in greater detail and 
compare it to existing approaches employed by medical 
practitioners.

The authors confirm contribution to the paper as follows: (i) 
Study and workshop conception and design: Jan Scheer, 
Frederik Trinkmann, Till Nagel; (ii) Provision of study and 
workshop materials: Frederik Trinkmann, Fabian Siegel, Jan 
Scheer, Till Nagel; (iii) Study and workshop execution and 
analysis: Rene Pascal Warnking, Jan Scheer, Till Nagel; (iv) 

Figure 6. Zoomed in view of an example where the force-directed 
positioning of the slope charts prevents them from overlapping. Gray 
triangles point to the correct horizontal position for each chart.

Figure 5. Different options we explored for the layering approach to revise the slope charts. They visualize the changes from pre- to post-medication 
values using (A) bars and arrow tips, (B) arrows, (C) circles connected via triangles, and (D) band-connected circles.

2493 

Software design and implementation: Rene Pascal Warnking, 
Jan Scheer, Till Nagel, Franziska Becker; (v) Draft manu­
script preparation: Rene Pascal Warnking, Jan Scheer, Till 
Nagel, Franziska Becker; (vi) Administrative support: Fabian 
Siegel, Till Nagel. All authors reviewed the results and 
approved the final version of the manuscript.