Designing Enterprise Applications that Connect 
Employees on the Go

Brent-Kaan White 
Oracle Corporation 
200 Oracle Parkway 
Redwood Shores, CA 94065 
1 650 607-0892 

Sean Rice 
Oracle Corporation 
7700 Technology Way 
Denver, CO 80237 
1 303 334-7171 

Chun-Yi Chen 
Oracle Corporation 
200 Oracle Parkway 
Redwood Shores, CA 94065 
1 650 506-0118 

ABSTRACT 
This paper describes the process of designing an enterprise 
application that connects employees, the unique interface 
challenges, research activities, and subsequent changes to the 
design. The user-centered design process was driven by three 
research activities that informed the design in stages. Focus group 
sessions enabled us to understand requirements, wireframe 
usability evaluations helped us to validate macro level design 
decisions, and live prototype testing provided feedback that 
helped refine the design and validate the interactions. The 
collective research activities contributed to improved usability for 
navigation, actions, search, and a hierarchical organization chart. 
In addition, social networking within the work context was better 
understood and important concerns were identified.  Key changes 
to the design included a streamlined three-level organization 
chart, the reduction of icons, and a new layout for search.  

Categories and Subject Descriptors 
H.5.2 [User Interfaces]: Graphical user interfaces (GUI), user-
centered design 

General Terms 
Design, Human Factors 

Keywords 
Enterprise applications, mobile HCI, usability testing, iterative 
design, mobile browsers, social networking 

1. INTRODUCTION 
Consumers have embraced and downloaded enormous quantities 
of mobile applications, but our research has identified that few of 
these applications address frequent work tasks [1]. Companies, 
universities, and governments depend upon specialized software 
to complete work, but only a small subset of enterprise 
functionality is currently available on mobile devices. As the 
percentage of smartphones in the market increases, there are 
greater opportunities to provide interfaces optimized for mobile 
enterprise applications. Enterprise applications address activities 
within domains, such as supply chain, customer relationship, and  

human capital management. Much of the work within these 
domains is accomplished away from a fixed location.  

Mobile enterprise applications deployed within the past decade 
have primarily focused on two role types: those in the field, such 
as sales representatives and maintenance technicians, or workers 
within the supply chain, such as shipping and receiving clerks. 
However, the use of mobile applications for work tasks has 
expanded across employee roles and locations. Snyder et al. 
created five business mobile personas, one of which included a 
manager, a position that in today’s workforce frequently uses a 
mobile device as a common work tool within an office setting [2]. 

The employee mobile application derives much of its 
functionality from the most recent capabilities of enterprise 
human resources (HR) desktop software and provides corporate 
directory information, an editable work profile, social networking, 
and access to HR data, such as paycheck information. Oracle 
designed the application by adhering to a research-driven design 
process and by applying mobile design guidelines identified by 
Buchanan et al. that emphasize prioritization of content and 
limiting text entry [3]. This paper describes the process of 
designing the enterprise mobile employee application, the unique 
interface challenges, the research activities conducted, and 
subsequent changes to the design.  

2. METHOD AND DESIGN 
Oracle uses a user-centered design process that grounds all 
aspects of design with information about the end users who will 
use the products to achieve real-world business goals. Seven 
components comprise Oracle’s user-centered design process: user 
requirements research, analysis, design, iterative prototyping and 
evaluation, implementation, and usability benchmarking. This 
paper focuses on the front portion of the process, specifically, the 
user requirements research, analysis, design, and iterative 
prototyping and evaluation. 

2.1 Focus Groups 
Two focus group interviews were conducted for the mobile 
employee application with the goal of establishing user 
requirements for accessing employee profile and HR self-service 
information from a mobile device. Eleven employees from large-
sized companies participated in the study. To qualify for the 
study, participants had to be active smartphone users who use 
smartphones for work and to access the Internet. All participants 
used an enterprise self-service HR system.  

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). 
MobileHCI ’10, September 7–10, 2010, Lisboa, Portugal. 
ACM 978-1-60558-835-3/10/09. 
. 

349

Each focus group began with an overview of the session 
procedures and goals. The moderator told participants that Oracle 
is developing a mobile version of an HR application that will 
provide corporate directory and employee HR self-service 
functionality from the user's mobile device.  The bulk of the 1.5-
hour session was spent discussing current mobile device usage, 
impressions about the mobile employee application concept, and 
the participants’ expectations regarding search, employee profile 
content, and representation of the organization chart.   

2.1.1 Focus Group Findings 
Participants had few overall concerns regarding the proposed 
application and wanted the same functionality that they have in 
their desktop self-service HR applications available on their 
mobile devices. The top concerns that were raised by participants 
were related to data security and speed of the application on the 
mobile devices. Key functional recommendations derived from 
the focus groups included: 

Employee profile content: At a minimum, display name, 
phone number, e-mail address, IM, department, job title, and 
manager’s name when viewing an employee’s profile. In 
addition, we were asked to consider the following: 

o 
Provide location, administrative assistant, time zone, 
nickname, job responsibilities, start date, and date/time 
of last contact. 

o 
Require the user to take an explicit action and enter a 
password to see additional personal information, such as 
performance ratings and goals, salary, employee ID, 
vacation balance, 401K allocations, paycheck, and 
skills. 

Organization chart: Provide the ability to browse the 
management hierarchy and display that hierarchy as a tree.   

Search: Provide a simple name search by default.  Enable the 
user to easily add or change search criteria. 

2.2 Wireframe Design 
After gathering the user requirements, a pair of designers created 
a set of wireframes. Design challenges centered on navigation, 
hierarchy, multiple actions, social networking, and search. The 
application was designed to run in the mobile browser across 
major smartphone platforms. The BlackBerry Bold and Apple 
iPhone were selected as representative devices to ensure that the 
design worked well on both physical keyboard and touch screen 
interfaces. Showing the designs within both form factors from the 
earliest wireframes helped prevent a single focus on a device-
specific design solution.  

2.2.1 Wireframe Evaluation 
A usability test was conducted using low-fidelity wireframe 
screenshots of the initial design. The sessions helped us discover 
usability issues with the proposed design for several key tasks.  
We conducted the usability test on the wireframe design because 
we wanted to get quick feedback to validate the design approach 
before building an interactive prototype. 

Six enterprise employees participated in this activity. Each two 
hour test session involved one participant and was conducted 
remotely via Web and teleconference. Participants read tasks out 
loud that involved searching for coworkers in the corporate 
directory, browsing the organization chart, initiating contact 

(calling or sending an e-mail), editing personal information, and 
viewing paycheck information. The moderator asked the 
participants what actions they would take to complete the tasks. 
The moderator shared wireframe screenshots over the Web 
conference and displayed different screen mockups in response to 
the actions that the participants said they would take. Participants 
were asked to think out loud during the session.   

2.2.2 Wireframe Design Challenges 
The following discussion describes the major design issues and 
findings from the wireframe evaluation. 

2.2.2.1 Organization Chart 
The organization chart in the application is an employee directory 
that displays the management hierarchy with summarized 
employee information. Jones et al. identified the importance of 
flattening hierarchical data into one or two levels for small screen 
displays [4], but increasing smartphone screen sizes and the need 
to show employee relationships made us consider displaying a 
third level of hierarchy.  Our design challenges were: 

How to represent the management hierarchy in the 
limited screen real estate and communicate the 
relationships among employees.  
How to display the many levels of hierarchy on one 
screen. 
How to navigate through the hierarchy. 
 
We took a person-centric approach and used tree structure to 
represent management hierarchy. Each employee takes up one 
row in the tree (see Figure 1) and contains the key information of 
name and job title. Instead of displaying the employee directory 
as a simple list, the row-based hierarchy uses indentations to 
visually differentiate position levels. In order to help end users 
quickly recognize the searched person, each employee in the 
hierarchy is represented by a photo.  

We debated the optimal number of hierarchy levels to display on 
one screen and amount of content within each level. We wanted 
rich information about each level of hierarchy but didn’t want to 
overload the user when viewing all levels together. We used icons 
to navigate within the hierarchy and to communicate additional 
information about each employee. Several designs were explored 
and tested before deciding upon the final version.  

Figure 1. Design Versions: (a) Two levels without reposition 
icons, (b) Three levels with reposition icons. 

Some preliminary designs included: 

Positioning the focused employee as the top node and 
displaying two levels of hierarchy: the employee’s direct 
reports and peers below (see Figure 1a). 

350

Displaying three levels of hierarchy: the focused employee’s 
manager, along with peers and direct reports (see Figure 1b). 

Using different versions of icons to navigate up and 
reposition employees in the hierarchy (see Figure 1).  

Icon representation and location are key parts of the design. The 
icons in the hierarchy not only affect the visual aesthetics of the 
application, but also serve the purpose of navigation and 
communicating information about the employee. Bringing an 
employee into focus and displaying his or her management chain 
was a challenge. The approach of controlling the view of direct 
reports with expand and collapse icons adds complexity to the 
screen and potentially causes more scrolling (see Figure 1). 
Another method to prioritize content is to reposition employees at 
the top of the screen by clicking on an icon (see Figure 1b).  

2.2.2.2 Organization Chart Evaluation Findings 
The excessive icon use and visual representation of icons 
hindered the user’s ability to complete tasks.  Four of six 
participants could not navigate up the hierarchy with the proposed 
icons and could not display the appropriate level without 
assistance (see Figure 1).   

2.2.2.3 Multiple Actions 
Multiple actions can be performed on an employee from within 
the employee profile interface. Most mobile applications provide 
only a primary affordance for a single page-level action. We spent 
considerable effort deciding the best location and format for those 
actions. Our approach was to prioritize the frequently performed 
actions on the employee profile and introduce an Action toolbar 
(see Figure 3). The Action toolbar groups a row of icons with text 
labels beneath. We were not sure if the Action toolbar design was 
a better solution than placing action buttons interspersed with 
content (see Figure 2) or at the bottom of the screen.  

 
 

 

2.2.2.4 Multiple Actions Evaluation Findings 
The Action toolbar design was well received by participants. The 
design informed users of possible actions that could be taken on 
the employee profile. A consistent and prominent location for the 
primary actions helped users complete their tasks quickly. 

2.2.2.5 Search 
Search is another key feature in the application. In the preliminary 
design, a quick keyword search field and a Search link were both 
provided on the Home screen (See Figure 4). The end user entered 
keywords in the search field at the top of the screen to perform the 
search. The Search link in the content area took the user to an 
advanced search page where users could conduct a more precise 
search. We were not sure if the advanced search page would be 
useful because it required more data input, which may prove 
cumbersome for mobile users.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2.2.2.6 Search Evaluation Findings 
Five of the six participants either missed the quick search field on 
the page header area or were confused when two search options 
were presented at the same time. After navigating to the advanced 
search screen, users responded favorably to having the ability to 
search by multiple criteria.  

2.2.2.7 Social Networking 
The social networking feature consisted of adding employees by 
invitation to a private network that displayed work related activity 
streams, new social connections and status updates. To add an 
employee to the network, the user pulled up the target employee’s 
profile page and clicked on the Add to Network icon. Upon this 
action, an invitation was sent to the target employee with the 
request to connect. While social networking tasks are frequently 
performed on mobile devices, the integration of this functionality 
within a person-centric HR application created challenges. The 
ability to reject the networking invitation of a coworker could be 
socially awkward even though a formal invitation process is 
common for social networking applications. 

2.2.2.8 Social Networking Findings 
The social networking functionality in the application was well 
received but misunderstood. Four of the six participants thought 
that the Add to Network feature would add the person as a contact 
in the mobile device’s address book. The distinction between 
favorites within the native device’s address book and invited 
members of a social network was not clear to users. 

2.3 Prototype Evaluation 
We revised the design based on the wireframe evaluation findings 
and developed a functional prototype. The prototype allowed us 
to test on an actual mobile device and to validate that our live 
interactions satisfied user expectations. An interactive prototype 
of the mobile application design was tested at the Oracle HCM 
Users Group (OHUG) conference in Las Vegas, Nevada, from 
June 15 to 16, 2009. 

Eight Oracle customers participated in this usability test. The 
recruitment criteria required that participants currently use a self-
service HR system, use a BlackBerry or iPhone device for work, 
and access the Internet from their device. The testing procedures 
were the same as those employed for the wireframe evaluation, 
except that the participants sat next to the moderator during the 
session and interacted with the prototype on the device that they 
were most familiar with. The three iPhone users accessed the 
prototype on a first-generation iPhone, and the five BlackBerry 
users accessed the prototype using a BlackBerry Bold device.  

Figure 2. Design without 
Figure 3. Design with 

Figure 4. Search design  

351

2.3.1.1 Prototype Evaluation Findings 
The prototype evaluation provided a realistic experience for users 
who selected navigational elements with their cursors or fingers 
and watched screens load on a device. Here are the key prototype 
evaluation findings: 

Search: Participants had no trouble searching for people, 
drilling to detail, and initiating communication tasks. 

Action toolbar: Participants liked having the icons at the top 
of the profile page for quick access to common functions, 
such as SMS, e-mail, and chat. Participants were able to 
quickly access these functions with the toolbar. 

Organization chart icons: Six participants did not understand 
how to use the icons to navigate up the hierarchy or 
reposition employees within the hierarchy. 

Navigational links and icons: Three of the touch screen 
iPhone users had difficulty clicking some of the smaller 
icons and links in the prototype. 

3. DISCUSSION OF DESIGN CHANGES 
The results of the prototype test along with the findings from the 
initial 
round 
of 
wireframe 
tests 
provided 
specific 
recommendations to make our designs more usable. The 
following discussion focuses on the major changes. 

3.1.1 Organization Chart 
The hierarchy displayed three 
levels of the management chain 
in 
one 
view: 
the 
target 
employee 
in 
focus, 
the 
employee’s manager, and the 
employee’s direct reports (see 
Figure 
5). 
The 
usability 
activities 
indicated 
that 
showing the manager of the 
focused employee on the same 
screen 
is 
valuable, 
while 
showing the peers of the 
employee on the same screen is not critical. The design fulfilled 
user expectations and best used the screen real estate without 
introducing horizontal scrolling.  

The testing revealed that two separate icons for navigating up the 
hierarchy (up-arrow icon) and setting the employee in focus 
(reposition icon) were not necessary because the user perceived 
both as interactions with similar outcomes. Consequently, we 
updated the design to use the up-arrow icon for both setting focus 
and navigating up the hierarchy. A single icon offers improved 
usability due to the difficulty participants had in differentiating 
the intended purposes of icons without labels.  

The up-arrow icon appears only to the left of employees who are 
not in focus and have direct reports (see Figure 5). Upon clicking 
the icon, the employee is repositioned and appears below his 
manager and above any direct reports. To view the next level up 
in the hierarchy, the user clicks the up-arrow icon next to the 
topmost employee in the hierarchy.  

3.1.2 Search 
The updated design moved the keyword search field to the 
content area and grouped the keyword and advanced search 

together on the Home screen (see Figure 6a). Because users need 
to access Search frequently, we provided a link that takes users to 
an advanced search page at the top of every detail page (see 
Figure 6b).  

 
Figure 6. Search Designs: (a) Home screen, (b) Profile header  

3.1.3 Social Networking 
Designing a social networking tool for mobile employees requires 
a deep understanding of the social norms and culture within the 
work environment. Some organizations that place a higher value 
on rank may prefer a more formal social networking process that 
requires invitations while others may embrace a less formal 
connection style. We did not make any design changes because 
we realized that further research was required. 

4. CONCLUSION 
The designs that defined the mobile employee application were 
informed and refined by a rigorous user-centered design process. 
Focus group sessions enabled us to understand the specific needs 
of mobile employees with respect to corporate directory and self-
service HR functionality. Wireframe usability evaluations helped 
to validate macro-level design decisions. Live prototype usability 
testing provided user feedback to refine the design and validate 
the interaction paradigm and screen transitions.  

5. REFERENCES 
[1] Rampoldi-Hnilo, L., White, B., Snyder, M. and Sampanes, 
A.C. 2009. The future of enterprise is with the mobile 
workforce: An International Field Study. In Proceedings of 
the 3rd International Conference on Internationalization, 
Design, and Global Development (July 19-24, 2009, San 
Diego, CA, USA). HCI International ‘09. Springer Berlin, 
Heidelberg, 308-315. 

[2] Snyder, M., Sampanes, A. C., White, B. and Rampoldi-
Hnilo, L. 2010. Creating richer personas - making them 
mobile, international, and forward thinking. Paper presented 
at UPA International (May 24-28, 2010, Munich, Germany).  

[3] Buchanan, G., Farrant, S., Jones, M., Thimbleby, H., 
Marsden, G., and Pazzani, M. 2001. Improving mobile 
internet usability. In Proceedings of the 10th international 
conference on World Wide Web (May 01-05, 2001, Hong 
Kong, Hong Kong). IW3C2 ‘01. ACM, New York, N.Y., 
673-680. DOI=http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/371920.372181 

[4] Jones, M., Marsden, G., Mohd-Nasir, N., and Buchanan, G. 
1999. An Evaluation of WebTwig - A Site Outliner for 
Handheld Web Access. In Proceedings of the 1st 
international symposium on Handheld and Ubiquitous 
Computing (September 27-29, 1999, Karlsruhe, Germany). 
HUC ’99. Springer-Verlag, London, U.K.., 343-345.
 

Figure 5. Organization 
chart 

352