Received July 18, 2016, accepted August 9, 2016, date of publication August 25, 2016, date of current version September 28, 2016.

Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/ACCESS.2016.2601882

User-Centred Design and Usability Evaluation of
a Heart Rate Variability Biofeedback Game

THOMAS WOLLMANN1, FARHAD ABTAHI, (Student Member, IEEE)2,3,4, ABOOZAR EGHDAM5,
FERNANDO SEOANE, (Senior Member, IEEE)2,6, KAJ LINDECRANTZ, (Member, IEEE)2,3,4,
MARTIN HAAG1, AND SABINE KOCH5

1GECKO Institute, Heilbronn University, 74081 Heilbronn, Germany
2School of Technology and Health, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, 114 28 Stockholm, Sweden
3Department of Clinical Science, Intervention and Technology, Karolinska Institute, 141 57 Stockholm, Sweden
4Department of Clinical Physiology, Karolinska University Hospital, 141 86 Stockholm, Sweden
5Health Informatics Centre, Department of Learning, Informatics, Management and Ethics, Karolinska Institute, 171 77 Stockholm, Sweden
6Faculty of Caring Science, Work Life and Social Welfare, University of Borås, 501 90 Borås, Sweden

This paper has supplementary downloadable material available at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org., provided by the author.

ABSTRACT Reduced heart rate variability (HRV) is an indicator of a malfunctioning autonomic nervous
system. Resonant frequency breathing is a potential non-invasive means of intervention for improving the
balance of the autonomic nervous system and increasing HRV. However, such breathing exercises are
regarded as boring and monotonous tasks. The use of gaming elements (gamiﬁcation) or a full gaming
experience is a well-recognised method for achieving higher motivation and engagement in various tasks.
However, there is limited documented knowledge on how to design a game for breathing exercises.
In particular, the inﬂuence of additional interactive elements on the main course of training has not yet been
explored. In this paper, we evaluated the satisfaction levels achieved using different game elements and how
disruptive they were to the main task, i.e., paced breathing training. An Android ﬂight game was developed
with three game modes that differ in the degrees of multitasking they require. Design, development, and
evaluation were conducted using a user-centred approach, including context analysis, the design of game
principle mock-ups, the selection of game principles through a survey, the design of the game mechanics
and GUI mock-up, and icon testing, and the performance of a summative study through user questionnaires
and interviews. A summative evaluation of the developed game was performed with 11 healthy participants
(ages 40–67) in a controlled setting. The results conﬁrm the potential of video games for motivating players
to engage in HRV biofeedback training. The highest training performance on the ﬁrst try was achieved
through pure visualisation rather than in a multitasking mode. Players had higher motivation to play the
more challenging game and were more interested in long-term engagement. A framework for gamiﬁed HRV
biofeedback research is presented. It has been shown that multitasking has considerable inﬂuence on HRV
biofeedback and should be used with an adaptive challenge level.

INDEX TERMS Consumer health informatics (CHI), heart rate variability (HRV) biofeedback, exergaming,
patient motivation, usability, gamiﬁcation for health.

I. INTRODUCTION
A Western lifestyle — characterised by a low level of physical
activity and a high-calorie diet that is rich in fat and sugar —
has spread around the world over the past ﬁve decades.
The dominance of this lifestyle in combination with an age-
ing population has resulted in a complex combination of
chronic diseases, e.g., high blood pressure, diabetes and car-
diovascular diseases [1]–[3]. This situation has presented the
health-care system with challenges related to higher costs and
inadequate resources. Preventive health care, including the

promotion of physical and dietary lifestyle changes, through
mobile applications has recently attracted considerable atten-
tion. In 2014, Ferrara et al. analysed 132 health and ﬁtness
apps available from the Apple App Store, which use game
elements to inﬂuence users’ behaviour [4]. The inclusion of
game elements is intended to increase users’ intrinsic motiva-
tion, and based on a wide variety of theoretical foundations,
this approach has been successfully utilised in non-game
contexts. According to Deterding et al., the usage contexts of
game elements can be categorised into 1) playful interaction,

2169-3536 
 2016 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only.
Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
5531

2) gamiﬁcation and 3) serious games [5]. Serious games and
gamiﬁcation do not offer games in the same sense as games
for playful interaction, which use interaction elements that
target the user’s ludic drive. Gamiﬁcation strategies utilise
only some game elements in a non-game context, whereas
serious games are full-ﬂedged games.
Heart rate variability (HRV) refers to the variability of the
intervals between consecutive heart beats. The parasympa-
thetic nervous system (rest and digest) and the sympathetic
nervous system (ﬁght or ﬂight) are two branches of the auto-
nomic nervous system (ANS) that control the heart. Stress,
blood pressure, respiration, emotions, and thermoregulation,
among others, are stimuli that inﬂuence the heart rate through
the ANS. HRV reduces with age, and reduced HRV is also
associated with chronic diseases and poor outcomes, e.g., dia-
betes, systematic inﬂammation, depression and sudden car-
diac death [6]–[8]. Therefore, it is beneﬁcial to investigate
methods of intervention to increase HRV to achieve balance
in the ANS, e.g., vagal nerve stimulation, kinetic oscillation
stimulation and HRV biofeedback [9]–[11].
HRV biofeedback is a potential non-invasive intervention
method for improving ANS balance and thereby increasing
HRV, which could be beneﬁcial for various patients groups or
as a preventative measure for healthy people. The usefulness
of HRV biofeedback has been reported in several studies
[12]–[15]. Respiration has a cardiac vagal efferent modula-
tion effect on the heart rate. In HRV biofeedback, the idea
is to breathe at a speciﬁc individual-dependent rate called
the resonant frequency. The resonant frequency is the rate of
delivery of the feedback that controls blood pressure. This
feedback loop elevates or lowers the heart rate in the case of
a drop or rise in blood pressure, respectively. By breathing
at this rate, the feedback from respiration and blood pressure
can be made coherent and, hence, more efﬁcient. This method
is called resonant frequency breathing and has the potential to
enhance baroreﬂex gain and improve HRV [11], [16].
Abtahi et al. at the Royal Institute of Technology (KTH)
have developed an Android-based biofeedback application,
and this research group is working on the development and
evaluation of HRV biofeedback techniques [17]–[19]. The
initial idea was to investigate HRV biofeedback as neuroim-
munomodulation technique to achieve anti-inﬂammatory
effect [20]. Similar to any other exercise, greater beneﬁts of
HRV biofeedback are achieved by performing more work-
outs. However, the monotony of breathing exercises leads
to boredom, and hence, long-term engagement remains a
challenge. Using game elements and gamiﬁcation or even
turning this task into a video game could be a solution
for increasing motivation and overcoming the monotonous
nature of these exercises. A ﬁrst attempt in this direction
was made by developing a balloon game for the playful
visualisation of biofeedback. The player was directed to fol-
low a sinusoidal trajectory by breathing at a speciﬁc pace.
Similar approach, playful visualisation, have been reported
in biofeedback game for mental stress management [21].
In the commercial realm, Biocomfort, Stone Biofeedback

and Somatic Vision are offering playful HRV biofeedback
visualisations [22]–[24]. Games such as ‘‘Tropical Heat!’’
by Somatic Vision provide a serious gaming experience,
with additional user interactions beyond simply breathing.
In this case, the user must steer a jet ski along a track while
performing breathing training. Additionally, the player must
perform stunts to score points by pressing speciﬁc key com-
binations. However, no comprehensive usability evaluation
of these systems is available. In particular, the inﬂuence
of additional interactive elements on the breathing training
task has not yet been explored. These additional elements
naturally arise in serious games through the introduction
of additional attractive tasks other than the main objective,
i.e., paced breathing and biofeedback.
In this work, we developed a gamiﬁed training regimen
for resonant frequency breathing based on previous in-house
developments. The objective was to obtain insight into the
gamiﬁcation of paced breathing and HRV biofeedback by
evaluating the usability of the developed game and, espe-
cially, the inﬂuence of multitasking elements on users’ paced
breathing performance, joyfulness and willing for long-term
engagement. This paper describes the method used and the
results obtained for the selection of the gaming concept and
the usability evaluation of the developed game.

FIGURE 1. Overview of the design, development and evaluation process.
Milestones: game principle selection (rough dotted), concept elaboration
(medium dotted), programming (dense dotted), and summative
evaluation (solid).

II. METHODS
Figure 1 summarises the steps of the user-centred design and
usability evaluation of the developed HRV biofeedback game,
which are partially described in this paper.

A. CONTEXT ANALYSIS AND GAME PRINCIPLE SELECTION
Popular Android games in Sweden on the Google Play Store
(checked on 17.04.2015) [25] were used as inspiration for the
creation of ﬁve game concepts. The preferred game concept
was selected based on a survey of 20 participants with an
equal gender distribution and a mean age of 39 ± 13.5.

B. DESIGN OF THE GAME MECHANICS AND
GRAPHICAL USER INTERFACE
The mechanics, dynamics and aesthetics (MDA) frame-
work is a formal approach to game design [26]. From the

5532

‘‘aesthetics’’ point of view, the primary goal of the devel-
oped game is to pass the time while providing a sense of
pleasure to make the exercise more bearable. In the HRV
biofeedback game, the player must control his or her heart
rate through breathing while maintaining the game ﬂow by
enjoying tasks and visualisations. Translating these require-
ments to the ‘‘dynamics’’ point of view suggests that enter-
tainment can be achieved by deviating from the boring task
of breathing training by providing immersion and placing
the user in a game ﬂow that encourages him or her to keep
playing. In addition, achievements can be added as mid-term
motivators. Based on this understanding, a gaming concept
was chosen based on context analysis and a survey of poten-
tial users. The evaluated biofeedback game was developed in
a user-centred fashion in accordance with ISO 9241-210 [27].
Formative evaluations through icon tests, unstructured inter-
views and theoretic models were conducted to achieve a
basic level of usability. Bewley et al. have described a two-
stage icon testing method that has also been suggested by
Jakob Nielsen [28], [29]. This method was applied in two
iterations, with 10 different participants in each iteration.
Because these tests were formative, it was necessary for
the ages of the participants to be consistent with the target
population. Finally, the resulting game concept was evaluated
based on the GameFlow model [30].

C. GAME DEVELOPMENT
The HxM BT from Zephyr Technology is the wireless Blue-
tooth heart rate monitor that was used in this study [31]. The
device is designed to measure the user’s heart rate for ﬁtness
applications and is available through several retail stores.
A software development kit (SDK) for Android is available,
which uses a serial communication protocol. It includes a
strap that is embedded with dry electrodes connected to the
recording device through two snap buttons. The device turns
on automatically upon connecting to the strap and hence can
be easily operated by non-professional users without special
training.
A biofeedback framework was designed and implemented
in Java to provide the necessary functions for communicat-
ing with the heart rate sensors, which currently include the
Zephyr HxM and two home-built electrocardiogram (ECG)
and thoracic bioimpedance measurement devices, and to
perform the required signal processing steps for HRV
biofeedback. Android Studio was used as the development
environment, and the 3D components of the game were
realised using the libGDX game engine. During a game ses-
sion, the scene is rendered by OpenGL.

D. STUDY DESIGN
For performing the actual tests and deﬁning successful com-
pletion criteria (SCCs), a chronological task list was devel-
oped. Additional documents were prepared to guide each
participant through the test session. Prior to each actual
usability test, a pre-questionnaire regarding the participant’s
background and technological experience was completed.

An introduction followed by the chronological list of
tasks was presented to the participant by means of a Pow-
erPoint presentation in automatic playback mode to avoid
any human-human interaction bias. The software was already
pre-set to the default settings. The software was launched
by the participant. After the user had performed the calibra-
tion procedure and played a one-minute training game, any
questions that the user had about the game were answered by
the moderator. All developed game modes, i.e., visualisation,
steering with buttons and steering by tilting, were played
for three minutes. The ﬁnal task was to interpret a score-
board (displayed after the game session). The test session
was completed with post-test questionnaires and an interview
in which notable actions of the participant were discussed.
In addition, the participants were encouraged to talk about
their experiences and to ask questions.

E. STUDY POPULATION
The target users for this game include individuals with or
at risk of chronic diseases such as depression, hypertension,
and systematic inﬂammation. However, these diseases do not
necessarily cause any disabilities that would limit patients’
interactions with the game. Therefore, presenting with any
of these diseases was not a criterion for the recruited partic-
ipants. However, the participants were selected from the age
range of 40-67 years to match the target user group. This age
group consists of non-retired ‘‘digital immigrants’’ [32]–[34].
Working people have a higher chance of having come in
contact with modern technology through their workplaces.
Because the software has an English user interface, basic
English skills were a requirement. A sample size of 9 partic-
ipants who have not been part of pilot tests and design of the
game mechanics and graphical user interface was estimated
based on the results of a pilot study utilising the methods of
Sauro and Lewis [35]. To provide a larger buffer for potential
withdrawal and to satisfy the rule of thumb [36], the target
sample size was increased to 15. Employees and researchers
from KTH School of Technology and Health, in the target
age range, were invited to participate in the study. None of
the invited participants was directly related to the project nor
had access to any of the results from the formative studies.
Four participants withdrew prior to or during the tests. There-
fore, the results of the summative evaluation are based on
11 participants. Biosignals were recorded in accordance with
the ethical approval granted by the ethical review board of
Gothenburg, Sweden. All participants were informed about
the project and signed a consent form.

1) QUESTIONNAIRES
A pre-test questionnaire was used to collect data about the
participants’ demographic backgrounds, and a post-test ques-
tionnaire was used to measure usability metrics. Elements of
the screening questionnaire from Rubin et al. and the video
game experience questionnaire by Newcombe et al. were
used to develop the screening questionnaire [37], [38]. The
questionnaire of Rubin et al. covers the general backgrounds

5533

FIGURE 2. Collection and analysis flow of biosignals and logs.

of participants, whereas that of Newcombe et al. covers their
experience in video gaming. At the end of each test session,
a questionnaire was administered to measure subjective fac-
tors. The post-questionnaire was a combination of the game
experience questionnaire (GEQ) with the system usability
scale (SUS) to cover the general usability of the developed
game and the emotional experience of the user [39], [40].
Based on the GEQ results, scores for competence, sensory
and imaginative immersion, ﬂow, tension and annoyance,
challenge, negative affect and positive affect can be calcu-
lated. For this study, the in-game and post-game modules of
the GEQ were used. The social presence module was not
relevant because it is intended for multiplayer games. The
SUS was adapted following a recommendation from Finstad
and Bangor et al., who suggest changing ‘‘cumbersome’’ to
‘‘awkward’’ [41], [42]. Another adaptation was the use of
‘‘game’’ instead of ‘‘system’’, which was more relevant in this
study. According to Lewis and Sauro, changing ‘‘system’’ to
a different term has no effect on the SUS score [43].

2) INTERVIEW
In addition to the questionnaires, an interview was scheduled
with each participant after the post-questionnaire. Each par-
ticipant was asked about his or her favourite game mode and
the reasons behind his or her preference. Furthermore, non-
implemented game elements were described, and the partici-
pant’s opinions were documented. Finally, any problems with
the participant’s performance as observed by the moderator
were discussed.

3) BIOSIGNAL, AUDIO, VIDEO AND USER
INTERACTION RECORDINGS
Automatic data collection was used to measure biofeed-
back performance and the participants’ interactions. Time-
averaged pulse rates and heart beat-to-beat intervals were
recorded in addition to the action/event logs from the game
application. For potential further detailed analysis, the par-
ticipants’ performance and interviews were recorded in the
form of audio and video. The participants’ interactions with
the software were recorded simultaneously by mirroring the
tablet screen to a laptop. Application and user interaction

logs were recorded in MongoDB using Logstash. The logs
and signals were later analysed in MATLAB (MathWorks,
Inc.). Figure 2 illustrates the recording/analysis ﬂow of the
biosignals and logs.

4) PILOT TEST
The study protocol was reviewed in a pilot test. One of
the authors (TW), evaluated the test procedure on himself,
followed by ﬁve additional test sessions. The protocol and
study material were iteratively improved. In particular, the
SCCs were balanced by estimating the difﬁculty of the tasks.
A moderator guide was created based on the experience
gained from these test sessions to ensure a repeatable testing
procedure.
The number of required participants for the summative
study was estimated from the variance of the results. The
test participants had a mean age of 36 ± 7 and included ﬁve
male participants and one female participant. By applying
the methods of Sauro et al., a required sample size of 9 was
determined [35].

III. RESULTS
A. CONTEXT ANALYSIS AND GAME PRINCIPLE SELECTION
The developed mock-ups for the selected game concepts are
illustrated in Figure 3. The ﬁrst concept (Figure 3.a) is a
visualisation of breathing with a balloon; by controlling his or
her breathing, the user guides the balloon along a sinusoidal
path (short-term feedback) and can achieve stars in the sky
by maintaining the correct pace (long-term feedback). The
second mock-up is a balancing game with a stick ﬁgure,
which will shake and, ultimately, fall down if the user does
not breathe at the desired pace; see Figure 3.b. Car racing is
the third concept; by breathing at the suggested pace, the user
ﬁlls the car with fuel to allow it to complete its lap around
the track (see Figure 3.c). A shooting game (Figure 3.d) is
the fourth concept, in which the stability of the cross-hairs is
coupled to the correct breathing rate. To reduce the degree of
violence, non-living targets were suggested. Finally, the ﬁfth
concept is an endless runner combined with a ﬂight simulator;
see Figure 3.e. The plane moves upwards when the user
should inhale and downwards when the user should exhale.

5534

FIGURE 3. Game principle mock-ups, which were evaluated through a
survey. (a) Balloon game. (b) Balancing game. (c) Car racing game.
(d) Shooting game. (e) Flight simulator game.

The plane will ﬂy more stably when the user is breathing
at the exact desired pace. Obstacles and collectable items
are added to the scene and can be collected by steering
the plane to the left or right. All participants preferred the
ﬂight simulator concept, and hence, this concept was used to
develop a full game.

B. DESIGN OF THE GAME MECHANICS AND
GRAPHICAL USER INTERFACE
The game has a 3D ﬂight simulator setting (Figure 4), as
selected through a survey offering ﬁve different scenarios,
i.e., a balloon game, a balancing game, a car racing game,
a shooting game and a ﬂight simulator. The plane is on a
parabolic ﬂight path, and the user must inhale and exhale at
the pace of the parabola to keep the plane stable. Three game
modes were implemented to add diverse challenge levels
from easy to difﬁcult. In the ﬁrst mode, the user has no addi-
tional task other than breathing. The second mode adds two
virtual buttons to control the plane’s horizontal movement.
Flying coins are added to the path, which the user can collect
to earn more points. The third mode is similar to the second
mode but with a different steering tool. Instead of using
virtual buttons, the player must steer by tilting the gaming
device. The user collects more points by correctly breathing
and collecting more coins with the plane. Therefore, the goal
is to achieve a high score and earn a place on the leaderboard.
Adaptive tasks are used to increase the user’s mid- and long-
term motivation. By setting and fulﬁlling an extra goal, the
user can receive additional points. The implemented extra
goals are 1) collecting a minimum number of coins, 2) hitting
a maximum number of clouds, and 3) reaching the maximum
altitude of the plane.

FIGURE 4. Selected screenshots from the realised game. (a) Main menu
view. A mock-up device is connected to the software. The green icon
indicates that a ‘‘flight challenge’’ is active. (b) ‘‘Visualisation Only’’ game
mode. The countdown prior to game start is visible. (c) ‘‘Steering with
Buttons’’ game mode. The virtual button on the right is pressed. Smoke
indicates that a cloud has been hit. The altitude indicator flashes to mark
the point in time for switching between inhaling and exhaling.
(d) ‘‘Steering with the Accelerometer’’ game mode. The stars notify
the user that a coin has just been collected.

The player can ‘‘collect’’ cities by visiting them, thereby
giving the player a sense of exploring the world. Sensory plea-
sure can be achieved by means of atmospheric and impressive
visual and audio effects. Statistics and in-game feedback can
help the user to discover his or her own body/mind status.
These ‘‘dynamic’’ elements are implemented through con-
crete ‘‘mechanics’’, which are not presented here.

C. DEMOGRAPHIC RESULTS
The mean age of the participants was 54 ± 11, and there
were eight male and three female participants. Interesting
ﬁndings about the participants’ backgrounds are summarised
in Table 1.

TABLE 1. Selected findings about the backgrounds of the participants.

D. QUESTIONNAIRE RESULTS
The overall average SUS score was 69 ± 14. Figure 5
illustrates the SUS results. Based on the GEQ results,
linear
correlations
with
age
were
found
(Figure
6).
A decreasing perceived competence was observed for the

5535

FIGURE 5. Achieved SUS scores; reported for females, males, non-tablet
users and tablet users.

FIGURE 6. GEQ metrics from the summative study in relation to the
participant’s age. A trend line and the corresponding R2 value are
overlaid.

older participants. In addition, sensory and imaginative
immersion was found to increase with age. According to the
user interaction logs, the participants succeeded in perform-
ing most of the tasks, and the time needed to learn to use the
virtual buttons (mean of 66 ± 78 seconds) was much longer
than that needed to learn to use the accelerometer (mean of
8 ± 10 seconds).

E. BIOSIGNAL DATA
The participants’ success rate for the one-minute training ses-
sion was greater than 50% for all game modes (‘‘Training’’,
‘‘Visualisation Only’’, ‘‘Steering with Buttons’’, and ‘‘Steer-
ing with the Accelerometer’’), with that for ‘‘Visualisation
Only’’ being approximately 80%. For learnability estima-
tion, the development of the 0.1 Hz peak (corresponding to
6 cycles per minute, which is a typical resonant frequency) in
proportion to the total power was used. The integral of the
power spectrum density (PSD) between 0.09 and 0.11 Hz
was divided by the total PSD area. The percentage of the
PSD area contained in the peak corresponding to the resonant
frequency increased throughout the game session in 64% of
the participants.

F. INTERVIEWS
During the post-test interviews, the participants reported rea-
sons for their low performance in certain tasks, their own
game preferences and their suggestions for improvement. The
‘‘Steering with the Accelerometer’’ game mode was the most
liked among the participants (64%), followed by ‘‘Steering
with Buttons’’ (27%) and ‘‘Visualisation Only’’ (9%). A sum-
mary of the discussions with the different participants can be
found in the supplements. All of the participants appreciated
the ‘‘ﬂight challenge’’ idea as a useful tool for eliciting long-
term intrinsic motivation to encourage players to play the
game more often. They also liked the idea of including real
locations and ﬂight routes and providing a map on which they
could see which cities they had already visited. In addition,
variations in the backgrounds, plane models, plane engine
noise, coin models and plane speeds on different routes were
suggested by some participants to have a positive effect on
immersion.

IV. DISCUSSION
The game concept was selected through a survey, and hence,
the ﬁnal acceptance is related to the representativeness of the
survey participants with respect to the ﬁnal study group.
The overall game idea was broadly accepted, as indicated
by the SUS score of 69. Nevertheless, clustering trends were
observed between male and female participants and between
tablet and non-tablet users. Because the sample size does
not permit the splitting of the participants into two clusters,
no statistical analysis of these clustering effects was per-
formed. According to Sauro et al., the SUS score should
be interpreted in terms of the achieved percentile rank [35].
With this approach, the usability assessment is ‘‘C’’ (in an
A-F ranking), which corresponds to an adjective rating of
‘‘Good’’. Because this assessment is primarily designed for
information systems, for which the intent of usability is to
decrease challenge as much as possible, our software is not
fully comparable to the types of software that are most com-
monly assessed in this manner.
Despite the low conﬁdence metric, the developed game
achieved similar GEQ results to those of a Half-Life
2 mod developed by Nacke et al. [44]. The games Maniac
Mansion Deluxe and Zuma have higher scores for com-
petence and annoyance, tension, and negative affect; lower
challenge scores; and similar scores for sensory and imagina-
tive immersion, positive affect and ﬂow [45]. Therefore, the
metrics of the developed game are no worse than those of the
presented commercial games, which do not include breathing
exercises.
One objective of game development is to achieve a high
ﬂow score according to users (as supported by GEQ met-
rics). No data are available for comparison regarding the ten-
sion and annoyance score for non-gamiﬁed breathing train-
ing; however, this task is generally reported to be boring.
A below-average tension and annoyance score can therefore
be interpreted as a success. A remarkably high challenge

5536

score in combination with a low competence score reveals
a low perceived skill. This can be partially explained by
the high challenge of the tasks and the inexperience of the
participants. In addition, most of the participants were non-
gamers. However, the barrier to entry for the game should
be kept low, and continuous feedback on success should be
provided. During these tests, the HxM BT was used, which is
not able to measure respiration, and therefore, the application
was not able to provide immediate feedback. Even with an
available respiration signal, the continuous notiﬁcation fea-
ture should consider the individual’s respiration cycle and
should be parameterised to be more motivating than accurate.
In addition, it should not distract the user from breathing
correctly.
Objective evaluation of the participants’ performance
revealed that most of the tasks were successfully individually
performed. The post-test interviews indicated that individual
usability problems encountered when using the menus can
be solved by increasing the size of the buttons in the main
menu. Misinterpretation of the high score and score labels can
be traced back to the fact that these numbers were the same
during the tests. The majority of the participants interpreted
the score categories correctly, indicating that the gamiﬁed
score visualisation is appropriate.
Biosignal recordings revealed that the ‘‘Visualisation
Only’’ mode yielded the highest heart rate response among
the participants. Even with the overlapping learning curves,
the training success rates of the ‘‘Steering with Buttons’’ and
‘‘Steering with the Accelerometer’’ game modes were lower.
The ‘‘Steering with the Accelerometer’’ mode in particular
had a very low training success rate. This decline in the
success rate indicates that multitasking has a strong effect
on breathing training and is therefore not appropriate for
beginners. Concurrent observations of the learning curves in
the majority of the participants suggested that game modes
that require more multitasking are likely suitable for users
with more experience. To allow the user to focus on breathing
training ﬁrst, each game session could begin with 30 seconds
of breathing only. After this warm-up phase, multitasking
elements could be added to challenge the experienced user.
In our study the breathing rate was set to 6 cycles per
minute which corresponds to a resonant frequency of 0.1 Hz.
For a productive application an individual resonance fre-
quency might be beneﬁcial. Characteristics of resonance
frequency and a method to detect individual resonance fre-
quency is described by Vaschillo et al. [46]. An adaptive
individual resonance frequency detection is implemented in
our biofeedback game. This algorithm learns the individual
resonance frequency by changing the proposed breathing
cycle during gaming and monitoring the recorded PSD. How-
ever, this feature was not used it in this study to keep the
session as short as possible. Further studies should investigate
the effectiveness of a playful resonance frequency detection.
Sensory and imaginative immersion was found to increase
with age. One possible explanation could be lower game
experience of older people. People might have higher

impression by quality of 3D graphics if they have not experi-
enced it before. Younger people who are more likely to be
familiar with 3D graphics, might have higher expectations
which explains their lower scores. This hypothesis should be
evaluated in future studies.
Despite the observed trend in the objective training suc-
cess, the participants reported an inverted order of game
mode preference for all game modes. The higher challenge
and natural and intuitive steering offered by the ‘‘Steering
with the Accelerometer’’ mode were signiﬁcantly preferred.
A remarkably shorter learning curve was observed for the
accelerometer interaction (statistically signiﬁcant based on a
paired t-test). By contrast, Medryk and MacKenzie [47] have
remarked that most users are already familiar with virtual
buttons and that therefore, not as much learning potential is
present with such buttons as with the accelerometer. However,
this claim was not consistent with our results; the overall
performance with the buttons was worse than that with the
accelerometer. One suggestion for increasing the learnability
of the button controls is to use the left and right halves of
the screen as buttons. This change would free the user of
the need to ensure that his or her ﬁngers are hitting the
buttons. To raise the user’s conﬁdence, an interaction method
should be chosen that allows the user to perceive a higher
level of skill. According to Marzo et al., the accelerometer
outperforms buttons in this respect [48]. Consistent with these
previous ﬁndings, the accelerometer-controlled mode was the
mode of choice of the users. In addition, the user is able to set
a ‘‘ﬂight challenge’’ from a list of preset tasks by adding an
extra goal. The overall difﬁculty of this additional challenge
is rated and, in the case of success, is added to the user’s
score. Moreover, the user can choose from three different
game modes with divergent challenges. This concept has the
potential to motivate the user over the long term, because
player can adapt the game so that it remains exciting.

A. LIMITATIONS OF THE STUDY
In the conducted summative study, healthy participants with
university backgrounds were used as surrogates for the target
user group. In addition, the gender distribution was shifted,
with 73% male participants; this biases the results, as there
were observable differences between the genders in the per-
ceived usability of the software. These limitations should be
considered when extrapolating the results to a wider user
group. The bias induced by two of the participants, who
had participated in multiple such studies, should be negli-
gible. In addition, the study design imposed a high level
of challenge and stress on the users, which likely reduced
their performance and perceived enjoyment. Furthermore,
the participants were not individuals who play video games
regularly. Their acceptance is therefore expected to be lower
than that of people who enjoy playing video games.
Because
the
participants
played
each
game
mode
only once, the long-term acceptance remains unknown.
The decision not to randomise the order of the game
modes resulted in overlap of the learning curves and the

5537

individual performances. However, the users were given time
to adapt to the challenge level, in a manner similar to the
real use case. In the study protocol, the length of the training
phase was restricted to one minute to prevent the participants
from tiring during the test session. The decision to invite
more participants into the study than were needed paid off,
allowing several data sets to be excluded because of quality
issues, thereby elevating the quality of the remaining data
sets. However, it was not possible to split the participants into
clusters (male vs. female, tablet users vs. non-tablet users) for
further analysis.

V. CONCLUSION
The results show that video games have the potential to moti-
vate people to engage in HRV training. On the ﬁrst try, higher
training performance was observed for pure visualisation
than for games with multitasking. However, most participants
preferred activities with multitasking, which leads to more
engagement. Therefore, an adaptive challenge with multi-
tasking elements is mandatory for success. Multitasking has
considerable inﬂuence on HRV biofeedback and should be
used with caution. The reported usability evaluation demon-
strates that users can perform the presented biofeedback exer-
cises without any coaching and can understand their training
progress from a playful presentation.

VI. FUTURE WORK
Future
investigations
should
focus
on
ensuring
self-
conﬁdence in users. Because the participants in the sum-
mative study were not active gamers, the conclusions apply
only to this speciﬁc group and are of limited applicability for
other user populations. The ﬁrst generation of active gamers
is ageing and naturally developing various chronic diseases
that can be treated with health-oriented games, e.g., HRV
biofeedback games. The next step will be to plan further
studies to evaluate the developed game for different groups
of patients or people at risk, e.g., those with stressful jobs,
and to elaborate a patient-oriented therapeutic application.