Health Informatics Journal
2015, Vol. 21(1) 10­–23
© The Author(s) 2014
Reprints and permissions: 
sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/1460458213495744
jhi.sagepub.com

Development and usability testing 
of a web-based cancer symptom and 
quality-of-life support intervention

SE Wolpin
University of Washington, USA

B Halpenny
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, USA

G Whitman, J McReynolds, M Stewart and  WB Lober
University of Washington, USA

DL Berry
University of Washington, USA; Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, USA

Abstract
The feasibility and acceptability of computerized screening and patient-reported outcome measures have been 
demonstrated in the literature. However, patient-centered management of health information entails two 
challenges: gathering and presenting data using “patient-tailored” methods and supporting “patient-control” 
of health information. The design and development of many symptom and quality-of-life information systems 
have not included opportunities for systematically collecting and analyzing user input. As part of a larger 
clinical trial, the Electronic Self-Report Assessment for Cancer–II project, participatory design approaches 
were used to build and test new features and interfaces for patient/caregiver users. The research questions 
centered on patient/caregiver preferences with regard to the following: (a) content, (b) user interface needs, 
(c) patient-oriented summary, and (d) patient-controlled sharing of information with family, caregivers, and 
clinicians. Mixed methods were used with an emphasis on qualitative approaches; focus groups and individual 
usability tests were the primary research methods. Focus group data were content analyzed, while individual 
usability sessions were assessed with both qualitative and quantitative methods. We identified 12 key patient/
caregiver preferences through focus groups with 6 participants. We implemented seven of these preferences 
during the iterative design process. We deferred development for some of the preferences due to resource 
constraints. During individual usability testing (n = 8), we were able to identify 65 usability issues ranging 
from minor user confusion to critical errors that blocked task completion. The participatory development 

SE Wolpin, Biobehavioral Nursing & Health Systems, School of Nursing, University of Washington, Box 357266, Seattle, 
WA 98195-7266, USA. 

495744 JHI0010.1177/1460458213495744Health Informatics JournalWolpin et al.
2014

Article

11

model that we used led to features and design revisions that were patient centered. We are currently 
evaluating new approaches for the application interface and for future research pathways. We encourage 
other researchers to adopt user-centered design approaches when building patient-centered technologies.

Keywords
consumer health information, decision-support systems, ehealth, evidence-based practice, IT design and 
development methodologies

Introduction

The feasibility and acceptability of symptom and quality-of-life information (SQLI) systems have 
been demonstrated in the literature.1,2 However, many of these applications have been developed 
based on what providers, researchers, or vendors have believed is best, with limited attention 
toward principles of user-centered design.3 While our early research efforts in computerized SQLI 
screening were similarly based on the needs of clinicians, an increasing emphasis in our research 
over the last 10 years has focused on the needs of patients. The latest version of the Electronic Self-
Report Assessment for Cancer (ESRAC) web application utilized a user-centered design approach 
during the development process: presenting “patient-tailored” content as well as providing for the 
“patient-control” of health information. Findings presented here may help inform other researchers 
building or evaluating computerized SQLI management systems.

Background

Early efforts at computerized patient-reported outcomes focused largely on the needs of the provid-
ers. We have previously reported a review on these developmental efforts;1 in brief, foundational 
work, led by Slack et al.4 in 1964, reported on a computerized data collection system that included 
question branching and exception reporting to clinicians. Subsequent work has helped establish the 
utility and feasibility of collecting patient-reported outcomes via computer.2,5–12 Despite the advances 
made, usability testing was often rudimentary and limited to post hoc acceptability measures.1,13,14 
However, in recent years, many researchers have begun to use participatory design approaches which 
help incorporate the preferences of end users. This approach, within software engineering efforts, 
often involves engaging end users in the iterative design of a product but not necessarily in the analy-
sis and publication of research data.15,16 In a prior publication, we have provided a discussion of cur-
rent usability techniques as well as exemplar studies that we found in the literature.3 Our definition of 
usability is informed by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) 9241011: “The 
extent to which a product can be used by specified users to achieve specified goals with effectiveness, 
efficiency, and satisfaction in a specified context of use.”17 Our own development efforts increasingly 
have centered on users’ needs. In the first prototype of ESRAC (2001–2003), focus groups consisting 
of patients and providers were used during the design phase to help establish functional require-
ments.2 The application was evaluated using an externally developed exit survey14 with patients 
(n = 45) and clinicians (n = 12). Both groups reported high levels of acceptability in using the applica-
tion. The clinicians also reported that the graphical summary of symptoms was helpful.12 While rated 
as acceptable and useful, this early prototype was largely “hard-coded” for specific survey instru-
ments and had a relatively inflexible software architecture.18
With funding from the National Institute of Nursing Research (NINR), we were able to 
develop ESRAC 1.0 (2004–2008) with a more flexible survey architecture capable of multiple 
measurement time points, conditional branching, and a refined user interface based on

12	
Health Informatics Journal 21(1)

best practices.19–21 The application also contained a researcher interface for editing surveys and 
downloading normalized datasets.19 Additional aims in this study called for a randomized con-
trolled trial; patients (n = 660) of all cancer types used the application during two measurement 
points while in the ambulatory setting: prior to starting treatment and during treatment. Subjects 
were randomized to a control group and an intervention group, with graphical summaries of self-
reported SQLI provided to the care team in the latter group. We were able to establish the accept-
ability of this new platform with patients and clinical efficacy, given that the delivery of the 
summary report increased discussion of SQLIs without increasing the duration of the visit.22 
Capable of supporting a variety of research projects beyond ESRAC, and with an eye toward 
deployment in a variety of settings using virtual servers and cloud-based hosting, the codebase was 
named the Distributed Health Assessment and Intervention Research (DHAIR) platform.19
While ESRAC 1.0 had many additional features extending the original prototype, the applica-
tion was still designed primarily with the clinical care team in mind. The interface for patients was 
a basic web form allowing the patient to answer validated questionnaires with limited features for 
feedback, interactivity, or engagement. The resulting summary reports were passed to the clinical 
care team in preparation for the face-to-face clinic visit. Patients were confined to reporting symp-
toms only at certain time points and could only access the system in an ambulatory setting on a 
research study laptop.
The program of research continued with a second NINR award (2008–2010) to enhance the 
intervention with a patient-centric approach encouraging patients to self-monitor SQLI, access 
institution-specific and web patient education resources for self-care of SQLI, and receive coach-
ing on how to communicate the SQLI to the clinical team.23,24 We have also reported our participa-
tory and iterative design approaches for developing ESRAC 2.0 within the context of a broader 
discussion of different approaches to assessing the usability and acceptability of patient-centered 
technologies.3,25 Here, we report our assessment of user preferences and subsequent results from 
usability testing of a revised prototype.

Methods

Participatory design and iterative software development techniques with a user-centered focus was 
the overall framework. Our development efforts were supported by design guidelines having an 
emphasis on universal usability and older adults.21,26–30 In brief, mixed research methods were 
employed with qualitative approaches used during focus groups as patient/caregiver preferences 
were identified. During individual sessions, we used low- and high-fidelity mock-ups and primar-
ily relied on a “think-aloud” approach31 as well as recordings made by the Tobii T60 eye tracker,32 
which provided us with both qualitative and quantitative data.
We conducted two focus groups with patients and caregivers during April and June 2008. The 
first focus group had three patients; the second group had two patients and one caregiver. Eight 
individual usability sessions were conducted between May and December 2008 (Figure 1). Two of 
these participants had taken part in the earlier focus groups.

Procedures
Participant characteristics

All study procedures were approved by the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center/University of 
Washington Cancer Consortium Review Board. Eligible participants included patients with any

13

type of cancer diagnosis or receiving a bone marrow transplant. All participants were 18+ years of 
age and English speaking. No upper age limit was employed. Participants were allowed to engage 
in focus group sessions as well as usability sessions. All participants received a US$20 incentive 
gift card for their participation in a focus group or usability session. Compensation was later 
increased to US$40 gift cards in an effort to increase recruitment rates.

Focus groups

Participants were recruited by flyers in the clinical area of the outpatient oncology center and 
through referrals by their nurses to the study coordinator. The participants were encouraged 
to bring caregivers to the group. Following informed consent procedures, participants 
answered a short internally developed questionnaire reporting demographics and previous 
computer use.
Focus groups were facilitated by one of the authors (B.H.). We used four categories of questions 
outlined by Kruger: Introductory, Transition, Key, and Ending questions.33 Discussion began by 
asking participants to think about symptoms they may have and what would be helpful in terms of 
symptom management. Participants were then prompted to think about their last visit and reflect 
on the process of how they thought about and reported symptoms to their provider. Additional 
conversation was prompted by reviewing printed copies of the ESRAC 1.0 provider-centered 
report. The focus groups were asked to consider questions such as the following: Do the surveys 
ask the types of questions that are important to patients? Do they, as patients, understand what is 
on the summaries? Do the summaries display data that are important to patients? In the second 
focus group, participants were presented with key findings to date, so that they could reflect the 
findings, validate them, and provide additional input, an approach recommended by Garmer et al.34 
This focus group was asked to reflect more broadly on questions posed by the design committee, 
based on information learned from the previous focus group and development activities. During 
this process, we focused on participants’ suggestions for redesign and modification of the summa-
ries. Low-fidelity mock-ups (“wireframes”) were prepared to stimulate discussion and feedback 
from patients. These mock-ups were non-interactive drawings that approximated the screen dis-
plays and navigation elements that would normally be generated by the application. The mock-ups 
were arranged around three key areas: graphs for patients to monitor their SQLI over time; tips on 
how to better communicate with their doctors; and information sharing with family, friends, and 
caregivers.

4/1/2008
12/1/2008

7/1/2008
10/1/2008

May 08 - Nov 08
Individual Sessions

Apr 08 - May 08
Focus Groups

Figure 1. Timeline of focus groups and individual sessions.

14	
Health Informatics Journal 21(1)

Individual usability testing

During individual usability sessions, participants examined low- and high-fidelity mock-ups of the 
application, while being encouraged to communicate their observations and experience. Along 
with allowing free exploration of the application, we asked participants to complete several struc-
tured tasks, such as finding the graphical summary for a specific symptom or adding a journal entry 
(Appendix 1), while noting any navigation errors. Sessions were recorded with a portable usability 
laboratory (PUL). The PUL, consisting of a Tobii T60 eye tracking monitor, screen recording soft-
ware (Tobii Studio 1.2), and a video camera for recording audio and facial interactions, allowed us 
to look for patterns of user difficulty and software development issues that needed to be addressed. 
The Tobii T60 eye tracker is unobtrusive to the user and employs infrared cameras hidden in the 
base of a 17-inch monitor. Eye movements, as a proxy for user attention, are recorded without chin 
cradles or obtrusive video cameras. A calibration process required the participant to look at calibra-
tion points on the screen for approximately 5 s.32 Eghdam et al.16 used an eye tracker in their evalu-
ation of an antibiotic decision-support tool for providers and found that it was a valuable 
complement to traditional usability studies in allowing the researchers to discover navigation 
issues and other user behaviors that may have otherwise been overlooked.
We began by assessing each of four areas marked for revision: (a) the user interface, (b) visual 
display elements, (c) navigation controls, and (d) the patient-centered summaries. Testing proto-
cols with task lists that matched a typical use case were utilized. An example protocol (Appendix 
1) included the following: logging in, locating a symptom report, changing the graph type to a bar 
chart, customizing the date range, adding a journal entry, and sharing a chart with a caregiver. The 
task list changed depending on what area of the application we were exploring. Emphasis in early 
sessions was on an index of symptom reports (“Results List”) that users could use to “drill down” 
into a focused, interactive view for a specific symptom. In later sessions, task lists were focused on 
journaling functions as well as sharing charts.
Participants were given instructions to “Tell me what you are thinking about while you use the 
program.” During the session, the role of the study staff facilitating the usability testing was to 
encourage the participant to continue to “think-aloud” with prompts such as “Tell me what you are 
thinking” and “Keep talking.” This “think-aloud” method was first outlined by Virzi.31 Later, par-
ticipants were given slightly different task lists, with some core items retained, to maximize evalu-
ation of different parts of the application. Initial individual sessions were conducted with 
low-fidelity paper mock-ups, while later sessions used high-fidelity web prototypes. Using the 
PUL, we assessed critical navigation paths and deviations that users might make in the course of 
completing a task. Independent reviewers coded the relative success of participants in completing 
the task using “1 = No issues, 2 = some hesitation, 3 = marked difficulty, 4 = task failure.”

Analysis

Audio recordings of the focus groups were transcribed and reviewed by the research team using a 
content analysis approach. Independent reviewers (S.E.W., D.L.B., and G.W.) tagged utterances 
within each transcript with labels such as “navigation issue,” “information sharing,” and “aesthet-
ics.” Two rounds were conducted with reviewers meeting after each round to discuss tags and to 
reach consensus when needed. The resulting tags were then prioritized for development.
Tasks in each usability session were later reviewed and coded independently by authors S.E.W. 
and G.W. using recordings from the eye tracker, embedded audio/video, and external video. Codes 
were later compared and consensus reached when there were differences in initial coding. Had no 
consensus been reached, a third author would have been involved in the process.

15

Results

An internally developed demographic survey was administered once to each of the 12 distinct 
participants. The typical participant was male (n = 9), aged between 30 and 49 years (n = 9), non-
Hispanic (n = 11), and white (n = 10). The sample was quite educated with most (n = 8) having 
completed college or postgraduate studies. With respect to computer use, all respondents indicated 
they searched for health information on the Internet, and all reported using computers at home. One 
respondent had dial-up access at home, while the others reported high-speed access. Two respon-
dents reported never using computers at work, but the remaining participants indicated that they 
used computers “often” or “very often” when at work.

Focus groups

Participants’ review of the survey component of the platform confirmed that the questions being 
asked were relevant and that the graphical summaries of reported SQLI were understandable. We 
identified 12 key patient preferences (Table 1) to help guide our development efforts and subse-
quent individual testing sessions, 7 of these preferences were implemented but 5 were deferred for 
various reasons.
Participants reported a preference for being able to customize date ranges, select which specific 
symptoms in a subscale were displayed on a chart, as well as the ability to see the actual wording 
from the questionnaire for the variables that were being charted. Some participants wanted access 
to metadata about the surveys and SQLI (e.g. authors, previous study results). We were unable to 
implement this fully due to resource constraints but provided links to study related web pages that 
contain relevant bibliographic references.
One area that proved difficult to implement was a desire by patients to include free text 
annotations of graphical symptom summaries on the graph itself, as well as an online journal. 
We accomplished both by presenting a journal entry feature as a stand-alone page as well as 
an open text box interface for journal entries on the page that displayed graphed SQLI 
(Appendix 2).
We also received feedback on aesthetics and navigation, such as styling bulleted lists and the 
use of more icons, particularly related to labeling groups of similar symptoms. We were able to 
implement most of this feedback but deferred using icon groups in part because there is not 
always a clear relationship between icons and symptoms. With regard to content, there was 
preference for inclusion of teaching tips, so that users could access additional information 
about symptoms and links to external resources. Given the length of some of the teaching tips, 
there was consensus that displaying some of the preliminary text in a teaching tip with a “see 
more” link that would expand the text would be beneficial. Participants also wanted to be able 
to “invite and share” graphical summaries and journal entries with specific people such as fam-
ily members and caregivers—there was also a desire voiced to have granular control, so that 
individual symptom elements could be shared without “sharing everything.” We implemented 
this with a multistep sharing process including “select all” checkboxes to facilitate efficient 
information sharing while preserving granular control. One area we chose not to implement 
was the ability for patients to view usage logs that detailed whether shared charts and journals 
were actually being viewed by those who had received a sharing invitation. We saw potential 
problems with user privacy and deferred it for possible inclusion in a future study. A common 
theme related to patient control of information was the desire to have medical records, such as 
lab data, accessible within the application. This feature was deferred due to being outside our 
scope and research.

16	
Health Informatics Journal 21(1)

Individual usability sessions

Eight participants completed usability sessions. Three sessions were conducted with low-fidelity 
paper mock-ups as depicted in Figure 2, the remaining five sessions used high-fidelity mock-ups. 
One participant began a session that was stopped after 15 min due to connectivity issues; this ses-
sion was rescheduled at a later time.
The remaining five sessions used web prototypes and the Tobii T60 eye tracker.32 Using a 
testing protocol (Appendix 1), participants were asked to complete a series of discrete tasks on 
screen. The majority were completed with little or no hesitation. However, we identified 65 
usability issues ranging from minor user confusion to critical errors that blocked task comple-
tion. Of note was initial site navigation confusion in Internet-naïve users. Several participants 
were confused by the labeling of navigation buttons displayed with a horizontal tabbed folder 
metaphor. This confusion was confirmed by examination of gaze plots recorded by the eye 
tracker. These plots showed marked visual scanning as participants searched for the appropriate 
navigation elements (Figure 3). For the first task, we typically instructed subjects, “Find your 
nausea report;” however, several participants had difficulty locating the correct tab. At least 
two of the eight participants navigated first to the “Reports” tab instead of the “Results” tab. 
Once subjects found the correct tab, they generally did not have trouble completing the task. 
Through iterative feedback, we eventually settled on “Report My Experiences” and “View My 
Reports” for these tab labels.
Our rational for using low-fidelity approaches for the first three sessions was that we wanted 
feedback on key features before investing the time needed to code these features in the high-
fidelity web prototype. However, we found feedback from the web prototype sessions to be a richer 
source of data as the user experience was more interactive, and we were able to record and replay 
gaze patterns using the eye tracker. These benefits were tempered by the fact that these five high-
fidelity sessions were conducted on the development web server which frequently contained 
debugging code that resulted in lag times contrary to a typical user experience.

Table 1.  Features identified by focus group participants and subsequent decisions to implement or defer.

Feature
Focus group
Implemented/deferred

Customizable date range for summaries
2
Implemented
Individual display of symptoms in scale
1
Implemented
Show previous responses to questions “At the chart”
2
Deferred
Information about who created questionnaire scales
1
Deferred
Add journal/text entry to help annotate SQLI chart
1
Implemented
Aesthetics/style changes
1
Implemented
Icons for symptom groups (“picture of a brain … 
picture of an intestine”)
1
Deferred

Start bulleted teaching tips with title
1
Implemented
Link “See more” to expand teaching tips
1
Implemented
Share summaries and journal entries
Implemented
Show usage logs for whether those invited to share 
data access the data
2
Deferred

Add patient labs/records from the clinic system
1
Deferred

SQLI: symptom and quality-of-life information.

17

Our final design (Figure 4) found five primary pages using a tabbed navigation: (a) “My 
Home” which provided a welcome messaging as well as any tailored messaging directed toward 
the patient about appointment times, links to resuming SQLI surveys, and so on; (b) “Report 
My Experiences” where users answered questions about SQLI as well as provided free text 
journal entries; (c) “View My Reports” which showed past entries, starting from a dashboard 
view and moving into detailed data displays for each symptom; (d) “Teaching Tips” about man-
aging symptoms; and (e) “Share My Reports” where users could invite others to view specific 
charts and past journal entries.

Discussion

Our findings suggest that patients have a desire to view, manipulate, annotate, and share graphi-
cal summaries of their symptom status. Our research efforts incorporated participatory design 
steps, individual usability testing, and iterative development approaches. Combined together, 
these approaches allowed for application development that incorporated patient needs. Other 
researchers have also found success with participatory and iterative design approaches34–36 and 
with the use of eye trackers for complementary subjective and objective data collection.16 

My Home

Below is a list of different symptoms that you were asked about. There is also a small 
chart showing how your symptoms have changed over time. Select the small chart for 
any symptom to see a bigger version and to learn more about the symptom. You can 
also view your past journal entries if you like. 

Settings     
Teaching Tips
Report My Experiences
View Reports

Appetite

Appearance

Bowel Patterns

Concentration

Cough

Fatigue

Fever and Chills

Insomnia

Nausea

Breathing

Symptom Distress

Pain (1-10)

Family Role

Overall Quality of Life

Additional Symptoms

Figure 2.  Low-fidelity mock-up showing symptoms index page.

18	
Health Informatics Journal 21(1)

Despite the benefits of using eye trackers for the development of patient-centered technologies, 
many of the studies we found were related to provider-oriented tools or non-health-related 
applications.
While we implemented some features that users preferred and revised them to be more usable, 
we deferred implementing other features largely due to resource and time constraints. One patient 
preference that was particularly difficult to implement was the desire to annotate symptom charts. 
We were able to provide a partial solution by allowing patients to add entries to their journals 
while viewing their symptom charts. While this alignment of patient journals and charts allowed 
the patients to annotate results, the actual results in the charts were not connected programmati-
cally to the journal entry in the backend database. For example, if a patient changed the date range 
on a displayed chart to a time in the past and then added a journal entry, that entry would be asso-
ciated with the current date rather than the intended date. This is an area that could benefit from 

Figure 3.  Gaze plots from eye tracker recordings.

19

further study and development. People are growing accustomed to “tagging” content on websites 
and later using those tags for creating taxonomies and navigation approaches.37,38 How patients 
can tag their symptom charts is an interesting area worth further study, an extension of this ques-
tion might look at how patients might create symptom tags and attach them to graphical represen-
tations of their body over time.
Another preference that we were unable to meet fully was the desire for patients to see link-
ages between the symptom scales and the scientific literature. We were unable to implement 
this due to resource conflicts—but such integration is an inherently patient-centered character-
istic that lends transparency for those activated patients who want to research topics further or 
who may simply want a higher confidence level for the science underlying the assessment and 
monitoring charts. This desire for more transparency was also noted in participatory research 
by Garmer et al.34
Our study is limited in a number of ways. Across the board, participants were fairly well edu-
cated, and predominantly white, precluding any generalization beyond this demographic. 
Participants in focus groups may have behaved differently with caregivers present, and our focus 
groups and individual sessions would have benefited with additional participants. According to 
usability expert Jacob Nielsen, testing with 3–5 users will identify most problems in an applica-
tion,39,40 and other researchers have argued for more.41 Although the eye tracker provided valuable 
feedback on navigation and visual gaze patterns as it has for other researchers,16 it was not utilized 
to its fullest capabilities. We did not test competing versions of interfaces and focused on the itera-
tive development of one design. We learned from this study that future efforts need to consider 
more time for usability testing within the project timeline as well as a testing platform that is 

Figure 4.  Final design of “View My Reports” page.

20	
Health Informatics Journal 21(1)

independent from other development efforts. We found that lag times on the testing server, as well 
as bugs within the application itself, frequently confounded time-sensitive measurements taken 
with the PUL. These limitations left us using the recordings more as more qualitative data source 
versus a quantitative source. Despite these setbacks, these recordings served as a rich source of 
data and are congruent with the findings by Gerjets et al.42 that speak about the benefits of integrat-
ing think-aloud data with eye tracking data.

Conclusion

Participatory research efforts allowed for application development that incorporated patient 
needs. A number of important features were identified by participants and refined through our 
iterative development process, particularly with respect to the graphical display of symptoms, 
teaching tips about symptom management, critical navigation paths, and information sharing. 
Future efforts should allow generous amounts of time for usability testing within the project time-
line as well as a testing platform that is independent from other development efforts. We are cur-
rently evaluating new approaches for the application interface and for future research pathways. 
We encourage other researchers to adopt user-centered design approaches when building patient-
centered technologies.