1

Development and evaluation of a 
decision aid for family surrogate 
decision-­makers for patients with acute 
kidney injury requiring renal 
replacement therapy (RRT) in ICUs: a 
study protocol

Miao Zheng,1 Changlin Yin,2 Ying Cao,2 Yonghui Zhang,2 Kuoliang Zhang,1,3 
Xiaoqin Zhang,1 Wei Bian,4 Lihua Wang  ‍ ‍ 5

To cite: Zheng M, Yin C, 
Cao Y, et al.  Development 
and evaluation of a decision 
aid for family surrogate 
decision-­makers for patients 
with acute kidney injury 
requiring renal replacement 
therapy (RRT) in ICUs: a 
study protocol. BMJ Open 
2021;11:e043385. doi:10.1136/
bmjopen-2020-043385

►
►Prepublication history and 
additional material for this paper 
is available online. To view these 
files, please visit the journal 
online (http://​dx.​doi.​org/​10.​
1136/​bmjopen-​2020-​043385).

Received 01 August 2020
Revised 18 January 2021
Accepted 25 January 2021

For numbered affiliations see 
end of article.

Correspondence to
Dr Lihua Wang;  
​773569612@​qq.​com and  
Prof. Wei Bian;  
​664091353@​qq.​com

Protocol

© Author(s) (or their 
employer(s)) 2021. Re-­use 
permitted under CC BY-­NC. No 
commercial re-­use. See rights 
and permissions. Published by 
BMJ.

ABSTRACT
Introduction  Shared decision making is endorsed by 
guidelines for both acute kidney injury and critical care 
medicine. However, there is still a huge need for effective 
interventions, especially those focusing on decisions about 
renal replacement therapy for intensive care unit (ICU) 
patients with acute kidney injury. The decision aids provide 
evidence-­based support for shared decision making, to 
achieve better decisions through enhanced knowledge 
of treatment options and treatment aligns with patients’ 
preferences and values. Therefore, our objectives are 
to develop and evaluate a decision aid systematically 
and rigorously for family surrogate decision makers of 
ICU patients with acute kidney injury who need renal 
replacement therapy.
Methods and analysis  We will use a systematic 
development process that focuses on user-­centred design 
to develop and evaluate the decision aid in three phases: 
(1) development of a draft prototype for the decision 
aid based on extensive literature reviews, interviews 
with key stakeholders and evidence synthesis; (2) alpha 
testing (‘near live’ usability) the decision aid during 
simulated clinical encounters to test its comprehensibility, 
acceptability and usability and (3) beta testing (‘live’ 
usability) to examine the aid’s clinical feasibility. User 
testing will be conducted using mixed-­methods approach 
to support iterative revision of the decision aid. The IPDASi 
(V.4.0) will be used for following qualitative assessment. 
All interviews will be analysed by Colaizzi’s seven-­step 
approach to qualitative analysis. The coding scheme will 
use to analyse user interactions. Questionnaire surveys will 
be analysed using paired sample t-­tests when related to 
the before-­and-­after survey, otherwise using one-­sample 
t-­test.
Ethics and dissemination  Ethical approval for this 
research was obtained from the Ethics Committee of 
the First Affiliated Hospital of Army Medical University, 
PLA (Ref: KY2020104). All participants will sign a formal 
informed consent form. The findings will be published 
in peer-­reviewed journals and reported in appropriate 
meetings.

Trial registration number  ChiCTR2000031613.

INTRODUCTION
Acute kidney injury (AKI) is one of the 
most common complications in the inten-
sive care unit (ICU) and is associated with 
high morbidity and mortality.1 According to 
recent research in China, 51% of critically 
ill patients develop AKI, which increases 
mortality risk sevenfold as well as increasing 
the length of hospital stays and healthcare 
costs.2 Today, renal replacement therapy 
(RRT) is becoming a key treatment for ICU 
patients with AKI.3 4 RRT can be life-­saving for 
critically ill patients with AKI.5–7 However, one 
study comparing patients who did and did not 
receive RRT found that patients with AKI who 
received RRT had double the risk of 28-­day 
mortality, which accounted for 46.3%, and 
three times the overall ICU costs.2 Therefore, 

Strengths and limitations of this study

►
►The present study uses a systematic, rigorous proto-
col to develop and evaluate a decision aid for inten-
sive care unit patients with acute kidney injury who 
are considering renal replacement therapy.
►
►This study will provide evidence for integrating a 
user-­centred design into the development of deci-
sion aids in clinical contexts.
►
►This study will also include usability testing to pro-
vide evidence for the acceptability and feasibility of 
the decision aid.
►
►This study will recruit participants from only one 
hospital in China. This means that the findings may 
not be generalised to all of China, but they will pro-
vide evidence for the design of future nationwide 
studies.

Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

 . 
by guest
 
 

2

for critically ill patients with AKI, attending physicians 
must decide whether to initiate RRT based on the indi-
vidual patient’s preferences and values. The decision to 
administer RRT should be based on patient preferences 
due to the lack of ideal clinical outcomes, regardless of 
treatment, for such cases.8 9 A recent study found that 
60% of patients opted for RRT when clinicians recom-
mend this treatment, while only 9% of patients received 
RRT when clinicians advise against this treatment.10 This 
is more driven by clinician and system-­level factors rather 
than patients’ preferences and values.11 Clearly, decisions 
about whether to administer RRT to critically ill patient 
should be based on the needs and preferences of patients 
and their families.
Many critically ill patients are sedated or in a coma, so 
families must act as surrogates and make decisions for the 
patient. However, the suddenness and clinical uncertainty 
of life-­sustaining treatments often make family members 
into decisional conflicts. These conflicts may burden 
family members with severe psychological syndromes 
such as anxiety, depression or post-­traumatic stress 
disorder.12 13 Emotional disorders and an impaired ability 
to process information may lead to decision fatigue, 
which reduces one’s ability to make decisions.14 In addi-
tion, family members may misunderstand the prognosis 
of a treatment, which also affects the quality of treatment 
decision making.15–17 Allegretti et al18 report that over 80% 
of surrogates overestimate the positive prognosis of RRT, 
although clinicians and surrogates represent sufficiently 
communication and mostly understanding. Obviously, 
there are a range of risks and possible complications for 
critically ill patients with AKI,19–21 which makes it difficult 
for surrogates to comprehend the overall prognosis of 
RRT.22 23 Further intervention is needed to narrow this 
knowledge gap and help surrogates scientifically and 
efficiently understand the prognosis. More attention 
to surrogate engagement in decision making for ICU 
patients with AKI who require RRT is needed.
To help family surrogates and ICU clinicians agree 
on a treatment plan, verified decision aids (DAs) are 
needed to facilitate shared decision making (SDM) in the 
ICU. SDM refers to the interactions of patients or their 
families with healthcare professionals to weigh the pros 
and cons of treatment options. It highlights the impor-
tance of patients’ preferences and values for reasonably 
predicting patients’ best interests.24 International guide-
lines recommend that critical care specialists discuss treat-
ment options with patients and/or their families as soon 
as possible when RRT is indicated for a patient with AKI.25 
DAs are designed to inform patients and their families 
about treatment options, prognoses and possible decision 
outcomes. A DA can help patients and families evaluate 
different treatment options.26 A Cochrane systematic 
review shows that DAs can effectively improve the quality 
of decisions without increasing the anxiety or depression 
of decision makers or worsening patient or health system 
outcomes.27 Stacey et al26 find that DAs are associated with 
more knowledge of the options, decisions that better 

align with patients’ values, reduced conflict around deci-
sions and higher patient participation in decisions.
Existing DAs used in the ICU context are mostly 
designed for surrogate decision makers who must make 
treatment choices for critically ill patients who are unable 
to participate in the decision-­making process. Cox et al28 
developed a web-­based DA for surrogate decision-­makers 
for patients receiving prolonged mechanical ventilation. 
This DA provides decision guidance but also uses an 
algorithm informed by surrogates’ responses to a patient 
values clarification exercise to indicate the preferred 
goal of treatment. Cox et al28 report that this DA reduced 
surrogate decisional conflicts during the decision-­making 
process in the ICU. Suen et al29 also developed a family 
support tool to help families navigate the complexity of 
surrogate decision making in the ICU. This tool helps 
individuals understand the surrogate’s role and consider 
the patient’s preferences and values in treatment deci-
sions. However, to the best of our knowledge, there is no 
DA designed to support decisions about the use of RRT 
to treat critical illness in the ICU context, although the 
effectiveness of other DAs for supporting families and 
encouraging SDM with clinicians has been verified.
In order to address this complex decisional dilemma, 
the present study aims to: (1) develop a DA that uses a 
systematic, rigorous process to support the family surro-
gate decision-­makers for ICU patients with AKI who 
need RRT; (2) test the comprehensibility, acceptability 
and usability of the DA in a simulated decisional context 
(‘near-­live’) and (3) verify the feasibility of the DA in ICU 
clinical practice (‘live’).

METHODS
A systematic development process model30 and a user-­
centred design (UCD) will be used to develop the DA.31 
This study will consist of three phases. The DA proto-
type will be developed in phase 1. User testing will be 
conducted in phases 2 and 3, and the DA will be revised 
based on these tests. Phase 2 will involve simulated alpha 
testing; beta testing in a clinical context will take place in 
phase 3. This study follows the IPDASi V.4.032 to ensure 
that the minimum quality criteria are met. The main 
elements of the development process are illustrated in 
figure 1.
A multidisciplinary steering committee will guide the 
development of the DA. A steering committee was created 
to ensure a systematic protocol. The steering committee 
consists of two experts in SDM, three professionals in crit-
ical care medicine and two patient representatives. The 
two SDM experts have many years of research experience 
in SDM and patient DAs. The critical care experts include 
an ICU director, a head nurse and a critical care specialist 
with expertise in RRT decision making and clinician and 
family consultation. The patient representatives are family 
surrogate volunteers who have experienced RRT decision 
making in the ICU. Steering committee meetings will be 

Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

 . 
by guest
 
 

3

Open access

hold regularly to supervise the design, content and itera-
tive revision of the DA.

Phase 1: development of the DA prototype
Scope: literature review
A comprehensive literature review will be conducted 
early to identify the purpose of DA development. First, 
an extensive literature review will be conducted to clarify 
the current state of RRT decision making and to identify 
the evidence for the need for a DA designed for use in 
the ICU. We will also conduct a competitive analysis by 
summarising existing relevant DA resources. This is an 
important step in the development of digital projects to 
avoid duplicating existing resources. This step will also 
help us determine whether the development project is 
compatible with our research protocol.

Design: needs assessment
Interviews with healthcare professionals
Alongside the literature review, a decisional needs 
assessment is critical for confirming potential DA use 
cases identified in the literature. Due to the complexity 
(as a kind of life-­sustaining treatment) of RRT decision 
making in ICU, the decisional trigger always depends on 
the patients’ attending clinician. Therefore, semistruc-
tured interviews will be conducted with ICU clinicians 
to identify the main points that a DA might address and 
the opportunities to integrate the DA into a clinical work-
flow. We will recruit ICU clinicians who have recently (<6 
months ago) taken part in clinician–family consultations 

addressing decisions around using RRT to treat patients 
with AKI. The interviews will last 30–60 min; the goal of 
the interviews is to elicit professional opinions on key 
aspects of the content, design and distribution of the DA. 
First, clinicians will be asked to indicate what informa-
tion family surrogates need to know before taking part in 
these decisions. Second, they will be asked to outline the 
surrogate decision-­making pathway to determine when 
and how in the process a DA would be appropriate. The 
individual interviews with ICU clinicians will be used to 
explore professional suggestions and reach consensus on 
healthcare professionals’ clinical needs for this DA.
All interviews will be recorded and transcribed verbatim. 
The interviewees’ perspectives will be written down by 
the interviewer; these notes will be analysed alongside 
the transcripts. Colaizzi’s seven-­step approach to quali-
tative analysis will be used to code emerging categories 
and themes in the transcripts.33 First, all transcripts will 
be independently reviewed and coded by two researchers 
with expertise in qualitative research methods. Then, 
final coding will be determined via further comparison 
and discussion. When the two coders disagree on a code, a 
third qualitative research expert will arbitrate the coding 
decision. The computer software NVivo V.12 will be used 
for the analysis.

Interviews with surrogate decision-makers
UCD requires a deep understanding of the role 
and responsibility of the target users of the DA in 

Figure 1  Development process of the RRT decision aid for surrogate decision-­makers in ICU. ICU, intensive care unit; RRT, 
renal replacement therapy.

Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

 . 
by guest
 
 

4

development. To comply with this requirement, we will 
conduct semistructured interviews with family surrogates, 
the target users of the DA, who have taken part in RRT 
decision making for their loved ones. To obtain a full 
perspective on surrogate decision making around RRT, 
data from routine clinician–family encounters regarding 
RRT in the ICU are needed. Therefore, we will observe 
ICU clinician–family consultations before conducting 
the face-­to-­face interviews with surrogates to identify how 
a DA can meet their decisional needs. An opportunity 
statement exercise31 will be included in the individual 
semi-­structured interviews to get a full understanding of 
surrogates’ perspectives on their RRT decisional needs. 
An opportunity statement exercise is a type of design 
thinking activity used to gather and explore users’ needs 
to support digital tool development. It is used to identify 
areas that the proposed digital tool may impact or add 
value to.31 Family surrogates will be asked to complete 
the following statement based on prepared description 
(summary outlines from literature review and healthcare 
professionals’ interviews, which describe what is a DA and 
what it does to help them): ‘How might we improve this 
DA so it can help you make the best treatment decisions 
based on your loved one’s preferences?’ An interview 
syllabus will be constructed to explore surrogates’ deci-
sional needs around RRT and to identify factors in the 
current decision-­making process. This will help us deter-
mine how a DA could make a measurable impact. Like 
the interviews with ICU clinicians, all of the audio record-
ings of surrogate interviews will be transcribed verbatim 
and qualitatively analysed along with the interviewers’ 
written notes.
Finally, the decisional needs of ICU clinicians and family 
surrogates will be translated into a general framework to 
be used in the next stage: detailed evidence synthesis.

Draft: working prototype
Evidence synthesis
The best evidence and other decisional information will 
be synthesised based on an assessment of the needs of 
ICU clinicians and surrogates. First, we will review current 
guidelines on the management of AKI and the admin-
istration of RRT to identify general treatment recom-
mendations. Second, available evidence for treatment 
outcomes from the systematic literature review and meta-­
analysis will be used to identify information that can help 
users decide whether or not to choose RRT. This evidence 
synthesis will involve four steps: (1) identify key words; 
(2) systematically search for the key words; (3) screen 
and extract relevant evidence based on clinical needs 
(most included evidence will be related to treatment 
recommendations and prognoses) and (4) summarise 
the evidence into a DA script. We will search for evidence 
using PubMed, EMBASE, Cochrane Library, CNKI, CBM, 
UpToDate and the websites of clinical practice guidelines 
and academic associations and institutions. The precise 
search strategy used on PubMed is explained in detail in 
online supplemental file 1.

Drafting the prototype
Based on the literature review, the assessment of the needs 
of key stakeholders, and the best available evidence, a 
paper prototype of the DA will be drafted according to 
the criteria for developing DAs34 35 and assessed using 
the IPDASi V.4.0. The content of the DA will include five 
main topics: (1) brief instructions about the disease and 
treatment; (2) pros and cons of treatment options; (3) 
possible treatment outcomes; (4) patient stories and (5) 
a value clarification exercise. Once the paper prototype 
has been completed, the steering committee will audit it 
and determine which content will be included in the DA.
To ensure that the right information (regularly updated) 
is provided to the right person (tailored) at the right time 
(the appropriate point in the decision-­making process),36 
we will use an internet-­based DA which enables content 
to be tailored to individual users.37 WeChat38 is the most 
popular social media mobile application in China. It 
combines instant messaging with text, image, voice and 
video chat options as well as payment and scan functions. 
More than 95% of Chinese adults have a mobile phone, 
and over one billion of them access WeChat at least once 
a day.39 WeChat is also commonly integrated with hospital 
services and used for making appointments with physi-
cians and to provide health education.38 Therefore, we 
believe that an internet-­based DA that is accessible on 
a mobile phone via WeChat will be a valuable tool for 
supporting decision making in the ICU context.
Finally, the paper prototype will be redrafted and rede-
signed into a working prototype, which will be an inter-
active web-­based version that is accessible on a mobile 
phone via a Quick Response Code (QR code) that can be 
scanned using the WeChat app.

Phase 2: alpha testing
The aim of this phase is to examine the comprehensi-
bility, acceptability and usability of the DA in a simulated 
decision-­making scenario.30 This will improve our under-
standing of the interactions between DAs and target users 
during tasks. The participants will be family surrogates, 
and the test will require interaction with the DA using the 
think-­aloud method. In this phase, the functionality and 
usability of the DA’s overall interface will be evaluated 
and problems with user interactions will be identified.

Participants
A purposive sample of surrogates not involved in the devel-
opment process will be invited to participate in the alpha 
testing in phase 2. We will recruit family surrogate deci-
sion makers of patients with AKI from Southwest Hospital 
in Chongqing, China. The surrogate sample will include 
individuals who chose RRT for their loved one, those who 
considered but declined RRT, and those currently delib-
erating treatment options in the ICU. We expect a sample 
size of eight to 12 participants; this will be large enough 
to detect up to 80% of surface-­level usability problems.40 
However, the final sample size will be determined by data 
saturation, which will be guided by transcripts of users’ 

Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

 . 
by guest
 
 

5

Open access

interactions with the DA. The alpha testing phase will be 
completed within 4 weeks.

Data collection
A researcher with expertise in health informatics and 
usability testing will guide each session; the sessions will 
be conducted in a quiet room. Data will be collected 
throughout participants’ use of the DA via question-
naires, recordings of the interactions and semistructured 
interviews. First, participants will be asked to complete a 
‘before’ questionnaire, which will collect demographic 
information, self-­perceived skill level with the internet and 
mobile phones, experiences with RRT decision making 
and knowledge41 of RRT. Second, participants will be 
presented with a scenario that simulates decision making 
about RRT for patients with AKI in the ICU. The simula-
tions will closely match participants’ experiences. Next, 
participants will be given a card with a QR code that can 
be scanned using WeChat on a research phone (iPhone 
XR); this code will connect them to the DA. Participants 
will also receive a brief task description asking them to use 
the think-­aloud method while engaging with the DA. In 
this method, participants orally describe their behaviours 
and thoughts while carrying out a task. Once the task is 
completed, participants will complete the ‘after’ question-
naire. This tool will include a knowledge survey similar 
to that in the ‘before’ questionnaire and an acceptability 
survey.42 Finally, participants will be interviewed about the 
experience. Interview questions will address participants’ 
satisfaction with the DA, pros and cons of the DA, and 
the quality of this decision support. The screen recording 
feature of the research phone will be used to record the 
entire user interaction (all screen activities and the user’s 
voice). Field notes will be taken as well to provide addi-
tional data for further analysis.

Data analysis
Due to the small sample size in this phase, data anal-
ysis will occur in conjunction with data collection. The 
data analysis will use a coding scheme developed by the 
usability engineering team from examinations of human–
computer interactions and relevant literature on cogni-
tive psychology.40 This scheme includes eleven categories 
of usability problems, such as navigation, graphics and 
layout. These categories, along with the think-­aloud 
reports, can then be used to analyse user interactions with 
the DA. Additional codes that indicate other user prob-
lems generated from our testing results will be added to 
the scheme as needed.
The screen recordings will be watched and annotated 
independently by two researchers. Disagreements will be 
discussed to reach a consensus. The semistructured inter-
views will be analysed in the same way as the interviews 
with key stakeholders in phase 1. The knowledge surveys 
will be analysed using a paired t-­test, and the acceptability 
surveys will be analysed using a one-­sample t-­test. SPSS 
Statistics V.26 will be used for the analyses.

Based on these findings, ways to improve the DA 
will be identified. These points will be reviewed by 
steering committee, which will decide which revisions to 
implement.

Phase 3: beta testing
Beta-­testing will be conducted to test the feasibility of the 
DA in the ICU clinical context. The focus in this phase 
will be contextual factors which may influence the impact 
of the DA in real life. Without the developers’ control, 
the stage of acceptance testing will be more stable. In this 
phase, a mixed-­methods approach will be used to conduct 
a before/after study in RRT decision-­making procedures. 
The objectives of beta testing are to assess the impact of 
the DA on family surrogate engagement in RRT decision 
making and on the quality of surrogate decision making.

Participants
Family surrogate decision-­makers and ICU clinicians 
will be recruited from the ICU clinical workflow. Partic-
ipants will be recruited from the same hospital as in the 
alpha testing phase. We will recruit participants based 
on patients. If an AKI patient with indications for RRT is 
identified, we will first recruit clinicians to ensure that we 
can observe the family–clinician consultation. Then, we 
will invite the family surrogate to participate in the study. 
Surrogates will be defined as the person responsible for 
providing written informed consent for the patients’ 
medical decisions. Included clinicians will be limited 
to those with at least 3 years of ICU clinical experience 
who are responsible for guiding the decision-­making 
process. Clinicians who are reluctant to engage in SDM 
with patients’ families will be excluded. Family surrogates 
who are not able to use WeChat on a smart phone will be 
excluded as well. If either the clinician or the surrogate 
is ineligible to participate in the study, the patient will be 
excluded.
A consecutive sample of 15–20 family–clinician dyads 
will be invited to participate. This sample size is in line 
with previous studies identifying the minimum sample size 
for calculating inferential statistics in usability testing.40 
We propose recruiting as many participants as possible 
to generate sufficient feedback for further refinement of 
the DA.

Data collection
Once a family–clinician dyad has been enrolled in the 
study, the surrogates will be introduced to the DA before 
the family’s decision-­making consultation with the clini-
cian. Next, the family surrogates will be invited to a formal 
consultation with the clinicians to discuss their loved 
one’s treatment. All eligible surrogates must complete 
the questionnaire before and after using the DA. The 
questionnaire will collect demographic information; 
it will also include the surrogate decision-­making self-­
efficacy scale,43 the decision-­making preparedness scale44 
and the decisional conflict scale.45 After the consulta-
tion, family surrogates and clinicians will be interviewed 

Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

 . 
by guest
 
 

6

independently by different interviewers. In the inter-
views, participants will be asked to provide verbal feed-
back on the decision-­making process. Family surrogates 
will be asked whether the DA facilitated their engage-
ment in the decision and whether it met their decisional 
needs. Clinicians will be asked to share their experiences 
and to evaluate the quality of surrogate decision making. 
Outlines for the interviews with surrogates and clini-
cians will be prepared in advance and approved by the 
steering committee. All interviews will be recorded and 
last 30–45 min. All sessions will take place in a quiet room.

Data analysis
Descriptive analyses will be conducted for the baseline 
data. A paired sample t-­test will be used to assess self-­
efficacy, preparation and decisional conflict. CIs will be 
set at 95%; the significance level will be set at 5%. All 
interviews will be transcribed and coded using NVivo 
V.12.0. The interview data will then be analysed as in 
phase 1. Based on these findings, we will refine the DA if 
necessary. Finally, the steering committee will confirm the 
completion of the final version of the DA. The next stage 
will be a formal clinical trial.

Patient and public involvement
Two family surrogate decision makers were recruited as 
patient representatives in the steering committee. These 
two patient representatives will describe their decision-­
making stories. It is expected that these stories will help 
participants clarify their loved ones’ preferences. These 
patient representatives will engage with the entire devel-
opment process and the content and design of the DA. 
We expect that the DA will be user-­centred. The patient 
representatives on the steering committee will not be 
involved in participant recruitment.

Ethics and dissemination
Research ethics approval has been obtained from the 
Ethics Committee of the First Affiliated Hospital of Army 
Medical University, PLA (Ref: KY2020104). A statement 
providing information about the study will be given to 
each participant, and written informed consent will be 
obtained from all participants. Participants will have the 
right to withdraw from the study at any time. All signif-
icant original data collected in the study will be consid-
ered for publication in peer-­reviewed journals.

DISCUSSION
This study initiates the rigorous development and eval-
uation of a DA for family surrogate decision makers for 
critically ill patients with AKI who need RRT. We expect 
that the DA will improve SDM and the quality of decisions 
about RRT in the ICU. Over the past two decades, SDM 
has been introduced in China, but now public attention 
bounded with the paternal model in medical decision 
making has hardly changed. Currently, there are more 
theoretical studies than empirical research of clinical 

practice in this area. Decision making is still dominated 
by ICU clinicians,46 47and patients’ and family surrogates’ 
attitudes towards and engagement with medical decision 
making in China need to be explored. The State Council 
issued an outline for the Healthy China 2030 initiative,48 
which indicates that patients’ sense of gain and security 
in medical care should be increased by the optimisation 
of treatment procedure. This initiative also proposes 
strengthening the human aspect of medical care by 
encouraging supportive doctor–patient relationships. 
The paternal model of medical decision making can no 
longer adapt to modern medical services in China today, 
and SDM is needed to achieve the best treatment deci-
sions for both patients and healthcare providers.
In any case, globally, SDM is rarely implemented in RRT 
decision making in ICUs. A decision-­making process is 
shared if both clinicians and patients/surrogates engage 
in SDM behaviour, if patients/surrogates feel that they are 
participants in the decision-­making process, and if clini-
cians and patients/surrogates share their views and ideas 
to reach an agreement.49 However, available data show 
the discordance of RRT decision making between clini-
cians and surrogates exists.10 Furthermore, surrogates are 
usually unable to reasonably estimate the prognoses of 
their loved ones, even with adequate communication and 
education.18

User-­centred Information Technology health tools can 
help users deal with complicated processes and inacces-
sible data.31 The goal of this DA, which will involve target 
users’ participation in the development stage to ensure 
that the final product is user centred, is to increase surro-
gates’ ability to engage in SDM by helping them partic-
ipate more actively in clinician–family consultations. 
Indeed, we believe that this DA will improve surrogates’ 
understanding of AKI and relevant treatment options, of 
the risks and benefits of treatment, of possible decisional 
outcomes and of the importance of the patient’s prefer-
ences and values. We also expect that this DA will improve 
surrogate engagement in decision making by reducing 
decisional stress and other negative emotions.
Since most critically ill patients are incapacitated, deci-
sion making in the ICU is complex. Therefore, decision 
supports tailored to the unique needs of family surrogate 
decision makers are needed.50–53 For decisions around 
RRT in the ICU, key points include improving commu-
nication and support for surrogates and discussing or 
clarifying the preferences and values of critically ill 
patients.54–56 Although our plan will not develop a DA 
tailored to both surrogates and their loved ones, we expect 
that our endeavours will provide a reference for future 
efforts to appropriately involve incapacitated patients in 
treatment decision making. Of course, for this to happen, 
governments and policymakers must pay more attention 
to strategies for increasing SDM in ICU care.

Author affiliations
1Graduate School, Guizhou University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Guiyang City, 
Guizhou Province, China

Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

 . 
by guest
 
 

7

Open access

2Department of Critical Care Medicine, Southwest Hospital of Third Military Medical 
University (Amy Medical University), Chongqing, China
3Academic Research Office, Qiannan Medical College for Nationalities, Duyun City, 
Guizhou Province, China
4Department of Ophthalmology, Southwest Hospital of Third Military Medical 
University (Amy Medical University), Chongqing, China
5Addmin Office, Southwest Hospital of Third Military Medical University (Amy 
Medical University), Chongqing, China

Twitter Wei Bian @tianwei

Acknowledgements  Special thanks to the patient representatives, Xiongjie Lang 
and Tuantuan Wang. We thank the participants who volunteered to take part in this 
research.

Contributors  The principal investigator of the study is MZ. LW, CY, WB, YC and 
YZ supervise the research progress and provide intellectual input into the protocol 
for practice implementation. CY, YC and YZ has provided special guidance for the 
study implementation and professional contribution for RRT decision making in the 
intensive care unit. MZ conceived of the study and drafted the manuscript. MZ, KZ 
and XZ contributed to the scope and background of the study through an extensive 
literature review. MZ, LW and WB provided intellectual input into the conceptual 
framework of the protocol and revised critically for intellectual content. All of the 
authors have read and approved the final manuscript.

Funding  The study is funded by Chongqing Social Science Planning Youth Project 
(2018QNSH42) and Chongqing Postgraduate Education and Teaching Reform 
Project (yjg172013), which had no role in the design, collection, analysis nor 
interpretation of data, nor in the writing nor publication of the manuscript.

Patient consent for publication  Not required.

Provenance and peer review  Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.

Supplemental material  This content has been supplied by the author(s). It has 
not been vetted by BMJ Publishing Group Limited (BMJ) and may not have been 
peer-­reviewed. Any opinions or recommendations discussed are solely those 
of the author(s) and are not endorsed by BMJ. BMJ disclaims all liability and 
responsibility arising from any reliance placed on the content. Where the content 
includes any translated material, BMJ does not warrant the accuracy and reliability 
of the translations (including but not limited to local regulations, clinical guidelines, 
terminology, drug names and drug dosages), and is not responsible for any error 
and/or omissions arising from translation and adaptation or otherwise.

Open access  This is an open access article distributed in accordance with the 
Creative Commons Attribution Non Commercial (CC BY-­NC 4.0) license, which 
permits others to distribute, remix, adapt, build upon this work non-­commercially, 
and license their derivative works on different terms, provided the original work is 
properly cited, appropriate credit is given, any changes made indicated, and the use 
is non-­commercial. See: http://​creativecommons.​org/​licenses/​by-​nc/​4.​0/.

ORCID iD
Lihua Wang http://​orcid.​org/​0000-​0002-​3053-​4893