Vol.:(0123456789)

https://doi.org/10.1007/s40430-020-02347-w

TECHNICAL PAPER

AT‑d8sign: methodology to support development of assistive devices 
focused on user‑centered design and 3D technologies

A. V. F. Santos1 · Z. C. Silveira1

Received: 24 January 2020 / Accepted: 13 April 2020 / Published online: 26 April 2020 
© The Brazilian Society of Mechanical Sciences and Engineering 2020

Abstract
The worldwide growing demand for assistive devices, due to the global trend of population aging and high rates of chronic 
diseases, creates design opportunities for study, optimization and clinical validation of these products, in search of quality 
products that promote quality of life and greater autonomy. The high abandonment rates of assistive devices, the low-quality 
and inefficient performance in many cases, in addition to the scarcity of options and the high prices, indicate possible failures 
in the initial design phases of these products. This paper presents the elaboration of an adaptive methodology focused on 
the “Design for Assistive Technology,” considering user-centered design and 3D technologies. The AT-d8sign methodol-
ogy presents an iterative and dynamic flux, divided into three main phases: (1) design cross-domain; (2) conception spiral; 
(3) evaluation and refinement. The study is based on three fundamental elements: an analysis of three designs developed in 
the area by the research group; a case study from one of these designs; a systematic review on the current scenario of the 
design methodology in this area. The preliminary results from the application of the methodology included: shorter design 
development time from informational design to clinical testing; effective insertion of the users and health professionals in 
the decision-making process throughout the conceptual design phase; better communication between the interdisciplinary 
research group due to the use of design techniques; gradual improvement of the conceptual and technical solutions supported 
by 3D printing, resulting in the refinement of fundamental attributes of assistive products: comfort, safety and functionality.

Keywords  Engineering design · 3D printing · Co-design · Inclusive design · Design for mass customization and 
personalization

Abbreviations
ABS	
Acrylonitrile Butadiene Styrene
AD(’s)	
Assistive Device(s)
AM	
Additive Manufacturing
AT	
Assistive Technology
ATdN	
Assistive Technology Design Nucleus
CAD	
Computer-Aided Design
CAE	
Computer-Aided Engineering
COPM	
Canadian Occupational Performance Measure
DCD	
Design Cross-Domain
DfAM	
Design for Additive Manufacturing

DfAT	
Design for Assistive Technology
FFF	
Fused Filament Fabrication
FMEA	
Failure Mode and Effect Analysis
IMDT	
Integrated Multidisciplinary Design Team
JTHFT	
Jebsen-Taylor Hand Function Test
MEI	
Material Energy Information
MPT	
Matching Person & Technology
PIADS	
Psychosocial Impact of Assistive Devices 
Scales
PLA	
Polylactic Acid or Polylactide
QFD	
Quality Function Deployment
QUEST	
Quebec User Evaluation of Satisfaction with 
Assistive Technology
SHAP	
Southampton Hand Assessment Procedure
SUS	
Unified Health System (Brazil)
TRIZ	
Theory of Inventive Problem Solving

Technical Editor: Adriano Almeida Gonçalves Siqueira.

 *	 A. V. F. Santos 
	

Z. C. Silveira 
	

1	
Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of São 
Paulo, São Carlos, Brazil

260 
Page 2 of 15

1  Introduction

The design of devices in the health area, specifically in the 
context of Assistive Technology (AT), using virtual and 
physical prototypes, demands a repertoire of interdiscipli-
nary knowledge. The establishment of a cross-domain of 
knowledge between the areas of engineering and health, 
with a user-centered approach, is important elements for 
obtaining effective technical solutions. In this sense, the 
design development of AT products fundamentally differs 
from mass-production products, whose main attribute is 
interchangeability.
The global trend of population aging [1], identified 
on an even greater scale in Brazil [2], with the resulting 
increase in the incidence of disabilities is factor that indi-
cates the increasing demand for assistive devices products 
(ADs). This scenario reinforces the need for investment in 
research and development in the context of Assistive Tech-
nology, in order to guarantee autonomy, independence, 
quality of life and social inclusion of these individuals.
This demand, specifically in Brazil, is also associated 
with the implementation of the National Health Policy, 
which calls for quality and accessible care for people with 
disabilities by SUS (Unified Health System) through a 
multidisciplinary team, in order to enhance their func-
tional skills [3, 4].
However, despite the growing demand, some problems 
can be identified in this area, such as: the insufficient 
development of the AT industry, especially at the national 
level [5]; the existence of a very segmented and practically 
monopolistic market, operating with many profit margins, 
high prices and low-quality products; the lack of special-
ized distribution networks; insufficient services associated 
with AT products [6]. Specifically in Brazil, in addition to 
these factors, it is also necessary to mention the recent dis-
coveries by the media of spurious relations between health 
professionals and ADs manufacturers, leading to price 
cartelization and the artificial targeting of the demand [7].
In this scenario, the specific needs of AT users remain 
in many cases little known and unsatisfactorily met, lead-
ing to the adoption of devices with considerable usability 
problems [6]. It is estimated, for example, that there are 
about 600 million individuals with disabilities in the world 
living without adequate ADs or whose devices do not fit 
satisfactorily [8].
For these reasons, another relevant issue in this context 
is the high abandonment rates of ADs [9–14], worldwide 
and nationally, reinforcing the idea that improvements 
need to be made to the AT design. The disregard of the 
user’s opinions and of the physical, social and cultural 
characteristics of their context; the poor device perfor-
mance; the ease of purchasing low-quality products; the 

stigmatization associated with the poor-quality design are 
examples of factors that lead to abandonment [6, 9, 15].
In addition, it is necessary to consider the individual, 
economic and social losses caused by this high incidence 
of abandonment. With regard to the individual, it leads 
to loss of functional skills, freedom and autonomy, in 
addition to higher expenses. In the economic and social 
dimensions, there are inefficient use and waste of resources 
by the federal, state and local governments and by other 
provider organizations [9].
Finally, there are other factors that contribute to the 
maintenance of this situation such as: the tradition of 
unsystematic design of ADs, especially in the Brazilian 
context [16]; the development of ADs based on approaches 
pushed only by the technology or the market and not a 
user-centered design [6, 8, 17]; the inadequate assess-
ment of ADs; the lack of a more appropriate collaboration 
between specialized professionals from different areas, 
especially engineering and health; the reduced technol-
ogy transfer between universities and technology centers 
and industry [5].
On the other hand, new technologies, such as 3D tech-
nologies and more specifically additive manufacturing 
(AM), with the possibility of low-cost printers, gener-
ate opportunities for greater inclusion of end users in the 
design stages, as well as other benefits in the design chain, 
such as reductions in time, costs and redesign. These fac-
tors, mainly the insertion of the end and intermediate users 
in the design activities, are very suitable to the customi-
zation and personalization of products according to their 
needs and preferences, as highlighted by several recent 
studies [15, 18–23].
The growing importance of AT in the society, which is 
eminently multidisciplinary, and the increasing complexity 
of users’ needs and available technologies, creates research 
scenarios for collaboration between engineers and occu-
pational therapists [17]. This condition is favorable to the 
development of assistive products with high aggregated 
value, considering the user-centered design and the possi-
bilities for generating prototypes in different design phases 
and tasks, in order to include more effectively the different 
users in the decision-making process.
Despite the existence of design methodologies already 
well consolidated in the literature [24–26], it becomes nec-
essary, to obtain better results, the elaboration of one that is 
well adapted to the specific characteristics of the AT design 
and to the recent advances and possibilities that AM has 
brought to the area.
In this way, the main contribution of this work in 
engineering design area is to propose an adaptive design 
methodology focused on the Design for Assistive Tech-
nology (DfAT) considering user-centered design and 3D 
technologies.

Page 3 of 15 
260

2  Method

According to Santos [27], the methodology was developed 
based on three elements, as shown in Fig. 1: an analysis 
of three designs developed in recent years by the research 
group to which this work is linked to; a case study in con-
tinuation of one of these designs, in the development a feed-
ing AD; a systematic review on the current scenario of AT 
design methodology with the aid of AM.

2.1  Cases analysis

This work is linked to the activities of the Integrated 
Multidisciplinary Design Team (IMDT), associated with 
the Mechanical Engineering Department of the São Car-
los School of Engineering of the University of São Paulo 
(EESC-USP) and the Advanced Manufacturing Center 
(NUMA). Recently, the name of the group has undergone a 
readjustment, having been changed to Design Engineering 
and Innovation Center (DEIC).
The group is formed by researchers, including professors, 
graduate and undergraduate students, from different areas of 
engineering, such as mechanics, mechatronics and materials, 
developing the following lines of research: design methodol-
ogy, AM (characteristics and applications), development of 

AT products. In the latter case, in partnership with occupa-
tional therapists and physiotherapists from other academic 
centers such as the Federal University of Triângulo Mineiro 
(UFTM) and the Federal University of São Carlos (UFSCar).
It was very useful for the further elaboration of the 
proposed methodology the analysis of three AD designs 
[28–30] developed in recent years by the group, with a focus 
on the design methodology and the tools and techniques 
adopted in each case, in search of extracting the accumulated 
experience in this type of design. The comparative table in 
Fig. 2 illustrates the enhancement of the design methodology 
throughout the designs, with the use of more design tools 
and techniques over time.
The design demands for the three case studies were iden-
tified through the partnerships with health professionals and 
were then developed by interdisciplinary design teams, with 
some common steps, such as: study of patents and commer-
cially available products for identification of the state of the 
art and the technique, as well as opportunities for innovation 
and improvement; interviews and questionnaires with users 
and health professionals to identify therapeutic needs, user 
requirements and design parameters, with the help of QFD 
(Quality Function Deployment); generation and improve-
ment of technical solutions with the help of design tools 
and techniques, such as functional analysis, FMEA (Failure 
Mode and Effect Analysis), TRIZ (Theory of Inventive Prob-
lem Solving), among others; elaboration of virtual models 
(CAD) and manufacture of prototypes, through AM, for tests 
and evaluations with users.

2.2  Case study

The realization of a case study in the development of a feed-
ing AD (Fig. 3), in continuation of the work presented by 
Santos [28], also enabled a panoramic view of practically the 
entire design process in the context of AT, from the identi-
fication of the demand to the generation and improvement 
of functional prototypes with the aid of AM and conduct-
ing performance tests with users, having been essential for 
the elaboration of the presented methodology. Through the 
interaction with an end user and health professionals and 
with the aid of AM, the study leads to structural and aes-
thetic changes and improvements, as well as in the manu-
facturing parameters.
Fig. 1   The three fundamental elements for the development of the 
methodology

Fig. 2   Comparative table of tools and techniques used by the three design case studies developed by the research group

260 
Page 4 of 15

Throughout the work, it was possible to better understand 
the importance of AM for this type of design, for the ben-
efits it brings to the interaction between the various parties 
involved in the process, especially through the mock-ups and 
prototypes, and for the possibility of greater user involve-
ment, favoring the adoption of an approach centered on the 
user and his needs. On the other hand, it was also possible 
to note the importance of incorporating into the design team 
professionals and technicians with expertise in manufactur-
ing via AM, in its parameters and materials, as well as in the 
machine to be used. The planning of the process, with the 
appropriate selection of materials, the correct calibration 
of the manufacturing parameters (filling, orientation, clear-
ances, etc.) and the search for appropriate manufacturing 
strategies that seek to reduce the waste of resources and the 
complexity of the post-processing, also proved fundamental.
The results of single-subject tests [31, 32], performed by 
occupational therapists with the user to assess performance 
and satisfaction with the device, in combination with the 
Canadian Occupational Performance Measure (COPM) [33], 
also translated and validated for being used in Brazil [34], 
presented interesting and encouraging results, seeming to 
indicate a significant improvement with the use of the AD 
in relation to the conventional cutlery [27].

2.3  Systematic review

Another fundamental element for the elaboration of the 
methodology was the accomplishment of a systematic 
review about the current scenario of the AT design with the 
aid of the AM. For that, it was taken as a reference the road-
map called RBS Roadmap [35], proposed for the execution 
of reviews of this type, with a focus especially on research 
in the area of project management and product development, 
as in the case of this work.
In addition to the primary references suggested by senior 
researchers and specialists in the areas of interest, articles 
were searched in four multidisciplinary databases (Science-
Direct, Scopus, PubMed and Web of Science) using search 

strings prepared with previously selected keywords. After 
conducting cross-searches and applying all RBS Roadmap 
filters, resulting in 28 references, were selected at the end 
for analysis [27]. This process is explained in more detail 
in “Appendix.”
In a panoramic analysis, it was noted that many of the 
proposals presented more of a description of the steps of an 
AD development process than actually a methodology, that 
is, more of a working method than a design method. On the 
other hand, some more complete and structured proposals 
could be identified [15, 18, 23]. An increase in the number 
of works of interest in recent years, especially since 2018, 
as shown in Fig. 4, was another highlight, emphasizing the 
topicality of this study.
Among the identified limitations, one of the most sig-
nificant and recurrent, even in the case of more structured 
proposals, is the lack of use or the absence of a more detailed 
description about the application of design tools and tech-
niques, especially in the identification and management of 
user requirements, in the generation of ideas and concepts 
for the product and in the selection of the most appropriate 
and viable solutions.
In addition, it was also found that the vast majority of 
the works already highlights the importance of a multi- or 
interdisciplinary team in carrying out designs in this area, 
although not all have dedicated themselves to explaining 
the composition of the team and its process of formation, 
integration and interaction.

3  Proposed methodology

The methodology was called AT-d8sign (AT-d8) and is 
divided into three main phases, as can be seen in Fig. 5: 
(1) design cross-domain; (2) conception spiral; (3) evalu-
ation and refinement. The name is a reference to the word 
design and the acronym for Assistive Technology, in addi-
tion to representing the iterative and dynamic character of 
the process and the flow of information between the par-
ties involved and between the phases, which are not exactly 
sequential, but rather developed in a parallel and cyclic 
way, especially in the case of phases 2 and 3. Each phase is 
divided into four stages, and while the first has a preparatory 
nature, the last two represent the creative core of the process.

3.1  Design cross‑domain

The AT design is developed, ideally, by the intersection 
of several domains of knowledge and experience: (a) the 
domain of health, through the professionals involved, such 
as occupational therapists, physiotherapists, prosthetics, 
and their respective specific knowledge and skills; (b) 
the domain of engineering, represented among others 

Fig. 3   The last version of the developed feeding AD [27]

Page 5 of 15 
260

by mechanical, production, manufacturing and materials 
engineers or technicians, with their technical knowledge 
and skills; (c) the domain of family and caregivers, marked 
by the experience of living more directly with the end user, 
his demands and needs; (d) the user domain, occupying 
a central position and characterized by the individual’s 
very particular experience with its functional diversity and 
the needs it entails. Depending on the characteristics and 
specificities of each design, there may be other domains 
of interest, which should also be involved in the process.

Therefore, the first fundamental phase of the process is 
the creation of a favorable design environment, called design 
cross-domain (DCD), which is marked by the integration 
between the various parties involved, with their personal 
experiences and needs, technical knowledge and skills, 
languages and communication strategies. As a result, it is 
created a suitable design structure to the conception and 
generation of new AT ideas, solutions and products.
When the design demand is identified, these domains 
are initially disconnected from each other, as illustrated in 

Fig. 4   Number of references 
selected per year in the system-
atic review [27]

Fig. 5   Design methodology proposed: AT-d8sign [27]
Fig. 6   Integration of the design domains [27]

260 
Page 6 of 15

Fig. 6. Thus, one of the first design initiatives consists of 
using strategies that aim to approach and integrate these 
diverse domains, with the user domain as a central element. 
The objective is to establish the DCD (Fig. 7), in which 
the domains are properly integrated, with a common set of 
design visions, values, language and goals.
More than a multidisciplinary design, in which knowl-
edge and representatives from multiple areas come together, 
there is then an interdisciplinary design, thus transmitting 
more clearly the idea that these different domains are not 
only brought together, but effectively integrated in the design 
process, forming an AT design nucleus (ATdN).
The establishment of the DCD is divided into four main 
stages, presented below.

3.1.1  Design domains identification

The identification of the relevant domains to the devel-
opment of the design is the first essential factor for the 
creation of the DCD. For this, in addition to the end user, 
the maximum number of individuals and domains that can 
play a relevant role in the context of the AD use should be 
considered, such as family members, caregivers, people of 
daily living and also professionals and specialists from the 
areas of health, engineering and other areas understood as 
important for the AD design. If the end user is a child or 
anyone with some kind of limitation in his/her ability to 
express and communicate, the role of family members and 

caregivers becomes even more important, since they act as 
translators of the user’s perceptions.
Disregarding any essential domain to the design can lead 
to significant losses to the process, to the final product and 
to the user himself. In relation to the process, it can lead to 
slowness, wasted resources, lost opportunities for innova-
tion, among others; as for the product, it can result in the 
generation of low-quality and poor-performance products, 
increasing the probabilities of abandonment; finally, with 
regard to the user, it can cause demotivation, some kind of 
damage to the treatment or even an injury.
It is up to the design team, therefore, to identify all the 
domains of interest for the design in question, from a prelim-
inary study of the demand and of the AD to be developed, as 
well as the user and his context. Naturally, new individuals 
and domains may be added in the process as new needs are 
identified.

3.1.2  Design domains integration

After identifying the domains of interest for the design and 
its representatives, strategies must be adopted to approach 
and integrate them, in search of the DCD.
The periodic and, preferably, face-to-face meetings 
between representatives of the design domains, involving 
all or some specific domains, proved to be the first important 
resource for the gradual consolidation of the DCD. If it is 
not feasible to maintain more regular face-to-face meetings, 
due to factors such as distance, availability or any other, it 
is essential the planned and efficient use of the means of 
communication and media available today, such as e-mails, 
messages, audios and videos, for the exchange of informa-
tion and interaction between the various parties involved in 
the process.
The realization of interviews with the user, family and/
or caregivers, allows a deeper understanding of the needs of 
the user, from his own perspective and from the perspective 
of those of his coexistence. Structured or semi-structured 
interviews make it possible to obtain more specific infor-
mation, whereas unstructured interviews and informal dia-
logues, through a more spontaneous interaction, allow for 
the capture of details and particularities that are generally 
not identified by more specific interviews, in addition to play 
an important role in establishing bonds of trust with the end 
user. These bonds are important for a greater involvement 
of the user in the design, predisposing him to the continuity 
of the process and, later, to the use of the device and to the 
evaluation tests.
As far as possible, the observation of the user when car-
rying out activities associated with the AD can also be very 
useful for understanding the problem to be solved and for 
bringing the parties together.

Fig. 7   Creation of the design cross-domain (DCD) [27]

Page 7 of 15 
260

Conducting presentations, seminars, courses and/or 
workshops on more technical topics is another impor-
tant resource, since they help to create a more common 
language among the various individuals involved in the 
process and lead to a better understanding of the design 
restrictions and objectives, by clarifying technical issues 
in a given domain little or entirely unknown to others. For 
example, a presentation made by health representatives 
about the user’s disability and its characteristics will be 
very useful for representatives in the engineering domain 
so that they can better understand the design constraints 
and requirements. Likewise, a workshop conducted by rep-
resentatives of engineering to present the AM technique, 
its characteristics, advantages and limitations, will be very 
useful to clarify the members of the other domains regard-
ing the possibilities and limitations of the design and of 
the manufacturing and so for a series of other knowledge 
and information related to the design.

3.1.3  Study of the background

The study of the background is another fundamental stage 
in the process of creating the DCD, being related to the 
product, to the user and to the context.
In the case of the product, it is characterized by map-
ping the state of the art and the technique in relation to the 
AD to be developed, with the search for the largest num-
ber of patents of related devices and also similar products 
commercially available. Based on the analysis of these 
patents and products, the objective is to identify oppor-
tunities for improvement and innovation for the design.
With regard to the user, it is essential a joint and more 
detailed analysis carried out by representatives of the 
health and engineering domains of his disability and its 
characteristics, impacts and related daily activities.
A survey of the user’s previous experiences with other 
ADs is also very important, in order to understand how 
they were, whether negative or positive, and what impact 
they may still have on the user’s relationship with AT 
today, for example, in the form of frustration and resist-
ance to the use of new ADs or in the form very high expec-
tations. Galway et al. [36] even suggest some methods 
for extracting information from users, according to the 
design phase, about their “previous attitudes” toward a 
certain technology or intervention. The positive aspects 
of these experiences can be used and/or improved, while 
strategies must be sought by the design team to overcome 
the negative aspects.
Finally, in relation to the context, it is necessary to know 
the physical, economic, social and even cultural charac-
teristics of the context in which the individual is inserted 
for a satisfactory result, since a successful solution for an 

individual in a given context will not necessarily have the 
same result for an individual with a similar clinical condi-
tion, but in a different context.

3.1.4  Planning and schedule

Although the difficulties generated by the markedly iterative 
and highly dynamic nature of the AT design, planning the 
activities to be developed and establishing a basic schedule 
with goals and deadlines are very important, as it helps to 
guide the process and bring more clarity for the individuals 
involved about common and particular goals and targets. 
This also contributes to the integration of the parties and 
to stimulate them to carry out the activities that they are 
responsible for.
In the absence of this planning, there may be a consid-
erable increase in the process times, leading to adverse 
consequences, such as: a clinical worsening of the user; 
the decrease in user and/or team motivation, compromis-
ing the continuity of the design; the waste of resources; the 
increase in design costs; the loss of windows of opportunity 
for innovation.

3.2  Conception spiral

In this phase, product concepts and solutions are elaborated 
and improved, based on a cyclic and iterative process that 
involves the feedback of the information obtained in the third 
phase, developed in parallel. For this reason, it was called 
the conception spiral. It is the creative core of the process, 
being composed of four fundamental stages, as shown below.

3.2.1  Design requirements definition

The definition of the design requirements involves, firstly, 
the identification and ranking, in terms of relevance, of the 
user requirements, both from his own perspective, with his 
expectations and desires, as well as from the perspective of 
the representatives of the health domain, who establish his 
therapeutic needs and restrictions. In addition, the technical 
requirements of the design, which are the parameters and 
restrictions related to the product and the context of use, 
must also be identified by the engineering domain and other 
domains of interest.
These requirements are key elements for the design pro-
cess, since they will guide the activities and the decision-
making of the team, which, seeking to meet them, will 
always need to make a balance between the “ideal,” the 
“possible” and the “necessary” before the choices that arise 
during the process.
Some of the tools used to identify the user requirements 
are: brainstorming sessions, questionnaires and interviews 
(structured or not). Observing the user when performing

260 
Page 8 of 15

tasks related to the AD can also be very useful for a better 
understanding of the requirements and restrictions associ-
ated with the product and the context of use. Galway et al. 
[36] also proposed some methods for extracting information 
from users, according to the design phase, for what they call 
“impact factors,” directly associated with the user and design 
requirements.
Once a list of user requirements has been established, it 
is necessary to rank them in terms of relevance, as this defi-
nition can be useful in the subsequent phases of the design 
for the decision-making before the trade-offs that arise. For 
example, when the team has to choose between prioritizing 
one or some requirements over others, considering the pos-
sibilities and constraints of the design and the focus on the 
user’s central priorities.
This ranking can be done by assigning scores through 
questionnaires directed to the users themselves, family mem-
bers and caregivers and representatives of the health domain 
or through tools such as the dominance matrix [24].
A very useful tool in this stage is the QFD, above all, 
through the so-called House of Quality, which allows a link 
between the user-subjective domain, through his require-
ments, and the engineering technical domain, through the 
design parameters. In this way, the technical decisions made 
during the process will be connected to the initial demand 
and the user needs, favoring a user-centered approach.

3.2.2  Concepts generation

As evidenced by the carried out systematic review, one of 
the major limitations of the design in this area is still the 
absence or very limited use of design tools and techniques, 
especially with regard to the collection and management of 
user requirements and in the connection of these with the 
design parameters, as well as in the generation of concepts 
and solutions for the product. For this reason, this stage, 
which is the creative core of the methodology, is consid-
ered an essential element of AT-d8sign and perhaps its main 
contribution.
It must be remembered that the conceptual design stage 
is critical in the design process as a whole, as the concepts 
and solutions chosen here will have a significant impact on 
the rest of the chain. For this very reason, unsuitable choices 
at this point will most likely lead to considerable waste of 
time and resources.
The design tools and techniques are very useful in help-
ing to connect the subjective and technical domains, respec-
tively, of the user and of the engineering, as well as for a 
clearer understanding of the problem and the functions to 
be fulfilled by the AD, thus favoring the identification of 
the possibilities of adaptation, improvement and innova-
tion for the generation of a quality product. In this way, one 
can better understand the importance of tools such as QFD, 

functional analysis, Material Energy Information (MEI) dia-
grams, morphological analysis, FMEA, among others that 
have been used in the designs developed by the group to 
which this work is linked.
The QFD (House of Quality) acts as a first link between 
the user and the engineering domain, guiding the process 
and preparing the context for the generation of concepts 
and solutions for the product. From there, the other tools 
are used, all combined or a selection of them, according 
to the design team’s understanding. The functional analy-
sis aids to understand the functions to be fulfilled by the 
product and to create a new reading for the problem. The 
MEI diagrams help to understand the dynamics of the 
device’s functioning and its interaction with the environ-
ment. The morphological analysis assists to open the range 
of options for the device and to weigh the pros and cons 
of each one. FMEA contributes to the effort to foresee the 
product in use and to identify its weak points and the level 
of relevance of each of them, in order to think about the 
possibilities for improvement.
The realization of discussion and brainstorming sessions 
(preferably not only with representatives of the engineering 
domain), the use of sketches on paper or tablet, the search 
for analogies in other areas or in nature (biomimetics), 
among others, are very useful tools for the idea generation 
process. Despite the initial challenges for its proper under-
standing and application, TRIZ also proved to be a great 
tool for generating interesting and innovative concepts for 
the design [28].
When reaching possible solutions, debate and discussion 
meetings should be held to analyze their feasibility, through 
a balance between the “ideal,” “the possible” and the “neces-
sary” from different perspectives, such as costs, manufactur-
ing, materials, time, among other factors. The more domains 
are involved in this process, and consequently, the more per-
spectives are contemplated, the greater the chances of more 
appropriate choices. Thus, by combining those considered 
the most viable among the various possibilities for each 
aspect of the product, the solutions to be implemented for 
the AD in the subsequent stages of the design are defined.
As the AT design is not guided purely by technology or 
by market, but above all by the user and his particularities, 
it is important to remember that not only aspects such as 
functionality and efficiency should be considered in the pro-
cess of choosing and defining concepts and solutions for the 
product, but also factors like comfort, appearance, etc.
It is also worth mentioning that these concepts and 
solutions will undergo modifications, readjustments and 
improvements based on the feedback obtained from the user 
and the health domain representatives (and other domains 
of interest) in the third phase of AT-d8sign (evaluation and 
refinement), carried out in parallel to the second phase.

Page 9 of 15 
260

The best criterion for defining the end of the iterative 
cycles for improving the concepts is the user himself and 
his experience with the device, without disregarding, how-
ever, the possible restrictions imposed by the design (costs, 
manufacturing process, among others) and the therapeutic 
vision of the health professionals, which may also indicate 
necessary adjustments.

3.2.3  Virtual models creation

CAD tools, due to the practicality and agility they bring to 
changes in the design (often in real time), are already very 
useful for the process of generation and consolidation of 
concepts and for their first presentation to representatives 
from other domains of the design. This facilitates interaction 
and integration between domains, in addition to enabling 
more active user participation.
As this methodology (AT-d8sign) is focused on the devel-
opment of AT with the aid of AM, the creation of virtual 
models from the defined concepts and solutions is an essen-
tial step for the next stage of 3D printing mock-ups and pro-
totypes, which in turn will be used in the assessment tests.
It is important to highlight that the virtual model (and for-
merly, the concept itself) must be elaborated considering the 
process by which it will be manufactured, its limitations and 
possibilities. In the case of 3D printers that operate through 
the Fused Filament Fabrication (FFF), which were used in 
the designs developed by the group, it is necessary to think, 
for example, in the post-processing of parts that require a 
large amount of support material and consequently, that 
causes a significant waste of material and a longer post-pro-
cessing time. Therefore, strategies such as dividing an object 
into two parts for later joining, changing one or more non-
fundamental angles or dimensions, among others, can be 
useful to facilitate the manufacturing process of the device.
Another interesting resource that brings a lot of practical-
ity to the design is the generation of virtual models aiming 
at a parametric and modular design, so that the alteration of 
key measures is facilitated and, with this, the adaptation of 
the model to other individuals with similar needs through 
certain parameters and particular measurements. Thus, the 
modification and manufacture of a particular part, whether 
for adjustment or replacement, also becomes much more 
practical and agile, as well as the adjustment of clearances 
between the parts in the 3D printer.
The 3D scanning of objects or parts of the body, with 
the help of suitable equipment, is yet another possibility for 
obtaining virtual models. In the first case, it is easier, for 
example, to obtain 3D printed prototypes from handmade 
casts. In the second, it is possible to fine-tune certain ADs 
to the user’s body.

The virtual models also allow CAE (Computer-Aided 
Engineering) analyses to be carried out by the design team, 
with the aim of predicting, within a reasonable safety mar-
gin, some of the characteristics of the product, such as 
weight, mechanical resistance, thermal properties, among 
others. The finite element method is an example of one of 
these analyses, which are very useful for the design when 
done properly.
Interesting opportunities for the improvement and com-
plementation of designs can also arise through the sharing 
of virtual models, for example, in the case of open-source 
designs and online model repositories (Thingverse, Grab-
CAD, etc.).

3.2.4  Selection of materials and manufacturing

With the creation and adjustments of the virtual models, one 
comes to the stage of manufacturing, via MA, the mock-ups, 
prototypes and even the final product, if the characteristics 
of the AD and the 3D printer allow this possibility.
Although virtual models (CAD) are an important 
resource for the presentation of the conceptual design to 
other domains, physical representations (mock-ups and pro-
totypes) are even more effective, since they become a kind 
of design language, contributing considerably to the trans-
mission of information and to the integration between the 
various domains involved.
The selection of the materials to be used in AM is one 
of the first definitions in this stage. Although the projects 
carried out by the group were developed with the help of 
low-cost FFF printers and the use basically of thermoplastic 
polymers (ABS and PLA), it is important to remember that 
there are several other possibilities in the field of AM, of 
machines with greater capacity and complexity, operating 
with different manufacturing methods and enabling the use 
of a wider variety of materials than those mentioned, such 
as metals, ceramics, among others. In this sense, there are 
interesting review studies on the materials used in AM and 
the characteristics, challenges and applications of the pro-
cess [37, 38].
It is up to the design team, therefore, to make a balance 
between the requirements of the design and of the product, 
the characteristics of the materials and the availability of 
resources and equipment in order to choose the most suit-
able materials for the manufacture of specific parts and of 
the AD as a whole.
Other essential aspects for the manufacturing via AM, in 
addition to the selection of materials, are the knowledge of 
the process parameters (filling ratio, layer thickness, etc.) 
and of the characteristics of the machine used (software, 
clearances adjustment, etc.). The presence of professionals 
and specialists with expertise on the process, its parameters 
and the materials to be used is, therefore, of fundamental

260 
Page 10 of 15

importance for obtaining satisfactory results and quality 
objects. In the absence of these, the losses with the waste 
of resources and time can be significant and may even com-
promise the continuity of the design, for example, due to the 
user’s demotivation caused by the delay or the low quality 
of the manufactured objects.
The planning of the manufacture of the objects and parts 
to be produced, also called Design for Additive Manufactur-
ing (DfAM), is another very important factor of the process. 
Studies on material deposition strategies and the best ways 
to orient and configure objects and parts for manufacturing 
have a significant result in reducing material waste and the 
time and complexity of post-processing, also providing a 
better surface finish to the manufactured objects.

3.3  Evaluation and refinement

This phase is directly linked to the previous one, since the 
result of the evaluations obtained through the interaction 
and the tests with users and other members of the DCD will 
be fed back in the second phase to refine the concepts and 
characteristics of the product. Therefore, it is also a part of 
the creative core of the process, consisting of four stages, 
described below.

3.3.1  Concepts presentation

After obtaining the first product concepts in the previous 
phase, it is necessary to present them to the other members 
of the DCD for initial evaluations. This presentation, at first, 
is made using the sketches and drawings of the AD and, 
later, through virtual models, which already allow a clearer 
and more dynamic visualization of the device. The opinions 
and suggestions obtained must be properly registered to feed 
back the concept generation stage of the previous phase.
After that, the first AD mock-ups and prototypes are 
manufactured, which enable an even more effective interac-
tion with the other members of the DCD, since through the 
interaction with the parts, the assembly and disassembly, the 
movement of the moving parts (if any) and the visualization 
of the details of the AD, the user and the health domain rep-
resentatives can understand more clearly the concepts being 
proposed for the device and, thus, present their suggestions 
for improvement and modification. In this way, the commu-
nication between the parties, the presentation and consolida-
tion of ideas and the decision making are facilitated.
In addition, the impact caused by the first materializa-
tion of the AD seems to favor the establishment of a bond 
of greater interest between the user and the device, bringing 
more motivation for the continuity of the design and causing 
a greater predisposition to perform the use tests.
This presentation through mock-ups and prototypes has 
yet another purpose, which is to transmit more information 

to users and other members of the DCD about the AM 
technology itself, its characteristics, limitations and possi-
bilities. In this sense, understanding the design constraints 
and requirements becomes more accessible. Beyond that, 
the perception of this technology, often seen with admira-
tion, also becomes another factor for the creation of emo-
tional bonds between the user and the device, favoring its 
acceptance.
Another interesting way to present the concepts of the 
product is the use of intermediate materials for the creation 
of physical representations, such as clay, playdough, foam, 
Lego, among others, according to the characteristics of the 
AD to be developed and the availability of resources for the 
design.

3.3.2  Adaptation period

Following the user more closely during the initial period of 
use of the AD, called adaptation period, is essential, since 
the expectations of the user in this stage are the highest and 
the first results will not always be very satisfactory at first, 
either by the lack of certain adjustments in the device or by 
the lack of training for its use. Higher abandonment rates 
are identified in the first year of use of ADs, followed by a 
reduction in the next years of use, thus indicating the criti-
cality of this initial adaptation period [9, 39].
Without this monitoring and the stimulus it generates, the 
consequences may be the abandonment of the device and the 
withdrawal of the continuity of the development process. 
Hence the importance of creating the DCD and inserting 
the user since the beginning of the process, because, to the 
extent that he feels involved, as an integral and active part of 
the process, the greater the chances of feeling motivated to 
overcome the initial difficulties of the adaptation.
The emotional bonds established and strengthened from 
the beginning with members of the health domain and the 
rest of the team, with the product itself and with the design 
process play a very important role in stimulating and encour-
aging the continuity of the adaptation process. The repre-
sentatives of the domains closest to the user, such as family 
members and caregivers, have also a vital role in this process 
of encouraging and supporting the user in this initial period.
In addition, it is also essential for the continuity of the 
process the adequate training of the user and, if applicable, 
of other domains of interest (family members and caregivers, 
for example), for the correct use of the AD. Depending on 
the type of AD and the target users, the search for alternative 
and more engaging means of training can also be interesting, 
such as training through games or playful activities in the 
case of ADs for children.

Page 11 of 15 
260

3.3.3  Qualitative and quantitative tests

Conducting device evaluation tests are essential to ensure the 
user’s centrality in the development process, the refinement 
and necessary adjustments of the conceptual design and, 
therefore, the functionality and the final quality of the AD.
At this stage, it is essential to “listen” to the user and to 
those who share a closer relationship with his disability, such 
as family members and caregivers, especially in cases where 
the patient is a child or has some kind of limitation in his/her 
expression and communication skills. Without this attention, 
the chances of abandonment of the AD will be great. The 
meetings with the user and the other domains of interest, 
through interviews (structured or not) and questionnaires, 
and also the observation of the user during the use of the 
AD are some of the first resources to achieve this purpose.
It is also highly recommended to use validated tools for 
the qualitative assessment of the AT from the user’s perspec-
tive, such as: COPM [33], MPT [40]; QUEST [41], QUEST 
2.0 [42] e PIADS [43]. Some of these tools have even been 
translated and validated for application in the Brazilian con-
text as well: COPM [34], QUEST 2.0 [44] e MPT [45, 46]. 
Galway et al. [36] also indicate some methods for extract-
ing information from users, according to the design phase, 
regarding the assessment of AT.
Single-subject tests [31, 32] are another very interesting 
assessment tool, aiming to assess the effects of one or more 
specific interventions, under controlled conditions, for a 
given individual, who acts as his own control. Therefore, 
it adapts in a very interesting way for research in this area. 
However, although it is very useful to evaluate the results 
in the specific scope of a given user and context of use, it is 
necessary to highlight the limitations regarding the projec-
tion of these results to other users and circumstances of use, 
even with similar clinical conditions. If the production of the 
AD on a larger scale is a design objective, tests with other 
configurations and a larger number of individuals must be 
performed.
Despite self-reported tests are essential to capture the 
user’s perception of AT, it is necessary to emphasize that 
they are also very susceptible to external factors (physi-
cal, social, cultural, among others), which can influence 
the assessment. The feeling of gratitude for the team, for 
example, can lead to an overestimated assessment of the 
AD, while a high initial expectation or the condition of the 
user’s mood on a given day or period can lead to the opposite 
result. The influence of medication, when applicable, can-
not be disregarded either. For this reason, it is necessary to 
combine tests of a more qualitative nature with others of a 
more technical and quantitative character, in order to verify 
the functionality of the device and the meet of the therapeu-
tic needs more safely.

It is also recommended the performance of mechanical 
tests of resistance, fatigue, impact, among others, according 
to the characteristics of the AD and its application, as well 
as the use of CAE tools, such as the finite element method.
There are also more specific tests, aimed at assessing per-
formance and/or functionality associated with certain types 
of disabilities and ADs, such as, the Jebsen-Taylor Hand 
Function Test (JTHFT) or the Southampton Hand Assess-
ment Procedure (SHAP).
It is up to the design team to identify, in the specific lit-
erature about the type of the AD under development, the 
qualitative and quantitative tests, preferably validated, that 
can be used to evaluate the functionality and the effective-
ness of the product, as well as the experience and the satis-
faction of the user.

3.3.4  Delivery and follow‑up

If the characteristics of the AD and of the 3D printer used 
allow the generation of a final product, it is necessary to 
identify the appropriate moment for the conclusion of the 
prototype refinement cycle and the transition to the manu-
facture of the final product. Otherwise, AM can be used 
to improve concepts and prototypes until the design team 
deems it necessary and the final product is then manufac-
tured using the most appropriate and convenient manufac-
turing strategies.
In view of the design requirements, there are several fac-
tors that must be taken into account by the design team for 
the closure of the redesign and refinement cycles (phase 2 
of AT-d8sign) and the generation of a final version of the 
AD for delivery. The end user, however, is always the most 
essential criterion for making this assessment and defining 
the appropriate time for the delivery of a final customized/
personalized product according to his preferences.
Just as a short-term follow-up is carried out during the 
process of evaluating and refining concepts and prototypes, 
after the definitive delivery of the AD, it is also important 
to carry out a longer-term follow-up, in order to identify 
problems and adjustments to be made in reason of continued 
use for a longer period of time. This follow-up also aims to 
provide the support for product maintenance and replace-
ment of parts and also to sustain the links between the DCD 
members, feeding the user’s stimuli and motivation.
Other interesting options for this post-design phase may 
be the creation of design sharing networks or the adoption 
of an open-source design, enabling the continuous improve-
ment of the AD through the collaboration of other individu-
als (professionals, specialists or enthusiasts) and domains of 
knowledge. In addition, the model developed can be used, 
with the appropriate adaptations, in other cases and for other 
patients.

260 
Page 12 of 15

The elaboration of patents and, with that, the establish-
ment of partnerships with companies aiming at the improve-
ment of the product and/or its commercialization are also an 
interesting path.

3.4  Summary

In summary, the proposed methodology (AT-d8sign) con-
sists of three main phases: (1) design cross-domain; (2) 
conception spiral; (3) evaluation and refinement. The brief 
description of each of them, as well as their respective 
stages, according to Santos [27], can be seen below:

1.	 Design cross-domain: it aims to create the fundamen-
tal structure of knowledge, skills and experiences for 
the development of the design, based on the integration 
of all domains of interest. It consists of the following 
stages: 

	
1.1.	 Design domains identification: identification, 
according to the characteristics of the AD to be 
developed, of the domains of knowledge and 
experience that should be added to the DCD 
through their representatives in addition to the 
user;
	
1.2.	 Design domains integration: adoption of strate-
gies to bring together the different parties and 
domains of knowledge and experience involved 
in the design; creation of a language, as much 
as possible, common to DCD; alignment of the 
design visions, values and goals;
	
1.3.	 Study of the background: study of the state of the 
art and of the technique (patents and commer-
cial products) regarding the AD to be developed; 
survey of the user’s past experiences with AT; 
analysis of the characteristics of the user’s dis-
ability and of his context;
	
1.4.	 Planning and schedule: establishment of a basic 
schedule for the design and its activities, with 
some proposed goals and deadlines, in order to 
guide the process as a whole and to integrate and 
stimulate the parties involved.

2.	 Conception spiral: it is the most creative core of the pro-
cess, in which the concepts and solutions about the AD 
are elaborated and improved, with the help of design 
tools and techniques, and in which mock-ups, prototypes 
and products are manufactured via AM. It comprises the 
following stages: 

	
2.1.	 Design requirements definition: identification 
and ranking of the user requirements, expecta-

tions and desires; definition of the design techni-
cal parameters and restrictions;
	
2.2.	 Concepts generation: more adequate understand-
ing of the problem and the design demand; gener-
ation and improvement of the concepts and solu-
tions for the AD, with the help of design tools 
and techniques and the feedback obtained by the 
evaluations;
	
2.3.	 Virtual models creation: creation and improve-
ment of virtual models (CAD) for the AD, based 
on the first sketches and the feedback obtained 
by the evaluations; realization of CAE analyses; 
3D scanning of objects or parts of the body, when 
applicable;
	
2.4.	 Selection of materials and manufacturing: analy-
sis and selection of the most suitable materials; 
manufacturing of mock-ups and prototypes via 
AM; calibration of the process parameters and 
the 3D printer used.

3.	 Evaluation and refinement: it seeks to evaluate with the 
user and the other members of the DCD the satisfaction 
with the AD, as well as its functionality and effective-
ness, in order to feedback the previous phase to improve 
the design. It is divided into the following steps: 

	
3.1.	 Concepts presentation: presentation of the con-
cepts and solutions proposed for the AD to the 
other members of the DCD by the various means 
available (sketches, drawings, virtual models, 
mock-ups, prototypes, etc.);
	
3.2.	 Adaptation period: closer following of the user 
during the initial critical period of the adaptation 
to the AD; training of the user and other domains 
of interest in the use of the AD;
	
3.3.	 Qualitative and quantitative tests: identification 
and selection of the most appropriate assessment 
tools; use, in a combined manner, of qualitative 
and quantitative tests to evaluate user satisfac-
tion with the AD, as well as its functionality and 
effectiveness from a technical and therapeutic 
point of view;
	
3.4.	 Delivery and follow-up: when feasible, deliv-
ery of the final product to the user; long-term 
follow-up to identify necessary adjustments and 
to support maintenance and parts replacement; 
continued improvement by the open-source de-
sign, when applicable; elaboration of patents, 
depending on the circumstances.

The AT-d8sign method as a whole is summarized in 
Fig. 8, with its phases and respective stages.

Page 13 of 15 
260

4  Conclusions

This work presents a design methodology, called AT-d8sign, 
for the development of assistive devices with a user-cen-
tered approach and the aid of additive manufacturing, in the 
context of Assistive Technology. It consists of three main 
phases—design cross-domain, conception spiral, evaluation 
and refinement—each of them with its respective stages, 
having been elaborated based on three fundamental ele-
ments: an analysis of three cases of designs developed by 
the research group to which this work is linked; a case study 
in continuation of one of these designs; a systematic review 
on the current scenario of AT design methodology with the 
aid of AM.
One of the major gaps on the current scenario of the 
design methodology in the context of AT identified in the 
carried out systematic review and also an empirical finding 
in the experience of more than 5 years of design in this area 
was the absence or the very limited and little detailed use 
of design tools and techniques in the process of developing 
ADs, even in the case of more structured proposals.
For this reason, one of the major contributions of this 
work was the establishment of a structured design model 
using these tools and techniques, in order to significantly 
facilitate the understanding of the problem to be solved and 
the generation of useful and innovative ideas and solutions. 
Another important contribution is the incorporation of the 
recent advances and possibilities that the improvement of 
AM techniques has brought to the design in this area, such 
as: greater user involvement in the process; easier interac-
tion between the parties involved, through mock-ups and 

prototypes, which favor the transmission of information and 
the communication of ideas; reduction of time and steps 
between design and manufacture; evaluation tests with 
mock-ups and prototypes to validate and refine concepts 
and solutions; customization and personalization of devices.
User involvement, since the initial stages of the design, 
was another concern of the proposal, in order to guarantee 
an approach really centered on the user, on his subjectiv-
ity needs, and not just guided by the technology or by the 
market. The chances of the abandonment of the AD are 
thus significantly reduced. In addition, this more active 
involvement leads to the creation of emotional and trust 
bonds between the user and the design team and the prod-
uct itself, stimulating and predisposing him to the conti-
nuity of the design process and to the use of the device.
Although the model presented was developed through 
the development of ADs with the aid of low-cost FFF 
printers, nothing prevents it from being transposed, with 
the adaptations considered necessary, for different condi-
tions of design and manufacturing via AM in the area of 
AT or even in other areas.
As future work, it is expected to be able to apply the 
presented method to new case studies, with the develop-
ment of different types of AD and the use of other AM 
methods and machines, in order to evaluate and validate 
its applicability and effectiveness in designs with other 
characteristics and restrictions than those on the basis of 
which it was designed. The incorporation of more design 
tools and techniques, such as axiomatic design or biomi-
metics, are also proposals to be developed.

Fig. 8   The proposed AT-d8sign method, its phases and stages [27]

260 
Page 14 of 15

Acknowledgements  This work was supported by Grant #2016-
4/442109 of National Council for Scientific and Technological Devel-
opment (CNPq) and by the funding through doctorate scholarship 
#165793/2015-5.