Original Paper

Digital Person-Centered Self-Management Support for People
With Type 2 Diabetes: Qualitative Study Exploring Design
Challenges

Robyn Schimmer1, MSc; Carljohan Orre2, PhD; Ulrika Öberg3, RN, PhD; Karin Danielsson1, PhD; Åsa Hörnsten3,
RN

1Department of Informatics, Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden
2Department of Computer Science and Media Technology, Malmö University, Malmö, Sweden
3Department of Nursing, Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden

Robyn Schimmer, MSc
Department of Informatics
Umeå University
MIT Building
Umeå, 90187
Sweden
Phone: 46 733834222

Abstract

Background: 
Self-management is a substantial part of treatment for patients with type 2 diabetes (T2D). Modern digital
technology, being small, available, and ubiquitous, might work well in supporting self-management. This study follows the
process of developing a pilot implementation of an electronic health (eHealth) service for T2D self-management support in
primary health care. The use of digital health, or eHealth, solutions for supporting self-management for patients with T2D is
increasing. There are good examples of successful implementations that can serve as guides in the development of new solutions.
However, when adding person-centered principles as a requirement, the examples are scarce.
Objective: The objective of this study was to explore challenges that could impact the design of a person-centered eHealth
service for T2D self-management support. The study included data collection from multiple sources, that is, interviews, observations,
focus groups, and a Mentimeter (interactive presentation with polling) survey among stakeholders, representing various perspectives
of T2D.
Methods: A user-centered design approach was used to exploratively collect data from different sources. Data were collected
from a workshop, interviews, and observations. The different data sources enabled a triangulation of data.
Results: Results show that user needs related to an eHealth service for person-centered T2D self-management support are
multifaceted and situated in a complex context. The two main user groups, patients and diabetes specialist nurses, express needs
that both diverge and converge, which indicates that critical design decisions have to be made. There is also a discrepancy between
the needs expressed by the potential users and the current work practice, suggesting more attention toward changing the organization
of work to fully support a new eHealth service.
Conclusions: 
A total of three overarching challenges—flexible access, reducing administrative tasks, and patient
empowerment—each having a significant impact on design, are discussed. These challenges need to be considered and resolved
through careful design decisions. Special attention has to be given to the patient user group that could greatly impact current work
practice and power structures at the primary care unit. A need for further studies investigating patient needs in everyday life is
identified to better support the implementation of technology that does not give specific attention to organizational perspectives
but instead approach design with the patient perspective in focus.

(JMIR Diabetes 2019;4(3):e10702) doi: 10.2196/10702

KEYWORDS
eHealth; diabetes mellitus, type 2; informatics; nursing; patient-centered care; self-management

JMIR Diabetes 2019 | vol. 4 | iss. 3 | e10702 | p. 1

Introduction

Background

Using electronic health (eHealth) services as self-management
support for people with type 2 diabetes (T2D) is, in many ways,
a promising way to reduce costs, increase availability of care,
and empower patients [1-3]. T2D is a common diagnosis and
demands a high level of self-management. In Sweden, 4% to
6% of the population is estimated to suffer from diabetes,
although approximately 4% is diagnosed and whereof
approximately 90% is T2D [4,5]. However, as most people are
diagnosed at an age of 60 years and above, the prevalence of
T2D is much higher in the older age groups [6]. In the group
of people aged 65 years and older, the prevalence is reported
to be approximately 12% to 18%, with higher percentage among
men [7]. The illness is complex and demanding as the basic
treatment is dietary changes and increased physical activity
besides the pharmaceutical treatment and blood sugar testing.
It also commonly involves comorbidities such as hypertension,
hyperlipidemia, and obesity and leads to severe complications
such as stroke and heart disease, kidney dysfunction, blindness,
and other problems if not sufficiently treated and self-managed
by patients [8].

The context of this paper is Swedish primary health care, which
is responsible for treating people with T2D. Basic medical
treatment as well as nursing, prevention, and rehabilitation that
do not demand special competences are offered in primary health
care. Patients with chronic illnesses as T2D visit the primary
health care center on a regular basis. General practitioners,
primary health care nurses with special responsibility for
diabetes clinics, physiotherapists, and occupational therapists
often work in teams at primary health care centers. Majority of
them are connected to the public health welfare program.

Studies have shown that patients see a potential in using eHealth
services to support self-management [9,10]. The development
of such eHealth services has been ongoing for many years and
with various outcomes. In a systematic review from 2013, Pal
et al [11] show that although internet-based interventions for
diabetes self-management have limited effects on glycemic
control, mobile phone–based interventions demonstrated more
promising results. In a more recent study, Murray et al [12]
report improvements in glycemic control through a Web-based
self-management program.

The variety of outcomes reported in different studies implies a
challenge in how eHealth services for self-management support
should be designed, implemented, and evaluated. Reviewing
the supply of available apps for diabetes management, Huang
et al [13] conclude that “apps could play an important role in
complementing multifaceted diabetes care” and also highlight
the importance of being context-specific and adaptive to specific
user’s needs. When addressing, for example, specific context
and user needs, it is important to clearly describe how these
perspectives are applied in design and implementation processes.
Discussing the potential of self-management eHealth
interventions for social support, Vorderstrasse et al [14]
conclude that many studies lack detailed descriptions about how
social support has been designed, implemented, and evaluated.

It is, therefore, hard to determine the factors that have impact
on social support.

Person-Centered Care and Electronic Health

The American Diabetes Association recommends [8] that
person-centered care (PCC) approaches should be applied in
self-management support. There are benefits of adding PCC
functionality to eHealth services, both for patients and health
care organizations [15]. Digital devices that capture personal
data and behaviors can be utilized to develop more personalized
and timely services [16]. However, going through current
literature, there are still few examples of eHealth services for
T2D self-management support that also incorporate PCC.
Wildevuur et al [17] present a set of preconditions for
information and communications technology–enabled PCC and
also conclude that this is a relatively new research area. They
also point out the need for more research on design of
technology that integrates a person-centered approach with
attention to the context of use and user experience.

In this paper, we address these challenges related to design and
technology for PCC. Design of eHealth services, as with all
information technology (IT), is not a matter of solving simple
problems but rather finding a possible composition that meets
the requirements. Exploring challenges faced in a design
situation of an eHealth service that includes PCC principles is,
therefore, crucial for future work integrating them into the
design of new eHealth services. The study is a part of our work
with an ongoing pilot implementation study to develop a
person-centered eHealth service for T2D self-management
support. The aim of this study was to explore possible challenges
that could impact the design of a person-centered eHealth service
for T2D self-management support in Swedish primary health
care.

Methods

General Approach

This particular study is part of a larger project with the aim of
exploring the prerequisites for and developing a person-centered
eHealth service for support of self-management in T2D. The
project has already published several part studies [10,18,19].
In this study, data are collected from multiple sources, that is,
interviews, observations, focus groups, and a Mentimeter
(interactive presentation with polling) survey among
stakeholders, representing various perspectives of T2D.
Identifying design challenges requires a broad approach where
user requirements and needs are supplemented with an
understanding of the context of use, current organization, and
work practice. The choice of data sources for this study was
made with this systemic view in mind, where each data source
provided insights into different aspects of the whole.

User-Centered Design

Due to the focus on PCC, we wanted to move beyond a solely
health care perspective where organizational needs are
prioritized. Instead, we wanted to have a more holistic viewpoint
where the patients and their needs were foremost. We, therefore,
chose to adopt a user-centered design (UCD) approach. The
strength of the user-centered approach is that it is founded on

JMIR Diabetes 2019 | vol. 4 | iss. 3 | e10702 | p. 2

the principle of designing based on studying user’s practice
[20], which fits well with the purpose of adopting
person-centered principles into the eHealth service. A design
approach is also well suited for exploring complex problems
[21] and context of use [22,23].

UCD can beneficially be used to focus on important aspects
such as multiple stakeholders, current practice, and future needs
[20,24,25]. These three aspects formed the foundation for data
collection where different data sources were used to gather data
that helped us explore these aspects.

Multiple Stakeholders

Understanding the users and other stakeholders is an essential
part of design [26]. A complex context often includes multiple
users and stakeholders that require to be assessed to identify
user needs and organizational constraints.

The two main user groups identified for this study were patients
with T2D and diabetes specialist nurses. These two groups are
the main actors in most of the current Swedish primary health
care practice. As most patients manage their own health in
everyday life, with help and support from family members, it
makes them important stakeholders too. Beyond these groups,
there are also other user groups and stakeholders involved such
as managers and physicians at the primary care unit and
representatives from higher organizational levels. However, no
stakeholders on higher organizational levels than the regional
primary care director were participating in our studies.
Furthermore, researchers and system developers were also seen
as stakeholders important for the design and development of
eHealth service.

Current Practice

Understanding the context of use is an important part of the
design process. With the patient and the diabetes specialist nurse
as the two main user groups, there are two distinctly different
contexts of use: one situated in the patients’ everyday life and
the other that is situated at the primary care unit and the work
of the diabetes specialist nurse. Together, they form a complex
context that is necessary to understand to design an eHealth
service that is adapted for the individual’s use in everyday life;
nurses’ caring, treatment, and administrative aspects of work;
and interaction between these two user groups.

Current practice is an aspect related to the context and focuses
on the processes and activities in the current situation. For the
design process, exploring current practice is an important part
of making decisions, whether certain activities should be
supported by the new system or whether it is necessary to make
adjustments in the routines [27]. Within this context, current
practice involves activities of the individual in everyday life
and activities more closely related to the processes at the primary
care unit. For this study, we choose to focus primarily on the
primary care unit context and the interactions between patients
and diabetes specialist nurses. The assumption was that these
interactions between patients and nurses were likely to reveal
challenges and tensions that were important in guiding design
decisions.

Future Needs

Design involves creating something that is not yet there [28].
An important part of design is, therefore, to establish the users’
future needs. Identifying future needs is done through careful
investigations into the current work practice and requirements
expressed by future users. Users are, however, often limited in
their ability to fully express what a new system should include
[29].

Understanding and establishing future needs is not only an
empirical inquiry into current practice and contexts that connects
requirements and wishes expressed by future users but also an
analytical activity where the results of the inquiry are analyzed
in relation to available technology and other factors. Together
with other relevant material, future needs form the foundation
for important design decisions [23,28] by setting out the desired
direction for the new design.

Data Collection and Participants

Data collection from multiple sources, that is, interviews,
observations, focus groups, and a Mentimeter survey among
stakeholders, representing various perspectives of T2D, was
performed.

Interviews and Observations

Study participants for the interviews and observations were
recruited through contacting the regional primary care director
who appointed 1 health care center as a possible choice. The
manager of this health care center accepted their participation
and mediated contact with their diabetes nurses. The manager
and 1 diabetes nurse both had many years of work experience
within primary health care and T2D care. All interviews and
observations were made by the first author.

Repeated interviews (n=4) with 1 diabetes specialist nurse and
1 primary care unit manager (n=2) revolved around work
process, routines, and known organizational constraints and
challenges. The purpose of this data collection was to gain
insights into opportunities and constraints related to the
organization and professional self-management support. All
interviews were audio recorded and transcribed verbatim for
analysis.

Nonparticipatory 
observations 
(n=4) 
of 
nurse-patient
consultations were conducted at the health care center using
video (GoPro cameras) to record the sessions. The purpose of
the observations was to gain a deeper understanding of the
preconditions for interaction between the diabetes specialist
nurse and the patient.

Workshop Procedures

Informed by the interviews and observations and to address the
multifaceted perspectives of multiple stakeholders, we chose
to design a workshop where we invited a broad sample of
stakeholders somehow involved in T2D care. The recruitment
began by listing potentially important stakeholders and
participants who were invited based on personal contacts and
snowball sampling. The purpose of the workshop that was held
in 2016 was to explore expectations, wishes and needs, and
concerns related to self-management support in T2D care and
digitalization. The list of participants is presented in Table 1.

JMIR Diabetes 2019 | vol. 4 | iss. 3 | e10702 | p. 3

Table 1. Workshop participants (N=26).

Value, n (%)
Participant

5 (19)
Patients

2 (8)
Spouses

9 (35)
Diabetes specialist nurses

1 (4)
Physician and regional primary care director

6 (23)
Researchers

3 (12)
System developers

Focus Groups and Mentimeter Surveys

For focus group discussions during the workshop, the
participants (n=26) were divided into 4 focus groups of 6 to 7
people. Participants were divided so that there were 1 to 2
patients and/or spouses per group and 2 to 3 diabetes specialist
nurses per group. The other participants, including researchers,
were distributed evenly into the 4 groups. The idea of using
mixed groups was to let different perspectives be expressed and
shared to explore both mutual and divergent expectations and
opinions.

To support group discussions, each focus group worked with
two canvases. On the basis of the idea of business canvases
[30], these were designed to cover different aspects of
self-management and digitalization. Additional material,
multicolored post-it notes, pens, and markers were available
and used by the participants to document the discussions.

Mentimeter questions had been prepared to cover questions on
concept definitions (eg, what does self-management mean to
you?) and user technology. The participants used smartphones
or tablets to answer the questions individually, and the answers
could then be presented anonymously to further inspire group
discussions.

Analysis

Nonparticipatory observations of nurse-patient consultations
were conducted using video to record the sessions—focus lays
on preconditions for and outcome of interaction between the
diabetes specialist nurse and the patient. Video recordings from
the observations were viewed in sequence, using memos to
annotate important activities and situations [31]. The recordings
and memos were then discussed, analyzed, and interpreted by
the authors. Themes (increased use of checklists, avoiding
one-sided communication, and prioritizing among administrative
tasks) were identified, which suggested that changes were
needed to make patients more involved.

Repeated interviews, conducted individually and in pair, were
performed with 1 diabetes specialist nurse and 1 primary care
unit manager. Interview guides were used that covered areas
such as work processes, routines, and organizational constraints
and challenges for T2D care. The purpose of this data collection
was to gain insights on opportunities and constraints related to
the organization and routines in care and care processes. All
interviews were audio recorded and transcribed verbatim for
analysis.

All text data were then analyzed using qualitative content
analysis [32]. The texts were read through several times, and
meaning units responding to the aim were identified in the
interview data. In the next step, all texts in meaning units were
coded and organized based on similarities and dissimilarities.
The codes were sorted and abstracted into themes, illustrating
emergent concerns expressed by the participants. Data on
various levels were discussed between the authors to gain
consensus and reach trustworthiness regarding the interpreted
themes (access governed by needs, developed teamwork,
relevant IT training, assessing patients’ individual needs, and
counteracting shallow patient interaction).

Focus group discussions in 4 groups were conducted during the
workshop (2×45 min). The first session revolved around
personal needs and possible improvements related to both
everyday life and care. Questions raised were as follows: needs
that are not satisfied today, what patients and spouses expect
from care, and possible future improvements. The second
sessions revolved around perceptions and expectations on
eHealth and digital self-management support. Questions raised
were as follows: negative expectations and fears toward
digitalization, advantages with digitalization, and digital
solutions and functions that could improve life with diabetes.
Data from focus group discussions comprised canvases,
multicolored post-it notes, pens, and markers that were used by
the participants for self-documentation that was analyzed
through systematic text condensation [33]. In addition, field
notes made by the first author who moved around in the room
observing and listening to all focus groups were analyzed
together with the self-documented data (striving for disease
control and balanced life, practicing PCC, facing limited
resources, and increasing number of contact channels).

Mentimeter questions had been prepared in advance to cover
questions related to concept definitions (eg, what does
self-management mean to you? and what does eHealth mean
to you?). Using smartphones or tablets, the participants answered
the questions, and the results were displayed collectively
(without revealing individual respondents). The purpose was
to further inspire the discussions and create common
understanding of key concepts. The data collected were added
to the focus group discussion dataset and field notes for analysis.
The 
analyzed 
Mentimeter 
survey 
data 
were 
about
self-management (improved responsibility and self-care, lifelong
learning needs, and promoting independency).

Data from all data collections were discussed and analyzed
between the authors. Qualitative content analysis was used to

JMIR Diabetes 2019 | vol. 4 | iss. 3 | e10702 | p. 4

sort data on various levels into 7 themes (improved access,
resource efficiency, reduced administrative tasks, continuous
training 
and 
support, 
tailored 
care, 
strengthened
communication, and patient empowerment).

Ethics

Ethical approval was given by the regional ethics board in Umeå
for all patient involvement (Registration number 2016/375-32).
All patients were informed about the aim of the study and
accepted participation in the study and expressed no doubts.

Results

Themes and Subthemes

The aim of this study was to explore challenges that could
impact the design of a person-centered eHealth service for T2D
self-management support. The design process included data
collection from multiple sources, for example, interviews,
observations, focus groups, and Mentimeter survey among
stakeholders, representing various perspectives of T2D.

The analysis revealed 7 critical factors, or challenges, expressed
as the following themes: improved access, resource efficiency,
reduced administrative tasks, continuous training and support,
tailored care, strengthened communication, and finally, patient
empowerment (Table 2).

Improved Access

Getting in contact with the caregiver was an emergent theme
among the patients participating in the workshop. They
requested increased number of contact channels to establish
contact with the caregiver in an easier and quicker way. One of
the patients expressed that it should be “Easy to get in contact,
e.g., getting advice and new prescriptions.” Questions or issues
could emerge at any given time, and it is not always meaningful
to wait to raise this issue, for example, acute hypoglycemia,
until the next regular meeting with the nurse or the physician
(which could be 6 months away). Even if the issue is of temporal
importance, getting a quick answer and support could strengthen
the overall service experience and support patient learning.

This is, however, not reflected in what was seen at the primary
care unit; there was no simple way for patients to interact
directly with their diabetes specialist nurse without going
through the generic booking or contact routine, as access must
be governed by needs. This routine comprises contacting the
primary care unit reception either by phone or using the existing
Web-based system for bookings or requests. The request is
evaluated and redirected to someone at the primary care unit
that is considered appropriate (or has the time) to answer the
request. Then, the patient is contacted later over phone, which
could lead to a discrepancy between the urgency of the issue
and the time of being contacted.

Resource Efficiency

Being efficient with limited resources was brought up by both
patients and caregiver representatives but with slightly different
meaning. Patients were concerned with unnecessary waiting
time. One of the patients at the workshop concluded that
“Making contact over phone takes time.” Being put on hold or
needing to elaborate with work hours to visit the primary care
unit can be seen as compromising with an individual’s time.

From a caregiver perspective, there is a clear concern about
being efficient with the limited economical resources that are
available. The high costs associated with treating T2D and other
chronic illnesses became clear in the interviews with the
management representative who expressed the importance of
finding efficient work processes and right resources being
allocated to the right needs. In the current work practice, the
diabetes specialist nurse faces the challenge of limited resources
alone as the diabetes care is mostly organized around the nurse
and to a lesser extent the physician responsible for diabetes care
at the unit. The interviews revealed that there were ambitions
toward dealing with this issue through more developed
teamwork at the primary care unit. Through involving more
professions at the unit, for example, dietitians and
physiotherapists, the individual needs of the patient are expected
to be met in a better way. Moreover, the diabetes specialist
nurses attending the workshop also expressed a similar concern
about resource allocation, saying that if resources were
distributed wisely, there would have been “More time for those
who need it more.”

Reduced Administrative Tasks

Seen from a caregiver perspective, administrative tasks are seen
as a source of frustration. The observations and the interviews
at the primary care unit revealed a work process surrounded
with administrative, sometimes manual, tasks. The overall
experience is that they are forced to prioritize among
administrative tasks. Much of the work is also governed by an
increased use of checklists that takes up time from other tasks.
The IT support is, however, poor. For example, there is currently
no automated system support for the diabetes specialist nurse
to schedule appointments for patients for their biannual visits
at the primary care unit. Instead, this is a cumbersome process,
keeping track of the list of patients when it is time for the next
visit, and there is always a risk of forgetting a patient or even
that a patient gets accidently delisted. Making appointments
can also include managing other resources at the primary care
unit, for example, when a patient needs to take blood samples
in advance and, therefore, needs to visit the laboratory unit.
After a patient consultation, there are also the necessary tasks
of reporting the visit in the electronic patient record and making
notes in the Swedish National Diabetes Register. There is no
integration between these two systems, resulting in registering
the same data at two places.

JMIR Diabetes 2019 | vol. 4 | iss. 3 | e10702 | p. 5

Table 2. Themes and subthemes over challenges for design of a person-centered electronic health service for type 2 diabetes self-management support.

Subthemes
Themes

Increased number of contact channels; access governed by needs
Improved access

Facing limited resources; developed teamwork
Resource efficiency

Prioritizing among administrative tasks; increased use of checklists
Reduced administrative tasks

Responding to lifelong learning needs; relevant information technology training
Continuous training and support

Assessing patients’ individual needs; practicing person-centered care
Tailored care

Avoiding one-sided communication; counteracting shallow patient interaction
Strengthened communication

Improved responsibility and self-care; striving for disease control and balanced life; promoting independency
Patient empowerment

Continuous Training and Support

Technical problems and complicated interfaces are a reoccurring
concern among both patients and health care personnel.
Although participants at the workshop see a great potential in
more digital support, there is also a fear that this might be a
complicated and cumbersome transition. One of the patients
during the workshop questions if the eHealth service will be
“Hard to handle, hard to learn?”. Similar concerns can be seen
throughout the workshop participants, independent of
background. There is an awareness that T2D patients are a
diverse user group and that there are older people and people
without much experience of digital tools. What is wanted is
something that is “simple to use ” and comes with “simple
support ,” thus responding to lifelong learning needs and
accounting for differences in skill and previous knowledge.

Another problem related to learning new systems was revealed
in the interviews at the primary care unit. Training is seen as
important, but there are also expectations for it to be relevant.
However, training is often given through Web-based course
packages where the user is supposed to watch instruction videos.
The videos are often long, and it is, therefore, hard to find
suitable time for sitting down and watching during an ordinary
workday. Due to these obstacles, there is a great risk that the
training will be fragmented or even ignored. There is also a lack
of opportunities for revised and more in-depth training for
experienced users.

Tailored Care

The workshop revealed a strong wish and expectation for more
individualization when using eHealth solutions. A patient
emphasized that “I am unique! Individual treatment.” There
was an overall awareness among the participants that T2D was
an individual experience, and there was no one-size-fits-all
solution for everyone. Patients clearly express the need for more
personalized treatment and alertness for individual needs.

Caregivers shared the patients’ aim for more personalization
and expressed an expectation that the eHealth technology should
provide better tools for assessing patients’ individual needs. A
nurse pointed out that it would be good with a “Tailored profile,
what the patient should work towards.” Availability of more
and more easily accessible data was brought up as a promising
enabler. This orientation toward personalization can also be
seen in the interviews at the primary care unit, with the active
aim toward practicing PCC through new routines and by

including more professions into the T2D care based on patients’
individual needs.

Strengthened Communication

Observations at the primary care unit showed that nurse-patient
communication had a tendency to be one-sided. The nurse was
leading the conversation, and the patient was passively listening
and responding to direct questions. In one of the interviews, the
specialist diabetes nurse commented on this and pointed out
that it was hard to enable an open dialogue during these
consultations. There are many things to go through during the
visit, such as reviewing test results and medication, and there
is, therefore, limited time for more open discussions. However,
the nurse also pointed out that this varied depending on the
individual patient. A patient with good self-management skills
requires less time for standard activities, which leaves more
time for dialogue.

The problem with communication was also brought up during
the workshop. The caregiver representatives had high hopes for
future eHealth solutions, and one of the nurses expressed that
this could provide “more efficient communication which will
save both time and money for patients and caregivers.”
However, from the caregiver perspective, the main objective
for better communication seems to be connected to resource
efficiency. The patient representatives at the workshop expressed
a different perspective on communication, suggesting that a
change 
of 
perspective 
might 
help 
avoid 
one-sided
communication. This required more attention to issues that are
important for them. One of the patients stated that it was
important to “speak about feelings, fears and anxiety,” which
stood in strong contrast to the focus on practical checkpoints,
as revealed in the observations.

Patient Empowerment

Throughout the workshop, the participating nurses expressed a
wish that future eHealth services would help patients improve
responsibility and their self-care capability. Their expectations
are that an eHealth service will provide patients with tools for
being more engaged in their disease management and that
increased involvement will promote increased independency
among the patients. Moreover, highlighting the importance of
involving relatives, one of the nurses said that the aim should
be to “make oneself redundant—to be able to work in a way
that makes patients and relatives flourish.” More involvement
and independence were not exclusive for the caregiver
perspective. The patients participating in the workshop had

JMIR Diabetes 2019 | vol. 4 | iss. 3 | e10702 | p. 6

similar aims, expressing a strive for disease control and balance
in life, and this could be achieved through eHealth services that
supported independent and engaged self-management. One of
the patients expressed the aim “to be able to handle ‘everything’
on my own without help, make everyday life easier.”

Discussion

Emergent Design Challenges

The 7 themes presented in the Results section were further
discussed and abstracted by the authors and found to be bridged
by three overarching concepts representing emergent design
challenges. Challenges similar to these are suggested to have a
large impact on the final design, and depending on the decisions
made, one group of stakeholders might be favored at the expense
of another group.

Flexible Access: Critical Changes in Work
Organization

Better and easier access to care was a prominent wish among
patients. This can be supported in a new eHealth service, for
example, through technology-enhanced communication such
as instant messaging and video calls [34-36], thus offering an
increased number of contact channels, and can also be achieved
by changing current work processes at the primary care unit by
making it easier for the patients to get in contact with the
diabetes specialist nurse when needed. From a person-centered
perspective, this would likely enhance the partnership between
patient and nurse and support better physical and psychosocial
well-being [17] for the patients by avoiding that small, but
important, concern of being neglected.

However, promoting patients’ access to care will have
implications for health care personnel. Easier access and more
direct ways of communication require changes in the current
work process to handle patient contacts. Today’s work practice
involves gatekeeping patient contacts to support easier work
planning and changing toward a more patient-initiated access
will require primary care units to allocate resources to handle
patient requests. This could also result in higher costs as some
overstaffing can be required to handle unexpected peaks in the
process flow.

We argue that to properly and fully address the person-centered
perspective in design, the needs of the patient must come first.
As pointed out, this will result in challenges for the health care
organization when it comes to resource allocation; economy;
and, which was evident in the results, resource efficiency.
Overall, this can be seen as frustration with the current situation,
when available resources do not match the actual need.

It could, however, be possible to find efficient ways of meeting
patient needs through digital technology that does not
necessarily require the patient to contact a person at the primary
care unit. If we, for example, could better adapt the eHealth
service to anticipate and react to user (patient) needs, for
example, through data mining technologies [37], and
automatically respond accordingly [38], some of the direct
interaction with the primary unit could be avoided. This would
benefit both the patient, through quick and accurate support,

and the primary care unit that needs to allocate fewer, and also
more appropriate, resources to this activity. However, to further
explore this possibility, we need to pay closer attention to the
everyday experience of the patients to better understand when
critical questions occur and how we can respond. This includes
gaining better understanding of the types of communication
that have to be strengthened.

Reducing Administrative Tasks: A New Division of
Labor

In the Result section, administrative work and efficiency were
mainly brought up by the diabetes specialist nurses and other
stakeholders associated with the health care system. Given the
current practice with many different IT systems and sometimes
the necessity of registering the same data several times into
different databases and records, it is easy to sense the frustration.
Bringing up the idea of a new eHealth service brings forth
anxiety that new systems equal more administration, and it is
therefore brought up as a concern (cf [19]). Designing for this
need would require close attention to current practices and
routines and adequate support through automation. Moreover,
integration between the new and existing systems should be
provided.

The aspect of administration is, however, not well represented
among the patients. There are concerns about avoiding
unnecessary tasks and wasting time (eg, waiting on hold) but
not to the extent of what is expressed by the health care
personnel. We argue that this is not a sign of unimportance but
rather that the participants lack a relevant point of reference to
formulate an opinion. Introducing a new IT system (eg, an
eHealth service) into an organization will, in almost all
situations, affect work organization and the division of labor
[39]. How people work and who is doing what work tasks will,
intended or not, change. The practical implication of this will
be the continuous training and support that were an expressed
need among the health care personnel. To cope with the changes
that new IT brings to an organization, users need to be trained
properly to both being able to interact with the new system and
getting accustomed to changing work tasks and processes. In
the end, on an organizational level, this becomes a question of
management, where work tasks can be distributed to a new
group of workers, for example, to unlock other important
resources. Therefore, when designing the organization, this
becomes a clear and important delimiter.

However, when bringing in the person-centered perspective,
the organization does not work as a delimiter of use. The new
system is brought into a context comprising both the health care
organization and the everyday life experience of the patients
using it. This might result in a situation where tasks normally
performed by nurses and other health care personnel are
redistributed to the patient. More, and perceived unnecessary,
work adds to the complexity of using the design and goes against
the basic design principles of accessibility and usability [40]
and might become a barrier for using the system, implying an
increased need for relevant training and support also for patients.

We argue that this reduction of administrative tasks should be
carefully considered in light of this extended context of use.
This also creates a venue for asking questions about what

JMIR Diabetes 2019 | vol. 4 | iss. 3 | e10702 | p. 7

patients consider as administrative tasks and what will be
accepted. Again, this calls for closer attention to the everyday
life experience of patients to better understand the potential
impact of a new eHealth system and what administrative tasks
can be acceptable.

Patient Empowerment: Roles Are Changing

The results show that patients want independence and that the
diabetes specialist nurses express that they want to support the
patient in being more self-sustained. This is, however, not
reflected in the current work process. Care is structured in such
a way that it does not support independence, and the
consultations mainly revolve around control; checking patient
laboratory results; and the nurse leading the discussion, overall
making the patient passive.

From a design perspective with focus on person-centered
principles, a new eHealth service must focus on supporting
patients and strengthening nurses in supporting the patients.
Following the guidelines suggested by Wildevuur et al [17],
this would include designing for shared decision making, mainly
through enhancing communication and strengthening the
partnership. Critical design decisions will have to be made that
have a great impact on the role of the diabetes specialist nurse.
The new eHealth service, if supporting person-centered
perspectives and patient empowerment, will require the health
care organization to initiate substantial changes in the
organization, and the diabetes specialist nurses will have to
adapt to this change and fine-tune their own work practice
accordingly. This accommodates the expressed need for more
tailored care, in which the nurse takes on a coaching role
providing individualized support to the patient [14]. In addition,
this would include a change in communication patterns, inviting
the patient into a more in-depth interaction with the diabetes
specialist nurse.

Implementing digital technology, for example, through a new
eHealth service, will often have impact on power structures
[39]. We argue that these power structures must receive closer
attention and that the potential change of roles [41,42] when

designing 
person-centered 
eHealth 
services 
for 
T2D
self-management should also be implemented. Digital
technology has the potential to either help in restructuring
power, that is, changing the roles, or act to preserve existing
structures. Proper design decisions have to be made to achieve
the wanted effects and with an awareness and readiness that
this will have a substantial impact on work organization at the
primary care unit.

Methodological Discussion

The methods used performed well in highlighting user needs
from different perspectives and supporting an understanding of
the current context and practice. It also worked well with the
intended focus on patient-nurse interaction and the challenges
that emerged. It does, however, not shed sufficient light on
patient’s everyday experience and is, therefore, not enough for
fully establishing the user needs for the patient group. To fully
cover the patient perspective, the method needs to be adapted
for that specific context.

Conclusions

The aim of this study was to explore challenges that could
impact the design of a person-centered eHealth service for T2D
self-management. The results highlighted challenges or areas
of concern that were seen as important and in which critical
decisions have to be made. These challenges greatly affect both
patients and health care personnel (diabetes specialist nurses in
particular) and are essential points to be accounted for when
designing a new eHealth service. To design in line with
person-centered principles, the patient perspective needs to be
favored, which in turn will have an impact on how work is
organized and implemented at the primary care unit. Technology
could possibly mitigate some of the impact on the organization,
but to avoid a preponderance toward a primary care perspective,
this would require more insights on how patients should be
supported in everyday life, implying the use of other methods
for exploring that particular context of use. This requires further
research as it is not covered in this study.

Authors' Contributions

RS, CO, UÖ, and ÅH designed the study. RS collected the data. RS, CO, KD, UÖ, and ÅH participated in data analysis. All
authors contributed to writing the paper and provided input.

Conflicts of Interest

None declared.