Original Paper

A User-Centered Approach to an Evidence-Based Electronic
Health Pain Management Intervention for People With Chronic
Pain: Design and Development of EPIO

Ingrid Konstanse Ledel Solem1,2, MSc; Cecilie Varsi1, PhD; Hilde Eide1,3, PhD; Olöf Birna Kristjansdottir1,4, PhD;
Elin Børøsund1, PhD; Karlein M G Schreurs5, PhD; Lori B Waxenberg6, PhD; Karen E Weiss7, PhD; Eleshia J
Morrison8, PhD; Mette Haaland-Øverby1,4, BSc; Katherine Bevan9, BSc; Heidi Andersen Zangi10,11, PhD; Audun
Stubhaug2,12, PhD; Lise Solberg Nes1,2,8, PhD

1Department of Digital Health Research, Division of Medicine, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway
2Institute of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway
3Science Centre Health and Technology, University of South-Eastern Norway, Drammen, Norway
4Norwegian National Advisory Unit on Learning and Mastery in Health, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway
5Centre for eHealth and Wellbeing Research, University of Twente, Enschede, Netherlands
6Department of Clinical and Health Psychology, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, United States
7Department of Anesthesiology and Pain Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States
8Department of Psychiatry and Psychology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States
9Center for Learning and Mastery, Bærum Hospital, Vestre Viken Hospital Trust, Bærum, Norway
10National Advisory Unit on Rehabilitation in Rheumatology, Department of Rheumatology, Diakonhjemmet Hospital, Oslo, Norway
11Faculty of Health, VID Specialized University, Oslo, Norway
12Regional Advisory Unit on Pain, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway

Lise Solberg Nes, PhD
Department of Digital Health Research
Division of Medicine
Oslo University Hospital
Pb 4950 Nydalen
Oslo, N-0424
Norway
Phone: 47 91332341

Abstract

Background: Chronic pain conditions are complicated and challenging to live with. Electronic health (eHealth) interventions
show promise in helping people cope with chronic illness, including pain. The success of these interventions depends not only
on the technology and intervention content but also on the users’ acceptance and adherence. Involving all stakeholders (eg,
patients, spouses, health care providers, designers, software developers, and researchers) and exploring their input and preferences
in the design and development process is an important step toward developing meaningful interventions and possibly strengthening
treatment outcomes.
Objective: The aim of this study was to design and develop a user-centered, evidence-based eHealth self-management intervention
for people with chronic pain.
Methods: The study employed a multidisciplinary and user-centered design approach. Overall, 20 stakeholders from the project
team (ie, 7 researchers, 5 editors, 7 software developers, and 1 user representative), together with 33 external stakeholders (ie,
12 health care providers, 1 health care manger, 1 eHealth research psychologist, and 17 patients with chronic pain and 2 of their
spouses) participated in a user-centered development process that included workshops, intervention content development, and
usability testing. Intervention content was developed and finalized based on existing evidence, stakeholder input, and user testing.
Stakeholder input was examined through qualitative analyses with rapid and in-depth analysis approaches.

J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 1 | e15889 | p. 1

Results: Analyses from stakeholder input identified themes including a need for reliable, trustworthy, and evidence-based
content, personalization, options for feedback, behavioral tracking, and self-assessment/registration as factors to include in the
intervention. Evidence-based intervention content development resulted in one face-to-face introduction session and 9 app-based
educational and exercise-based modules. Usability testing provided further insight into how to optimize the design of the intervention
to the user group, identifying accessibility and a simple design to be essential.
Conclusions: The design and development process of eHealth interventions should strive to combine well-known evidence-based
concepts with stakeholder input. This study, designing and developing the pain management intervention EPIO, illustrates how
a stakeholder-centered design approach can provide essential input in the development of an eHealth self-management intervention
for people with chronic pain.
Trial Registration: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT03705104; https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03705104

(J Med Internet Res 2020;22(1):e15889) doi: 10.2196/15889

KEYWORDS
Web-based interventions; eHealth; mobile apps; evidence-based, user-centered design approach; service design; chronic pain;
cognitive behavioral therapy; acceptance and commitment therapy

Introduction

Background

Chronic pain conditions are often multifaceted and difficult to
manage, involving physiological and psychological and social
challenges for those affected [1-4]. Given this complexity,
chronic pain can also be perceived as unavoidable,
unmanageable, and challenging to disengage from [5].

Psychoeducational individual or group-based interventions with
cognitive behavioral (ie, cognitive behavioral therapy; CBT)
[6] and/or acceptance and commitment (ie, acceptance and
commitment therapy; ACT [7]) approaches supporting
self-management have been shown to be effective. CBT entails
an integrative approach combining cognitive and behavioral
change techniques, focusing on challenging and changing
unhelpful thoughts and behaviors with a goal-oriented,
problem-solving approach and enhancement of coping strategies
[8]. ACT was initially proposed as a new generation of CBT,
focusing on the role of acceptance and mindfulness rather than
cognitive change; aiming to increase psychological flexibility;
and centering around acceptance, awareness of the moment,
and a commitment to values and direction [9]. Both types of
interventions can improve a person’s quality of life, pain
acceptance, functioning, and self-efficacy while also having the
potential to reduce pain, depressive symptoms, and distress
[10-18]. Unfortunately, such in-person interventions are not
always offered or available [5], and multiple barriers to
attendance may be present for people living with chronic pain
conditions.

Electronic health (eHealth) interventions, referring to
health-related interventions distributed through technology,
have shown promising results in helping people cope with
health-related issues and chronic illness, including pain [19-25].
eHealth interventions have the potential to offer patients easier
access to illness management when convenient and most needed
and at the patients’ own pace [26,27]. Given the potential for
flexibility in use, eHealth interventions may introduce more
cost-effective treatment options, supplementing usual care and
even reducing the need for direct involvement from health care
providers [28,29]. This could be particularly important when

dealing with chronic illness, such as pain, as individuals living
with chronic illness usually have the need for, and responsibility
of, day-to-day management of their own illness [13]. Several
studies have pointed to great potential for the use of eHealth in
chronic pain management [21,23,24,27,30,31]. However, a
number of challenges have been associated with such
interventions. One significant challenge is the lack of guidance
and involvement of health care providers and intended users in
the development process [21,27,32-37]. This has resulted in a
gap between the commercial and scientific sides of eHealth,
with products often being developed in response to technological
innovations rather than evidence-based knowledge and/or user
needs [27,33,38]. There is a need for more attention on how to
develop and translate or transform existing face-to-face
interventions into electronic formats at the same time focusing
on the actual needs of patients with pain [27]. Researchers have
made recommendations for utilization of a more user-centered
design approach, ideally involving all stakeholders (eg, patients,
health care providers and caregivers, pain and eHealth
researchers, and designers and information technology [IT]
developers) in the eHealth intervention development process
from the early idea initiation to the final intervention evaluation
[5,27,39]. Despite these recommendations, end users and other
stakeholders are still rarely involved in the early development
process of eHealth interventions [32,39]. This could potentially
be at least partially because of a lack of information and
frameworks on how to involve stakeholders in the development
process [39].

Additional challenges include low adherence and high attrition
rates in eHealth interventions [39-43]. For eHealth interventions
and development processes to be successful, a focus on the
entire person (ie, a holistic view), including relationships,
context, and intervention setting, is necessary [39,44,45]. This
includes identifying facilitators and barriers for use and
exploring implementation issues from an early stage on [46-49].
Addressing these issues will likely contribute to development
of more user friendly, meaningful interventions for patients and
can potentially improve treatment outcomes for patients living
with chronic pain [27,39,44,46].

This study is part of a larger project aiming to design, develop,
and test the effectiveness of a user-centered, evidence-based

J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 1 | e15889 | p. 2

eHealth self-management intervention for adults with chronic
pain (clinical trial registration: NCT03705104). In the first step
of the larger project, users’ everyday challenges and attitudes
toward eHealth technology, as well as their needs and
requirements for a potential eHealth pain management
intervention, were explored through individual interviews with
people with chronic pain and their spouses [50]. Individual
interviews with health care providers have also been conducted
focusing on the same issues (to be published elsewhere). Patients
and spouses in the initial study reported a broad spectrum of
everyday challenges, including physical, psychological, and
social challenges, such as fatigue, grief, guilt, and social- and
work isolation, and participants anticipated that eHealth
technology would be a positive and accessible option for pain
management support [50]. The study found that patients’needs
in relation to an eHealth pain management intervention can be
summarized in 3 main areas: (1) need for reliable knowledge
about pain and pain management, including access to useful
coping skills and exercises; (2) support in finding balance in
everyday life, physically and mentally, through increased
awareness and simple documentation (ie, ability to track
variables such as sleep, mood, physical activity, and pain); and
(3) social support, including peer support forums and advice on
how to communicate with others, such as family, friends, and
health care providers [50].

Objectives

Building on the recent findings [50], this study aimed to design
and develop a user-centered, evidence-based eHealth
self-management intervention for people with chronic pain.
This paper includes descriptions and results from the
development process, including results from workshops with
all involved stakeholders (eg, patients, spouses, health care

providers, researchers, software developers, and user
representatives), intervention content development and usability
testing. The ultimate goal was to develop an evidence-based
intervention that was acceptable to users (ie, well received,
suitable, user friendly, attractive, and meeting needs) [51] and
had the potential to produce changes in quality of life for people
with chronic pain.

Methods

Study Design

The design and development process entailed a multidisciplinary
and user-centered design approach [39,52,53]. The project
utilized well-established cognitive behavioral pain management
concepts shown to be effective for people with chronic pain
[11,14,16,54,55] and incorporated concepts of a participatory
design approach [56] to ensure that the intervention would be
acceptable (ie, well received, suitable, user friendly, and
attractive) and designed in line with patients’needs and context
of use.

The intervention development was led by the study principal
investigator (PI; LSN), who is a clinical psychologist with health
psychology specialization and long-standing experience within
chronic pain and cognitive behavioral treatment approaches for
medical patients. The multidisciplinary project team consisted
of health care researchers (ie, PhD-level psychologists and
registered nurses), an editorial group ensuring that content and
material was presented in an understandable way, a software
team (ie, software developers and a designer), and a user
representative (ie, person with chronic pain experience). The
team met weekly (sometimes more often) during the
development process. See Table 1 for an overview of the project
team members with their project-related expertise.

Table 1. Overview of multidisciplinary project team (N=20).

Licensed health care providers, n
Electronic health expertise, n
Pain expertise, n
Total number, n
Grouping

5
5
6
7
Health care researchers

2
5
0
5
Editorial group

0
7
0
7
Software team

0
0
1
1
User representative

Patients and other stakeholders, including spouses of patients
with 
chronic 
pain, 
and 
collaborative 
partners 
(ie,
interdisciplinary health care providers, health care managers,
and researchers working at collaborating institutions such as
hospitals, municipality health care services, and universities),
all with long-standing experience on chronic pain issues, were
also involved in the development process. Service design
methods, utilizing a user-centered, sequenced, cocreative, and
holistic development approach [57] were used to facilitate
co-design and high user engagement throughout the development
process.

The pain management intervention was developed in an iterative
process involving systematic evaluation throughout as suggested

by the Center for eHealth Research and Disease Management
comprehensive roadmap approach for the uptake and impact of
eHealth technologies [39].

The intervention was developed in iterative processes, as shown
in Figure 1, through a combination of (1) contextual inquiry
and co-design processes collecting input from people with
chronic pain, their spouses, health care providers, and eHealth
experts; (2) intervention content development, where content
was developed by members of the project team based on
evidence-based CBT and ACT concepts for chronic pain
self-management; and (3) iterative software development and
formative evaluation, including low- and high-fidelity prototypes
development and usability testing.

J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 1 | e15889 | p. 3

Figure 1. Study overview and development timeline.

Recruitment

To be eligible for study participation, the patients had to be 18
years or older, having experienced chronic pain for 3 months
or more, and had to be able to communicate in Norwegian.
Patients were encouraged to participate regardless of age (≥18
years) and gender. Spouses had to be married or cohabitating
with one of the participating patients.

Patients and spouses were recruited through study information
published on the Web as well as through national project
collaborators and local and national pain associations. In
addition, patients and spouses participating in the initial
interviews investigating patients’ needs and requirements for
eHealth interventions [50] were invited to participate in this
study, as they already had experience with the topic and could
potentially add another layer to the design discussions.

Data Collection and Analysis

Data were collected from pain management courses, workshops,
and usability testing. Then, to ensure that the collected material
provided essential input into the ongoing development process,
collected data were first analyzed by means of rapid analysis
[58]. This included summarizing data from voice recordings
and recorded notes before sharing and discussing the material
in the project group (including the development team).
Following this process, to ensure a thorough scientific
development and that no themes were overlooked, a more
in-depth analysis of the material took place using directed
content analysis [59]. In this process, the material was coded
into predefined categories, containing development suggestions
and requirements from the participants, including input for
content, design, and functionality.

Intervention Development

Contextual Inquiry: Data Collection

A contextual inquiry [39] initiated the development process to
gather information about the intended users, their needs and
requirements for acceptability, and the environment in which
the intervention was intended to fit, building on previously
gathered information [50].

Pain Management Course Observations

To gain an insight into health care services offered in the study
area, as well as to gain additional information related to patients’
needs and experiences, the first (ILS) and second (CV) authors

observed 5 different pain management courses available in local
patient education centers and hospitals. Notes and summaries
were recorded during and after the course observations. The
information gathered was summarized into 3 categories: (1)
topics covered in the courses, (2) information shared by course
participants (ie patients), and (3) themes that potentially could
be incorporated into the app. This information was shared with
the project team to increase knowledge about the patient group
and the pain management courses with the rest of the project
team members.

Developing Personas and Patient Journey Maps

On the basis of existing research recommendations [39,60],
service design methods [57] were used to facilitate user
engagement. Five personas (ie, fictional but representative
patient profiles; see example in Figure 2) and 2 patient journey
maps (ie, roadmaps inspired by customer journey maps [57];
see Figure 3) visualizing typical days in the patients’lives were
developed based on previous findings [50] for the design and
development process. Personas included background information
(ie, stories to give each persona more depth), coping skills and
everyday challenges, an overview of technology skills, and the
persona’s needs and requirements in relation to the eHealth
intervention. The journey maps described a typical day in a
patient’s life. Personas and journey maps informed the
development process and project team members about typical
end users and their daily challenges, needs, and requirements
to bring the patients’voices to the forefront in the development
process. Personas and journey maps were also used in the
upcoming workshops as illustrative scenarios that the
participants could use when discussing possible design and
functionality options. For illustrations, see Figures 2 and 3.

Workshops

Contributing to the contextual inquiry, stakeholders were invited
to discuss their needs, requirements for acceptability, ideas, and
possible challenges related to the eHealth project. This was
done successively through (1) 5 workshops with participants
from collaborating institutions and the project team and (2) 3
stakeholder workshops involving all stakeholders (ie, people
with chronic pain, spouses, health care providers, researchers,
editors, and the software team). Service design methods,
including the use of scenario tasks, personas, and journey maps
[57], were used to facilitate participant engagement. The
workshops are described in the following sections.

J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 1 | e15889 | p. 4

Figure 2. Illustration of a study persona.

Figure 3. Illustration of a patient journey map during a typical day with pain.

J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 1 | e15889 | p. 5

Workshops With Collaborating Partners

First, health care providers, a health care manager, and an
eHealth research psychologist from collaborating institutions
(ie, hospitals, universities, and primary health care services)
were invited to participate in workshops together with the project
team.

In the first workshop, participants were separated into smaller
groups consisting of health care providers with a variety of
professional backgrounds (eg, registered nurses, psychologists,
and social workers) and individuals from the project team
(including eHealth researchers and software developers). Group
discussions were timed and led by group facilitators from the
project team. Notes from the group discussions were recorded
and materials such as post-it notes and drawings from group
tasks were collected. The material was categorized by the first
author (ILS) and another project team member using a rapid
analysis approach [58] to ensure rapid and continuous input on
the development process, broadly sorting the material into idea
clusters based on content and similarities.

Information gathered in the first workshop provided guidance
for the subsequent 4 workshops, which focused more specifically
on the development process (ie, content and software
development), with workshop 2 focusing on adherence and
design elements and workshops 3 to 5 focusing on content
development and how to best present the psychoeducational
content. Notes were taken and analyzed using a rapid analysis
approach [58].

Workshops With All Stakeholders

Building on workshops with collaborative partners, all
stakeholders (ie, people with chronic pain, spouses, health care
providers, researchers, editors, and the software team)
participated in 1 out of 3 stakeholder workshops. The main
purpose of these workshops was to elicit ideas on design and
content features and to further explore users’ requirements for
an eHealth pain management intervention, with each workshop
informing the next. The first stakeholder workshop was arranged
with only patients participating, together with members from
the project team (ie, the designer and 2 researchers, including
the first author). In stakeholder workshops 2 and 3, spouses and
health care providers from collaborating institutions were also
included in addition to editors and software team members.
Participants were divided into multidisciplinary groups of 5 to
6. A brief presentation of the personas and journey maps
developed initiated each workshop to provide all stakeholders
with an overview of findings in the development process so far
and to provide a collective understanding of the target patient
group. The personas were also updated during the workshops
based on participant feedback.

In the first workshop, more time was spent on discussing the
personas, whereas stakeholder workshops 2 and 3 focused more
on design and functionality aspects. As a starting exercise,
participants were asked to reflect upon what makes an app good
or bad and to discuss usability and acceptability aspects within
their groups. Potential design features were then briefly
presented to support stakeholders when participating in the
design discussions. The participants were then asked to reflect

and discuss which design features and elements were most
important to them in a priority task, where participants had to
choose between different design elements and features. The
final part of the workshops included a collective design task,
using scenarios, the personas, and patient journey maps to
discuss possibilities related to an eHealth self-management
intervention (ie, content, functionality, design, and usage) before
finally looking at potential barriers for use.

All stakeholder workshops were facilitated by the first author
in collaboration with other project team members (KH, HS,
MW, JM, and YI), and each group discussion was audio taped.
The material was first summarized by the first author using
rapid analysis [58] and focusing on ensuring that the material
provided essential input into the ongoing development process.
The material was later transcribed verbatim to conduct a more
thorough analysis using directed content analysis [59] to ensure
a thorough scientific process in material identifications. The
material was first sorted into broad categories representing
requirements for (1) content, (2) functionality, (3) design, and
(4) barriers for use. Data were extracted and compared across
the different workshops, looking for similarities and differences
in the material.

Intervention Content Development

A vital goal in this study was to identify evidence-based topics
and aspects from recognized cognitive behavioral and
acceptance and commitment pain management strategies; then,
develop the intervention content and integrate findings and
content with a user-centered approach, and subsequently, modify
findings to create a new technology-based pain management
intervention for people living with chronic pain.

Intervention content development was led by the project PI
(LSN), in close collaboration with the other experienced pain
management project team members (ie, co-authors KS, LW,
EM, KW, HE, and OK), assisted by 3 editors (MW, EB, and
HS) and the project-specific user representative. Following the
initial workshop with collaborating partners, the intervention
content development group first examined the existing literature
in the clinical and research area, then discussed the findings and
compared notes also based on clinical pain management
experience within the group. Intervention content material was
then developed based on evidence-based topics and aspects
from recognized CBT and ACT pain management [61-64],
tested and user tested, and then adjusted and adapted accordingly
in continuous iterations. Throughout the process, intervention
content was shaped for an electronic format to support usability
and ease of use for the end users. The intervention content
development underwent numerous iterations (ie, number of
iterations varied depending on topic/module) to certify that it
used appropriate, therapeutic language; was presented in brief
and easily understandable sentences; and was suitable for small
screens.

Software Development and Formative Evaluation

On the basis of content development and stakeholder input, a
low-fidelity paper prototype of the software was developed.
The prototype was tested within the development team with
involvement from eHealth experts and the project team, then

J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 1 | e15889 | p. 6

adjusted and implemented electronically to simulate the app
idea. To strengthen acceptability, the simulated prototype was
subsequently tested by the project team user representative,
hospital-employed healthy volunteers, and 1 external patient
before full-scale usability testing.

Technical Architecture

EPIO is distributed as a native app for iOS and Android through
the official app stores, and it is implemented using Web
technology in a Cordova container. All information stored
locally is encrypted with the Advanced Encryption Standard
(AES) algorithm in Galois/counter mode before it is written to
a local SQLite (a relational database management system)
instance. The key used for encryption is 256 bits long, and it is
generated the first time the app runs. Between invocations of
the app, it is wrapped using the AES- key-wrapped algorithm
with a wrapping key derived from the user’s personal
identification number (PIN) and stored on the device’s keychain.
As the keychain itself requires the device to be protected with
a PIN, the role of the app’s own PIN is to enable the user to
secure the app even when using it on a shared device. Usage
logs (navigation, use, and use of functionality) and
self-assessments are sent over an encrypted channel to a secure
server for later analysis by the research project staff.

Technical decisions were executed only after discussions in the
project team (ie, researchers, health care personnel, eHealth
experts, 
software 
design, 
and 
developers 
and 
user
representatives).

Usability Testing

Building on feedback and discussions within the project team,
high-fidelity prototypes were developed, including a start page,
menu page, and intervention modules. A diverse group of users
(ie, variety in age/gender), including hospital-employed healthy
volunteers and people with chronic pain, participated in the
testing.

The high-fidelity prototype usability tests were videotaped and
conducted face to face by a facilitator (ie, editor/eHealth expert)
and an observant (ie, either the first author, the designer, or
another project team member). A think aloud methodology [57]
was used to actively engage the participants and elicit continuous
feedback, with participants describing their actions and
immediate thoughts for each step. The observer took notes
throughout the testing. Summaries of observations were
completed and transferred into a table by the facilitator and
observer following each testing, containing information related
to (1) usability issues, (2) possible solutions, (3) who reported
this issue (ie, number of users), and (4) other input. This
provided a rapid and continuous yet structured feedback into
the development process. As a supplement toward establishing
acceptability, participants completed Sauro’s System Usability
Scale (SUS) [65]. This was done at the end of the usability
testing after the facilitator and the observer had left the room.
The SUS measures usability and satisfaction on a scale from 1
(strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree).

The summaries from the usability testing were discussed within
the project team and new sketches and decisions for the next
development phase were conducted, with the project team
discussing and prioritizing changes. The collected material was
later examined more in depth through content analysis [59] to
potentially identify themes overlooked in the initial rapid
analysis [58]. In this process, the material was sorted into broad
categories looking at (1) usability and flow, (2) functionality
and customization, (3) intervention content, and (4) design and
language.

Security and Privacy Considerations

The intervention program was developed at a major medical
center in Northern Europe. The design and development were
in accordance with the European General Data Protection
Regulations of 2018. The study, including a risk assessment
analysis of the app, was approved by the institution’s
Department of Information Safety and the institutional review
board (approval number: 2017/6697). Informed consent will be
obtained from all users of the app-based program.

Results

Participants

A total of 33 participants participated in the study design and
development process (ie, workshops and content and software
development), including 12 health care providers, 1 health care
manager, and 1 eHealth research psychologist from collaborating
institutions, as well as 17 patients and 2 of their spouses together
with the project team (see Table 1 in the Methods section). For
details, please see Table 2 for collaborating partners’background
and expertise, Table 3 for patient demographics, and Figure 4
for a complete overview of the intervention development
process, including activities and participation.

All participants, 3 men and 11 women, from collaborating
institutions had extensive experience working with people living
with chronic pain. They represented a variety of professional
backgrounds, with the majority working as licensed
psychologists within chronic pain management. In addition, 9
had experience in research and 3 had eHealth expertise.

The majority of the patients had experience with a variety of
treatments, ranging from primary care and physical therapy to
more specialized treatments and rehabilitation in secondary and
tertiary care settings. All participating patients owned a
smartphone and had access to a computer and/or tablet. Most
of the patients used apps daily, which were either installed by
themselves or someone in their family, though several were not
familiar with the concept of apps and did not know the
difference between a webpage and an app. Many of the patients
participated first in 1 out of the 3 workshops and then also later
during software development and formative evaluation. The 2
male spouses had been part of the initial interviews [50].

J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 1 | e15889 | p. 7

Table 2. Overview of background and experience of participants from collaborating institutions (N=14).

Research expertise, n
eHealth expertise, n
Pain expertise, n
Total number, N
Health care background

1
0
1
1
Nurse

5
1
7
7
Psychologist

1
0
1
1
Physician

1
1
2
2
Social worker

0
0
1
1
Occupational therapist

1
1
1
2a
Nonlicensed partner

aHealth care manager and eHealth research psychologist.

Table 3. Patient demographics (N=17).

Values, n (%)
Characteristics

Gender

2 (12)
Male

15 (88)
Female

Age (years), mean age=51 years

2 (12)
20-35

5 (29)
36-50

7 (41)
51-59

3 (18)
60-75

Type of pain (primary diagnosis reported)

5 (29)
Neck and/or back pain

5 (29)
Nerve pain/neuropathic pain

3 (18)
Fibromyalgia

2 (12)
Migraine

2 (12)
Others

Reported years living with pain

2 (12)
0-5

6 (35)
6-10

3 (18)
11-17

4 (24)
18-26

2 (12)
≥27

Employment status

4 (24)
Working/studying full time

3 (18)
Working/studying part time

8 (47)
On disability benefits

1 (6)
Retired

1 (6)
Nonworking

J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 1 | e15889 | p. 8

Figure 4. Overview of study timeline, intervention development process, activities, and participation. Partner WS: collaborating partners; Partners:
collaborating partners; IT: person(s) from software team (ie, developers and designer); User rep: user representative; Stakeholder WS: stakeholder
workshop. The test facilitator and observers are not counted as participants and included in the n for software development and formative evaluation.

Pain Management Course Observations

The 5 pain management courses observed covered topics such
as pain physiology, coping skills, and psychosocial challenges.
They had different structures, the majority being 1- or 2-day
courses and 1 occurring weekly over a period of 3 months. The
pain management courses covered topics such as pain
physiology, coping skills, and psychosocial challenges. The
level of information shared by patients during the courses varied,
depending on whether the type of course they attended had

allocated time for discussions or mainly focused on educational
information. However, the patients did describe a general need
for more peer support in their everyday lives. Topics otherwise
emphasized by participating patients included grief, guilt,
anxiety, and negative thoughts as well as issues related to
communication with health care providers, spouses/family, and
others. Participants generally seemed pleased with the courses
they attended, even though several patients emphasized the need
for more continuous support and help in everyday life.

J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 1 | e15889 | p. 9

Workshops With Collaborating Partners

Workshop findings showed that participants from collaborating
institutions (ie, health care providers and eHealth experts, n=14)
were generally positive toward an eHealth intervention for
people with chronic pain and saw it as an opportunity to make

psychological and educational treatment more accessible to
patients during and after treatment. Health care providers pointed
to the importance of reliable, evidence-based educational
information. Please see Table 4 for content needs and rationales
expressed during these workshops.

Table 4. Results from workshops with collaborating partners (N=14).

Rationale
Content needs and topics

Provide evidence-based, trustworthy information to patients, giving them a better alternative to online
forums and other nonscientific channels
Reliable, trustworthy, evidence-based
knowledge

Increase patient’s awareness of the association between chronic pain and psychological challenges
Focus on psychological health

Support patients in implementing activity pacing strategies in everyday life, including through exercises
Activity pacing

Increase awareness about personal activities and positive/negative health behavior (eg, amount of sleep
and physical activity)
Self-assessment/registrations

Include advice on how to best communicate personal struggles, potentially adding direct contact with
health care professionals as a functionality
Communication

Adding some form of option for social contact with peers
Social support

Potential barriers in the development process, as well as for the
final product, were identified as (1) time challenges, referring
to the amount of time it takes to develop eHealth interventions
and whether or not health care providers had time to participate
in the development process; (2) defining the most relevant and
beneficial intervention content; (3) patient involvement in the
development process; and (4) privacy and security issues.

Workshops With All Study Stakeholders

The 3 stakeholder workshops identified that patients (n=17),
spouses (n=2), and health care providers (n=2) supported many
of the same thoughts and ideas as health care professionals and
other collaborating partners participating in the initial 5
workshops. The patients particularly emphasized the need for
an intervention that gave them positive input in their daily lives.
They did not want reminders of what they could not do, for
example, being asked to do impossible exercises or being asked
to set unrealistic personal goals. Feeling guilty, grief, achieving
balance in everyday life, getting support, being present and
being useful while taking care of oneself were topics mentioned
by all participating groups. Content topics suggested and
discussed by participants included updates on recent scientific
findings; information about health-promoting behavior (ie, sleep,
nutrition, and physical activity); and advice on how to prioritize
and set limits, support and information on acceptance, and
exercises promoting energy and awareness, such as breathing
and relaxation exercises.

Regarding the end product/solution and what it should look like,
the participants had a broad range of functionality suggestions
and 
demands. 
All 
external 
stakeholders 
pointed 
to
personalization, that is, adjusting the intervention based on
individual needs and personal preferences. For example,
customization and simple behavior trackers were pointed out
by some as important features for a chronic pain eHealth
intervention. At the same time, several patients, spouses, and
health care providers emphasized that too many options for
choice could potentially be perceived as overwhelming. The

use of gamification elements (ie, application of game-playing
elements such as avatars, points, and badges) was viewed as a
potentially important and motivating option by collaborating
partners and the software team. However, the participating
patients did not identify gamification as important compared
with other potential elements and features of the solution. Too
many or too bright colors, cartoons, or sound effects were
described by several patients as potentially challenging for them,
especially when experiencing a lot of pain. Many stated that
the use of such elements is for younger people and kids, and
some of the patients also described having stopped using certain
apps because of such elements.

Health care providers from collaborating institutions focused
more on sharing functionality (ie, possibility of sharing health
information with health care providers) than did patients. Despite
seeing sharing possibilities as something positive, patients were
skeptical as to how this could work and found the option
unrealistic given the limited time available for health care
providers, and their impressions that health care providers often
work nonstop with no availability to respond to email/phone
calls during a full workday. When asked what mattered most
to them, the patients preferred an intervention that could give
them personalized suggestions for exercises and content related
to the issues and areas they described as challenging. Many
patients also emphasized this as one of the main reasons for
wanting simple ways to self-assess or track behaviors (eg, for
sleep and activity), wanting the intervention to suggest exercises
based on their own personal behavioral patterns.

Each stakeholder workshop also involved a priority task (ie,
choosing between different design elements and features), where
participants voted (each with a maximum 3 votes in addition to
2 group votes) on potential design elements and features. See
Table 5 for details on the distribution of votes from patients
(n=15), spouses (n=2), and health care providers (n=2); whether
the design element/feature was included in the final app;
why/why not; and a few illustrating quotes.

J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 1 | e15889 | p. 10

Table 5. Design elements/features: priority task voting, elements/features included, details, and illustrating quotes.

Illustrating quotes
Included in the final app (yes/no) and
details/justification
Votes, n
Description
Design element/feature

“For me, it is very important that it
is individually tailored/customized.”
Yes. The features My page and My fa-
vorites were included to allow for person-
alization and easy access to preferred
content. In addition, the sequence of
some of the modules could be individu-
ally chosen, to allow for more individual
preference.

14
Customize how things are pre-
sented/look in the app. For ex-
ample, you can customize col-
ors, styles, or specific parts of
the app that you want to use.

Customization and per-
sonalization

“Today, I've been in a lot of pain,
but I don’t know why [...] The regis-
trations I’m looking for will tell me
why I have so much pain every
Thursday.”

Yes. Daily self-assessment/registrations
of pain, sleep, rest, activity, and mood
were included as optional features for
those preferring to track all/some of
these factors.

13
Map/log what you do to see
connections and opportunities
for change.

Behavioral trackers

“I think it should, in a way, replace
a personal coach [...] and be able to
provide feedback, and discuss with
me. What went well, what went
wrong.”

Yes. Several of the exercises in the app
allow for registration of current
habits/activities and give suggestions for
new ways to do things.

10
Get feedback from the app. For
instance, by telling you what
you have achieved lately or
show you new ways to do
things.

Feedback

“You may receive quicker feedback
if it is automated, as health care
personnel go home at 4 pm.”

Yes. The app gives the users suggestions
for modules and exercises to try based
on their marked favorites.

10
The app automatically adapts
to your personal use. For exam-
ple, you can bring up content
and exercises according to your
previous preferences.

Automatic tailoring

“I imagine some pictures of famous
places that give me energy, people
or animals that give me energy, and
nature, that gives me energy.”

Yes. Illustrations and photographs are
used in the app to support the content but
are presented in a muted way so as not
to appear overwhelming or challenging.
Graphs, illustrating the users’ behavior
tracking, were also implemented.

8
Visualization is used to present
content in an engaging and visu-
al way. This can be through the
use of animations, cartoons,
graphs, etc.

Visualization

“When you have this kind of an app,
it is important that when you push
the button, you get right in [without
high-level log-in procedures], and
especially when you are not feeling
good.”

No. Not prioritized because of conflict
with the desire for easy access by means
of a 4-digit personal identification num-
ber, and the desire for an app that can
serve as a stand-alone self-management
program.

6
Communicate with health care
professionals, for example, by
sharing information, asking
questions, or receiving feed-
back.

Communicating with
health care professionals

“Social contact with other users, I
think it can be very negative. You
can so easily pull each other down.”

No. Not prioritized because of potential
negative impact, conflict with the desire
for easy access, and the notion that this
would require a larger user base than
planned study inclusion.

2
Communicate with peers/other
users, for instance, via forums
or share achievements with
other users of the app.

Communicate with peers

“It made me think of children when
I saw it.”
Yes. On the basis of eHealth expert input
and existing research [41,42], the buddy
EPIOS (a bird) was included as an engag-
ing element to stimulate engagement and
adherence.

0
Create your own avatar, that is,
a person you can be/that fol-
lows you in the app. You can
customize it to look the way
you want, for example, by
looking like your favorite ani-
mal.

Avatar

“I did not vote for it” [metaphors]
[because I had only three votes to
spend and this feature was not impor-
tant enough for me].

No. As the use of metaphors received no
votes and was also considered to be a
complicating element for the users, this
element/feature was not included.

0
Metaphors can be used as a
motivational way of getting
through the program/app. For
example, let the app be a gar-
den where you can walk around
or groom or plant things.

Using metaphors

“I’m not very competitive so it
doesn’t suit me very well, but I can
see that it may be a good thing for
others.”

Yes. On the basis of eHealth expert input
and findings from existing research
[41,42], rewards and trophies were in-
cluded as engaging elements to stimulate
engagement and adherence.

0
Points and trophies are collect-
ed through using the app. For
example, you can go up a level
when you have collected
enough points or get a trophy
for strikes, for example, when
you have used the app every
day for a week.

Rewards and trophies

J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 1 | e15889 | p. 11

Intervention Content Development

Existing interview material [50], workshop discussions and
usability testing (presented below) indicated that participants
preferred a neutral name for the intervention program,
encouraging limited use of negative words, such as pain, or too
positive words, such as positive focus. During content
development, a project team brainstorming and informal
namecompetition resulted in the intervention being named EPIO,
derived from the Greek mythology goddess Epione, the goddess
for the soothing of pain.

As evidence-based psychosocial/educational interventions are
mainly conducted in person, the decision was made for the EPIO
program to contain a face-to-face introduction session, where
participants would receive an introduction to the EPIO
intervention program, as well as help in downloading the app
onto their smartphone or tablet.

Given the significant evidence of potential for support from
CBT and ACT for people with chronic pain[10-18], combined

with input from all stakeholders, the EPIO intervention was
primarily based on CBT (ie, thought and behavior challenging,
cognitive restructuring, behavior change, problem solving, and
coping) [6,8] but with aspects of ACT (ie, value-based direction,
acceptance of pain, and awareness of the present) [7,9], both
resting on aspects found essential for pain management [10,18].
The final app-based EPIO intervention program contained 9
modules, as illustrated in Table 6. Each module in EPIO
contained educational topics (eg, about pain, balance and activity
pacing, thoughts and feelings, health behaviors, and coping
during difficult times), as well as brief topic-related tasks and
a variety of relaxation-focused exercises (eg, diaphragmatic
breathing, progressive muscle relaxation, visualization,
mindfulness, and meditation) anchored in existing treatment
manuals and findings for chronic pain management [61,64].
The first 5 modules were presented consecutively in a fixed
sequence, as the content in each of these modules was
considered essential for the subsequent topics. To allow for
more individual preference, the sequence of modules 6 to 8
could then be individually chosen, if preferring to do so.

Table 6. Overview of EPIO modules and content.

Content
Module title
Module #

60 min in-person/group session. Introduction and intervention overview, practical exercise exam-
ple, and help in downloading and using the intervention.
Introductory session
0

Introduction to the intervention program, including information about pain and pain management.
Coping strategies, fight-or-flight response, and introduction to breathing and relaxation; rationale
and exercises.

About pain
1

Activity pacing and planning, introduction to mindfulness, self-care, pleasant activities, EPIO
as your toolbox, and progressive muscle relaxation.
Balance
2

Pain, the relationship between thoughts and feelings, recognizing negative thoughts and cognitive
distortions, gratitude, and positive thinking. Exercises including challenging negative thoughts,
mindfulness, and autogenic muscle relaxation.

Thoughts and feelings
3

About stress, coping, and rationale for stress management and relaxation strategies. Acceptance,
active and passive coping approaches, and visualization.
Stress and coping
4

Defining and exploring individual values and goals. Personal role models, self-image, and intruding
thoughts. Planning and goal setting. Introduction to meditation.
What is important to me?
5

Health behaviors and health behavior change. Awareness of important health behaviors, including
sleep, physical activity, nutrition, and substance use/abuse; rationale and exercises. Stretch-based
relaxation methods/exercises.

Health behaviors and lifestyle
6

Communication, assertiveness, support systems, and social networks. Exercises related to
awareness about social support systems, how to strengthen social support, and progressive muscle
relaxation.

Communication, relations, and so-
cial support
7

Self-regulation and implementation of coping strategies in everyday life. Pain, frustration and
anger management, daily use of coping strategies in everyday life. Introduction and use of dis-
traction, visualization, and stretch-based relaxation.

Coping during difficult times
8

Review and summary, where to go from here and advice for the road ahead.
Summary and the road ahead
9

Software Development and Formative Evaluation

Stakeholders’ input and 5 iterative rounds of usability testing
contributed to adjustments to detect and ensure (1) easy and
intuitive navigation, including adding short cuts, introductions,
and symbols; (2) language and content issues, including adding
more steps to reduce the length of each section, replacing or
removing difficult words and terms; (3) implementation of

engaging design elements to stimulate adherence, including
adding rewards/trophies, as well as an avatar, the buddy EPIOS,
an animated bird accompanying the users throughout EPIO,
and finally d) possibilities for personal preferences and choice,
including adding possibilities to choose between reading or
listening, and choosing which, if any, variables to track (eg,
pain, sleep, activity, mood, and rest). See Figure 5 for screenshot
examples.

J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 1 | e15889 | p. 12

Figure 5. Example screenshots from the EPIO intervention. From left: (1) start page, (2) selective registrations, (3) module about pain, and (4) exercise
example.

The usability testing revealed an overall average SUS score of
81.25, indicating a grade A, which equals to excellent system
usability [65]. Users reported that the intervention was easy to
use, without need for assistance from anyone. Most users
reported that they thought they would use the intervention
frequently (mean 3.8, median 4).

In response to input from study participants, a number of
adjustments were made for the final version of EPIO. Some of
these are described in the following sections.

My Page

As personalization was emphasized as an important feature, a
personal page, My page was added to the program. This included
an overview of the user’s personal progress in the intervention
program in addition to access to personal registrations, illustrated
in graphs. In addition, based on the input from eHealth experts
and previous research [41,42], a trophies section was included
in My page to stimulate personalization and motivation. Ability
to gauge the length of each step and exercise in seconds/minutes
was also implemented.

My Favorites

Patients expressed a need for easy and direct access to exercises
and content that they liked; therefore, a mark as favorite feature
was added to each step in the program. As usability testing
revealed usability issues for this feature (ie, difficulties for users
to grasp how to mark their favorites), the final program version
included introductions presented in a step-by-step manner, with
the buddy bird EPIOS later reminding users of these steps and
the option to add the text add as favorite at the end of each step.
Usability testing revealed that participants liked the bird EPIOS
and the brief summaries and reminders provided by EPIOS.

Practicing Mode

CBT typically includes homework between sessions to practice
and generalize new skills and behaviors. Therefore, practice
and repetition were encouraged in EPIO, and following
completion of each module, participants could not open a new
module for 3 days. This was done to give users time to practice

and implement completed modules, knowledge, and exercises
into their daily lives. EPIO provided encouragement for practice,
either through suggested steps or through choosing own
favorites.

Security and Privacy Considerations

The EPIO intervention program was developed for people with
chronic pain. It was developed at and distributed from a major
hospital. Protecting patients and patient information is the
responsibility of health care providers and the institution (ie,
the hospital) and privacy and security were of essence to
consider in the design and development process.

One issue concerned the amount of sensitive information and
options related to log-in requirements. Participating patients
emphasized the importance of a simple log-in procedure. Most
of these patients expressed little concern regarding privacy and
security protections, stating that it was more important for them
to get an accessible tool they could get direct access to on a
bad day, referring to days with a lot of pain, without any hassle
or things to remember, such as high-level access procedures
and passwords. This was the case in the stakeholder workshops
not only in this study but also in previous patient/spouse
interviews [50]. At the same time, however, many of the patients
wanted to be able to keep personal notes/diaries, and some also
wanted to be able to share their information with their health
care provider through the app and/or connect with peers using
the app. This would introduce further privacy challenges.
Adding functionality such as sharing options would increase
the privacy level needed and therefore also increase the security
requirements. However, privacy and security are essential in
these types of settings, and as ease of use and a simple log-in
were identified as one of the most important patient
requirements, the solution was to incorporate a simple 4-digit
PIN, excluding functionality such as sharing possibilities and
personal notes. Users were instead encouraged to use a pen and
paper and take notes during some of the themes and exercises
(ie, “You may find it beneficial to use a pen and paper for this
exercise.”).

J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 1 | e15889 | p. 13

Discussion

Principal Findings

This study describes the design and development process of
EPIO, an eHealth pain management intervention for people
with chronic pain. The process combining evidence-based and
user-centered approaches is a previously recommended but
underutilized approach to eHealth intervention development
[27,33,34]. To our knowledge, this is the first study combining
evidence-based knowledge with stakeholders’ input to inform
the development of an eHealth intervention for self-management
of chronic pain.

The EPIO intervention program was developed using iterative
processes through a combination of (1) contextual inquiry and
co-design processes, where input from people with chronic pain,
spouses, health care providers, and other collaborating partners
was gathered; (2) intervention content development, where
relevant content topics were identified and intervention content
was created based on clinical experience and with inspiration
from existing evidence-based cognitive behavioral and
acceptance and commitment pain management programs
[61-64]; and (3) iterative software development and formative
evaluation, including low- and high-fidelity prototypes and
usability testing. External stakeholders (ie, patients, spouses,
health care providers, and other partners from collaborating
institutions) described a number of challenges associated with
current options for pain management care, emphasizing the
potential within eHealth technology and more available sources
for pain management strategies. Patients described the need for
an accessible solution that fits within their existing everyday
routines, giving them a break; positive input; and reminders in
their daily lives. To meet acceptability and usability needs for
the target group, the intervention used easily understandable
language, with brief and to-the-point sections made accessible
on small screens and mobile phones. Stakeholders also pointed
to a need for intuitive and effective functionalities that did not
demand too much of the patients’ time, giving them options to
choose from and automatic suggestions adjusted to their needs.

Evidence-Based Knowledge and the Importance of
User Involvement: Finding the Right Balance

CBT- and ACT-based psychological interventions have been
shown to be effective, improving quality of life, depressive
symptoms, and pain acceptance for people living with chronic
pain [10,11,13,14,16,66,67]. The goal of this study was to design
and develop such an intervention to be delivered in a
technological format and on a mobile platform. Seeking to
achieve persistent change in a person’s health and overall
well-being, intervention programs must be based on
evidence-based knowledge, and according to the Medical
Research Council’s guidance, all complex interventions should
be guided by the latest evidence and appropriate theory [68].

Despite these facts, the development of evidence-based eHealth
pain management interventions has been limited [33-35], as has
the incorporation of user involvement in these processes. Even
evidence-based interventions depend on users’ acceptance,
adherence, and overall user fit for interventions to be successful

[39]. The lack of user involvement (ie, patients and health care
providers) and human centeredness in development of eHealth
interventions 
have 
been 
criticized 
repeatedly
[5,21,27,32,34,36,39], and this lack of user involvement in the
development process can potentially also explain the high
attrition rates and low adherence associated with such
interventions [32,40-42]. People simply stop using technologies
that do not meet their needs, requirements, or daily routines.

In addition to general user requirements (eg, technology being
user friendly and flawless), it is essential to incorporate the
needs and requirements of the specific user group. For the
participants in this study, that meant the eHealth intervention
had to accommodate patients’varying and often high pain levels,
their challenges with feeling guilty and never doing enough,
and their concentration issues. Stakeholders stated that it was
important that the intervention did not focus on the negative
aspects of living with chronic pain or provide users with too
much information or too much choice, flashy graphics such as
sound and animation effects, or cumbersome log-in procedures.
Patients wanted positive input in their daily lives through a
solution that provided them with useful, effective, and
personalized advice on pain management, reminding them to
take smaller breaks during the day. Participants also suggested
functionalities to register daily activities, sleep, and mood level
so that patients could become more aware of how these areas
affected their daily life. Some of the patients also wanted an
option to register their daily pain level. From a CBT standpoint,
this could be viewed as useful, as increasing patients’awareness
and ability to take an active part in one’s own life is crucial.
However, the literature has shown that too much focus on the
pain itself, for instance, through keeping a pain diary, can be
negative and could possibly increase pain interference [69-71].
However, studies have also illustrated the positive sides of pain
screenings/registrations. As several participants regarded
self-assessment/registrations as important, and this was also
voted 
high 
on 
the 
prioritizing 
task 
(Table 
5),
self-assessment/registrations were included in the initial
development.

The design and development process in this study did reveal
some disagreements between what was considered important
by health care providers and other collaborating partners versus
what was considered important by some of the patients.
Although health care providers emphasized the need for
available, evidence-based, and trustworthy information given
to patients, seeing eHealth technology as a positive option for
providing patients with such knowledge, patients expressed
some conflicting views on the topic. Patients generally agreed
that information and content should be trustworthy, yet they
kept emphasizing during workshops as well as usability testing
that they did not want too much information, that they already
knew a lot about pain and the theory behind pain management,
and that they first and foremost wanted effective and quick
exercises that could help in their daily lives. This could have
been because several patients were recruited from patient
education centers and courses focusing on chronic pain, and
thus, they already had received a lot of information. However,
literature has shown that compared with the general population,
people living with long-term conditions report more difficulties

J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 1 | e15889 | p. 14

with understanding health information in addition to having
greater difficulties in engaging with health care providers [72].
This, together with some chronic pain patients’ reported
concentration issues, illustrates the importance of providing
chronic pain patients with easily accessible information.

Interventions, and perhaps particularly eHealth interventions,
have the challenges of enhancing motivation for use, adherence
to use, and motivation for continued use. How to best present
evidence-based content is a question of user involvement,
acceptability, usability, and feasibility. To promote user
engagement and continued use, the EPIO intervention had to
present the material in a way that met the users’ interests and
requirements. Participating health care providers and other
collaborating partners with eHealth expertise, as well as software
developers, suggested adding gamifying design elements such
as rewards and avatars, emphasizing the importance of engaging
and motivational design elements and pointing to evidence that
shows that the use of such elements and persuasive technology
positively affects adherence and well-being [41,42]. However,
the participating patients found this less important, and they
also expressed concern that the use of such effects could be
potentially challenging when in pain. None of the patients voted
for such elements in the priority task in the stakeholder
workshops (see Table 5). Patients instead stated that they wanted
the content presented in a simple way.

On the basis of these findings, it was important to find a balance
in the use of design elements, with the final EPIO program
including some of these types of elements, such as trophies for
progress and continued use; and an avatar/buddy, the bird
EPIOS; and providing users with content summaries and brief
motivational messages. The buddy bird EPIOS, therefore, has
an educational role in the intervention program, in line with
what users emphasized as important, but at the same time,
EPIOS has a motivational and relational role, in line with
participating health care providers and eHealth experts as well
as recommendations from existing literature [42].

Strengths, Limitations, and Future Directions

This study presents some limitations that need to be considered.
First, the limited number of male and younger patients (mean
age 51 years) might limit the representativeness of the study.
Given the large percentage of female patients compared with
male patients participating in this study, despite encouraging
participation of both genders living with chronic pain, the patient
sample can be considered a sample of convenience. However,
it should be noted that the prevalence of chronic pain is higher
among females compared with males [73], and research also
shows challenges in recruiting male participants compared with
female participants for intervention programs focusing on
self-management [74]. In addition, the participating patients
represented a wide range of pain diagnoses, and as chronic pain
is more prevalent among people older than 50 years [75], it may
be argued that the patients participating in this study were in
fact representative of the user group. The fact that some of the
patients and spouses had also participated in an initial interview
study [50] could potentially also be a limitation, as it is possible
that other opinions and perspectives would have emerged if
more novel users without prior knowledge of the emerging

intervention had participated. However, mutual learning and
shared understanding are core concepts within participatory
design, as this is the only way to ensure mutual respect between
stakeholders, enabling everyone to take part in the shared
decision-making process [56]. Patients are not eHealth experts
and do not necessarily have the language to articulate what they
need from an eHealth intervention. Consequently, using the
same sample of participants and giving them enough knowledge
about design and development processes may have made it
easier for the participating patients to take an active part in
development discussions. However, this study did also include
new and naïve patients with chronic pain to add to previously
collected qualitative data.

The software development and formative evaluation may also
present some limitations. For instance, every part of the
intervention steps/modules was not tested. However, the
intervention material was based on the same concepts and
foundations, written by the same experienced team [76,77], led
by the same PI, and using the same therapeutic language and
structure. Therefore, it was considered more important to get
users’ feedback on functionality and design, including layouts
and how the material was presented, than on every written word.
Usability testing was conducted at the project team offices, with
a facilitator and observer watching the participants within a
limited period. This could have impacted the testing, and it is
possible that the usability testing of EPIO captured only some
of the potential barriers to continued use over time.

A number of strengths are also evident in the current design
and development process. As recommended by existing research
[5,27,39] and to ensure trustworthiness [78], the study included
a broad range of stakeholders (ie, patients, spouses, health care
providers, and eHealth experts as well as researchers, editors,
software developers, and user representatives) from the project
planning stage and throughout the development process.

The development process was guided by existing development
recommendations, using a broad range of service design methods
and a user-centered design approach to facilitate cocreation,
mutual learning, and shared understanding among the
stakeholders involved. Intervention acceptability (ie, well
received, suitable, user friendly, attractive, and meeting needs)
to users was one of the main goals for the design and
development of EPIO. Although the intervention program was
developed using a participatory design approach to support the
likelihood 
of 
acceptability, 
usability, 
and 
feasibility,
acceptability will need to be further tested and established in a
future pilot test study before instigating efficacy studies. Given
the challenge of low adherence and high attrition rates in eHealth
interventions [41,42], the development of the current
intervention sought to incorporate stakeholder-identified aspects
supporting adherence. Whether this turns out to be an effective
approach facilitating adherence needs to be evaluated in a future
pilot test and subsequent randomized controlled trial (RCT). In
addition to high user involvement and stakeholder input, the
development process was guided by theory and concepts from
well-established cognitive behavioral and acceptance and
commitment pain management programs, meeting the requests
for eHealth pain management interventions that are based on
evidence-based knowledge. This enhances the future potential

J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 1 | e15889 | p. 15

for positive effect findings. The ultimate goal of the EPIO
program is to support improvements in quality of life for people
with chronic pain. Therefore, in addition to test usability,
feasibility, and acceptability, the next step in the research
process will be to examine preliminary efficacy findings in a
pilot test before eventually examining the intervention in a
full-scale RCT. Together with the high focus on privacy and
security aspects, acceptability and efficacy are also likely to
increase the potential for poststudy implementation.

Conclusions

This study offers insight into how to take a user-centered
approach to the design and development of an evidence-based
eHealth pain management intervention for people with chronic
pain. Developing evidence-based eHealth interventions while
also involving the voices and perspectives of a variety of
stakeholders can be challenging, time consuming, and sometimes

even an expensive process. However, continuing to develop
and test non–evidence-based, non–user-centered interventions
is not a great alternative. Instead, mutual learning and shared
understanding become crucial. This study involved patients,
spouses, health care providers, and other relevant stakeholders
in the design and development process of the eHealth
interventions, pointing to important steps for developing useful
and meaningful interventions for patients. In addition to
informing the potential process of developing an eHealth pain
management intervention, this study also provides a practical
example of how eHealth interventions can be designed and
developed 
to 
combine 
evidence-based 
material 
with
user-centered requirements. To test usability, acceptability, and
feasibility, as well as the potential efficacy of the program,
further research is needed and a pilot test is currently underway
to optimize the EPIO program in preparation for a full-scale
RCT.