Systematic User-centered Design of a
Prototype Clinical Decision Support System
for Glaucoma

Brian C. Stagg, MD, MS,1,2 Benton Tullis, BS,3 Afua Asare, OD, PhD,1 Joshua D. Stein, MD, MS,4,5,6

Felipe A. Medeiros, MD, PhD,7 Charlene Weir, PhD, RN,8 Damian Borbolla, MD, MS,8,9

Rachel Hess, MD, MS,2,10 Kensaku Kawamoto, MD, PhD, MHS8

Purpose:
To rigorously develop a prototype clinical decision support (CDS) system to help clinicians
determine the appropriate timing for follow-up visual ﬁeld testing for patients with glaucoma and to identify
themes regarding the context of use for glaucoma CDS systems, design requirements, and design solutions to
meet these requirements.
Design:
Semistructured qualitative interviews and iterative design cycles.
Participants:
Clinicians who care for patients with glaucoma, purposefully sampled to ensure a represen-
tation of a range of clinical specialties (glaucoma specialist, general ophthalmologist, optometrist) and years in
clinical practice.
Methods:
Using the established User-Centered Design Process framework, we conducted semistructured
interviews with 5 clinicians that addressed the context of use and design requirements for a glaucoma CDS
system. We analyzed the interviews using inductive thematic analysis and grounded theory to generate themes
regarding the context of use and design requirements. We created design solutions to address these re-
quirements and used iterative design cycles with the clinicians to reﬁne the CDS prototype.
Main Outcome Measures:
Themes regarding decision support for determining the timing of visual ﬁeld
testing for patients with glaucoma, CDS design requirements, and CDS design features.
Results:
We identiﬁed 9 themes that addressed the context of use for the CDS system, 9 design re-
quirements for the prototype CDS system, and 9 design features intended to address these design requirements.
Key design requirements included the preservation of clinician autonomy, incorporation of currently used heu-
ristics, compilation of data, and increasing and communicating the level of certainty regarding the decision. After
completing 3 iterative design cycles using this preliminary CDS system design solution, the design was satis-
factory to the clinicians and was accepted as our prototype glaucoma CDS system.
Conclusions:
We used a systematic design process based on the established User-Centered Design Pro-
cess to rigorously develop a prototype glaucoma CDS system, which will be used as a starting point for a future,
large-scale iterative reﬁnement and implementation process. Clinicians who care for patients with glaucoma need
CDS systems that preserve clinician autonomy, compile and present data, incorporate currently used heuristics,
and increase and communicate the level of certainty regarding the decision.
Financial Disclosure(s):
Proprietary or commercial disclosure may be found in the Footnotes and Disclosures at
the end of this article. Ophthalmology Science 2023;3:100279 ª 2023 by the American Academy of Ophthalmology.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

Modernclinicaldecisionsupport (CDS) systemsare computer-
based tools designed to improve clinician decision making for
individualpatientsatthe point the decisionsaremade.1Clinical
decision support systems can improve clinician decisions
regarding appropriate diagnostic test use and treatment.2e4

These systems are most effective when they are developed
following rigorous user-centered design principles.5,6 The
User-Centered Design Process framework is an established
model that describes a systematic approach to user-centered
development.7e9 Designing applications using this frame-
work improves performance and design efﬁciency.7e9

Glaucoma is a complex chronic disease. Clinicians who
care for patients with glaucoma must make hundreds of
critical clinical decisions efﬁciently in the midst of busy

clinics.10 Clinical decision support systems have the potential
to improve clinical decision making for clinicians who care
for patients with glaucoma.11 In a United States survey of
clinicians who care for patients with glaucoma, nearly 90%
were interested in using CDS for glaucoma.12 Determining
the timing of follow-up visual ﬁeld testing is a clinical de-
cision that is particularly challenging for clinicians who care
for patients with glaucoma.12,13 Visual ﬁeld testing frequency
should
be
tailored
according
to
individual
patient
characteristics, including disease stage and test-retest vari-
ability.14,15 In a United States nationwide cohort of patients
with glaucoma, nearly three quarters of patients did not
undergo visual ﬁeld testing at the guideline-recommended
frequency.13 Clinical decision support systems could help

1
ª 2023 by the American Academy of Ophthalmology
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/). Published by Elsevier Inc.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xops.2023.100279

ISSN 2666-9145/23

clinicians determine the appropriate timing for visual ﬁeld
testing for individual patients with glaucoma.
The objective of this study was to use the User-Centered
Design Process framework to rigorously develop a proto-
type CDS system to help clinicians determine the appro-
priate timing for follow-up visual ﬁeld testing for patients
with glaucoma. This prototype will be used as a starting
point for a larger scale iterative reﬁnement and electronic
health record (EHR) integration process. The focus of this
study was on the design of the CDS system itself rather than
the recommendations it provides. Systematically using the
User-Centered Design Process framework allowed us to
identify themes regarding the context of use for the CDS
system, design requirements, and design solutions to meet
these requirements. These ﬁndings serve as a starting point
for the future use of the User-Centered Design Process
framework to design other informatics solutions and CDS
systems to improve glaucoma care and decision making.

Methods

This qualitative study used deidentiﬁed data from semistructured
telephone interviews with 5 clinicians who care for patients with
glaucoma. These clinicians were purposefully sampled from
members of the Utah Ophthalmology Society and the Utah Opto-
metric Association to ensure a representation of a range of clinical
specialties (glaucoma specialist, general ophthalmologist, optom-
etrist), practice settings (academic medical center, private practice,
and large multispecialty clinic), and years in clinical practice. A
sample size of 5 was chosen a priori as a reasonable number for
development of a prototype design based on published literature,
with a plan to interview additional clinicians if thematic saturation
was not achieved.16 It was evaluated by the University of Utah
Institutional Review Board and deemed exempt. The study
adhered to the Declaration of Helsinki.

User-Centered Design Process Framework

For the design of this prototype glaucoma CDS system, we fol-
lowed the User-Centered Design Process framework available on
usability.gov.7e9 This is an iterative process that involves 4 phases:
specifying the context of use, specifying design requirements,
creating design solutions, and evaluating and reﬁning designs. The
goal of this framework is to ensure design solutions meet the needs
of those who will be using the product.

Step 1: Specifying the Context of Use

The semistructured interviews were conducted over telephone by a
single researcher (B.C.S.) in May 2021. The interview guide
covered 4 major questions: (1) How do you determine the appro-
priate timing for the next visual ﬁeld test for a patient with glau-
coma? (2) What factors inﬂuence this decision? What might make
you do it more often? Less often? (3) What factors make this de-
cision more challenging? Easier? (4) What would help you make
this decision? Before conducting the interviews, we piloted and
reﬁned these questions with 2 user-centered design researchers and
1 ophthalmologist who were not involved with the project to
evaluate for clarity and comprehension. During the interviews, the
interviewer recorded clinician responses to the questions by mak-
ing notes. These notes were completely deidentiﬁed and no in-
formation that would link the notes to the clinicians was retained.
Two researchers (B.C.S. and B.T.) reviewed the notes from
the interviews to identify distinct statements. The 2 researchers

independently analyzed the statements using inductive thematic
analysis and grounded theory.17,18 The researchers evaluated
the statements looking for themes that addressed Step 1
(specifying the context of use) and Step 2 (specifying design
requirements).
The
2
researchers
then
met
to
develop
a
consensus codebook of themes. A third reviewer was available
to adjudicate disagreements (D.B.). After the codebook of
themes
was
established,
the
2
researchers
independently
recoded all the statements using the ﬁnal coding scheme. The 2
researchers again met to reach consensus on the coding of the
statements, with the third researcher again available to resolve
disagreements.
The
2
researchers
reviewed
the
themes
addressing the context of use for the prototype CDS system and
developed a brief statement to describe the context of use for
the system, with the third researcher available to adjudicate
disagreements.

Step 2: Specifying Design Requirements

Two researchers (B.C.S. and B.T.) reviewed the statements and
themes to identify design requirements. As the ﬁrst step, the 2
researchers mapped the themes to the fundamental human need
framework.19,20 In this framework, the fundamental human needs
domains
are
subsistence,
security,
affection,
understanding,
participation, idleness, creation, identity, and freedom. The 2
researchers then developed design requirements based on the
themes and fundamental human needs. A third reviewer (D.B.)
adjudicated disagreements.

Step 3: Creating Design Solutions

Based on the interviews and themes identiﬁed above, 2 re-
searchers (B.C.S. and B.T.) developed user stories that depicted
typical situations where a user would beneﬁt from the CDS sys-
tem. The research team then developed a CDS system design
solution to meet these needs using Figma software (Figma Inc).

Step 4: Evaluating and Reﬁning Designs

We showed the design solution to the 5 clinicians who care for
patients with glaucoma described above and 3 informatics and
design researchers. After interacting with the design solution, the
clinicians and researchers provided feedback, which was incorpo-
rated in a second iterative design solution. We followed this iter-
ative design loop for 2 additional iterations. The third iteration was
satisfactory to the clinicians and researchers and was accepted as
our prototype glaucoma CDS system for determining the appro-
priate timing of follow-up visual ﬁeld testing. Throughout this
process, design suggestions from the clinicians and researchers
were recorded.

Results

We conducted semistructured telephone interviews with 5
clinicians who care for patients with glaucoma. There was a
range of clinical specialties (2 glaucoma specialists, 2 gen-
eral ophthalmologists, and 1 optometrist), practice settings
(3 from academic medical centers, 1 from private practice,
and 1 from a large multispecialty clinic), and years in
clinical practice (2 with > 15 years and 3 with < 15 years in
clinical practice). During the interviews, the clinicians made
a total of 41 distinct statements.

2

Step 1: Specifying the Context of Use

We grouped the clinician statements into 9 themes that
addressed the context of use for the CDS system. It
appeared that thematic saturation was attained as each
theme was discussed by > 1 clinician. The themes and
representative statements for these themes are listed in
Table 1. Four of the themes described how the clinicians
currently make decisions regarding the timing of visual
ﬁeld
testing,
1
theme
described
the
importance
of
clinician experience in this decision, and 4 themes
described clinician desires that would improve their
ability to make this decision. Clinicians described making
the decision regarding the timing of visual ﬁeld testing
based on intuition, broad heuristics, patient data and
ﬁndings,
and
patient
preferences.
Clinicians
desire
compiled and easy-to-use data, more certainty when mak-
ing this decision, help communicating with patients, and
help keeping track of the published literature. Clinicians
with less glaucoma experience reported more difﬁculty
with the decision.
From these themes the researchers developed a statement
describing the context of use for the prototype CDS system:
design a CDS system to help clinicians who care for patients
with glaucoma determine the timing for a follow-up visual
ﬁeld test for an individual patient with glaucoma because
determining a personalized timing for follow-up testing must
be done quickly in the middle of a busy clinic and requires
the synthesis of a large amount of data that is scattered in
different places in the EHR.

Step 2: Specifying Design Requirements

The 9 themes that addressed the context of use for the CDS
system mapped to 7 domains of the fundamental human
need frameworkdsecurity, freedom, creation, participation,
idleness, protection, and understanding (see Table 2), with 2
themes matching to each of security and participation. From
the themes and their corresponding fundamental human
needs, the researchers developed 9 design requirements for
the prototype CDS system to help clinicians who care for
patients
with
glaucoma
(see
Table
2).
Key
design
requirements
included
the
preservation
of
clinician
autonomy,
incorporation
of
currently
used
heuristics,
compilation of data, and increasing and communicating
the level of certainty regarding the decision.

Step 3: Create Design Solutions

Based on the interviews and themes identiﬁed above, the
researchers (B.C.S. and B.T.) developed 3 user stories that
depicted typical situations where a user would beneﬁt from
the CDS system.

(1) A glaucoma specialist who wants a recommendation
for follow-up that is nuanced, so she is able to see
the impact of alternative options.

(2) A general ophthalmologist who wants a recom-
mendation
for
follow-up
that
is
presented

efﬁciently, so he makes good decisions while
seeing a lot of patients.

(3) An optometrist who wants a recommendation for
follow-up that she trusts, so she knows her patient is
getting appropriate care.

With these user stories in mind, the research team then
developed an interactive preliminary CDS system design
solution to meet these needs (see Fig 1A).

Step 4: Evaluating and Reﬁning Designs

After completing 3 iterative design cycles using this pre-
liminary CDS system design solution with 5 clinicians who
care for patients with glaucoma and 3 informatics and
design researchers, the design was satisfactory to the clini-
cians and was accepted as our prototype glaucoma CDS
system for determining the appropriate timing of follow-up
visual ﬁeld testing (see Fig 1B). During this iterative design
process, we identiﬁed 9 design features intended to address
the 9 CDS design requirements described in Step 2 above
(Table 2). For example, clinicians expressed their desire to
retain autonomy. The design feature to address this
requirement was to use sliding widgets that allowed
clinicians to see the impact of their decisions under
varying assumptions. During the iterative design process,
clinicians
felt
the
sliding
widgets
allowed
for
both
autonomy
and
data-driven
guidance.
Clinicians
also
desired complied and easy to use data. The design feature to
address this requirement was to make pertinent data (such as
prior eye surgeries, medications, and prior eye pressure
measures) visible in a single initial user interface.

Discussion

Using the User-Centered Design Process framework, we
developed a prototype CDS system to help clinicians
determine the appropriate timing for follow-up visual ﬁeld
testing for patients with glaucoma. During this systematic
design process, we identiﬁed design requirements for this
CDS system and iteratively developed design solutions to
address these needs. We learned that clinicians who care for
patients with glaucoma need CDS systems that preserve
clinician autonomy, compile and present data, incorporate
currently used heuristics, and increase and communicate the
level of certainty regarding the decision. The CDS prototype
developed in this study will be used as a starting point for a
future large-scale iterative reﬁnement and EHR integration
process.
During the qualitative interviews, clinicians reported that
the effort and cognitive load from data gathering and visu-
alization were key challenges in deciding the appropriate
timing for follow-up visual ﬁeld testing. This correlates with
prior research showing that data gathering increases cogni-
tive load and emotional distress and contributes to clinician
burnout.21 Clinicians caring for patients with glaucoma must
incorporate large amounts of longitudinal data from many
sources accurately and efﬁciently to make decisions.10

During our iterative design process, clinicians strongly

3

preferred design solutions that presented most of the
pertinent data in a single user interface. Future CDS
systems and informatics interventions for glaucoma should
also use design solutions that address the challenge of

data gathering and visualization. To make this possible,
vendors will need to ensure that imaging and testing
devices that monitor glaucoma use data standards that are
interoperable and allow for data sharing. There is a good

Table 1. Themes Addressing the Context of Use for a Clinical Decision Support System to Improve Decision Making Regarding the
Timing of Follow-Up Visual Field Testing for Patients with Glaucoma

Theme
Illustrative Statements

How clinicians currently make decisions regarding the timing of visual ﬁeld testing
Timing adjustments are based on intuition
“Overall, I rely on my feeling more than on actual data.”
“My decision about timing is pretty arbitrary.”
Broad heuristics are used to adjust timing
“Using standard timings makes it easier for me to keep track of.”
“For mild or moderate glaucoma, visual ﬁeld every year.”
Patient data and ﬁndings are used to adjust timing
“I do ﬁelds more frequently if I see progression.”
“It’s different if they have a larger cup to disc.”
Patient preferences are used to adjust timing
“Patient convenience inﬂuences my decision.”
Clinicians with less glaucoma experience reported more difﬁculty determining
the timing of visual ﬁeld testing
Clinicians with less glaucoma experience have more difﬁculty
“I don’t see very much glaucoma, so it’s hard for me.”
“It’s hard because my patients with glaucoma are mixed in with patients
with many other conditions.”
Clinicians desire help with determining the timing of visual ﬁeld testing
Clinician desires compiled and easy to use data
“Gathering the data takes longer than evaluating it.”
“It’s difﬁcult to keep track of all of the patient data.”
Clinician desires more certainty when determining timing
“I wish I could have more certainty about my recommendations.”
“Sometimes, I’m not sure if the testing is necessary.”
Clinician desires help communicating with patients regarding timing
“It’s hard to explain to patients why it’s important.”
“It’s difﬁcult for me to convince patients.”
Clinician desires help keeping track of published literature regarding
timing
“There is a lot of different published data, it’s difﬁcult to incorporate
into practice.”
“The recommendations now are different than when I was in
residency.”

Clinician illustrative statements are representative of the other statements categorized in each theme.

Table 2. Clinician Themes Regarding Decision Support for Determining the Timing of Visual Field Testing for Patients with Glaucoma
Mapped to Fundamental Human Needs Domains, Design Requirements, and Design Features

Theme
Fundamental Human
Need Domain
Clinical Decision Support Design
Requirement
Clinical Decision Support Design
Feature

Timing adjustments are based on
intuition
Creation
Design should allow for clinician
autonomy
Sliding widgets to allow clinician inputs
for assumptions
Broad heuristics are used to adjust timing
Security
Design should incorporate currently used
heuristics
Presentation of data commonly used to
guide heuristics such as number of
medications and central corneal
thickness
Patient data and ﬁndings are used to
adjust timing
Freedom
Design should incorporate patient data
and ﬁndings
Presentation of patient data and ﬁndings
such as eye pressures and prior visual
ﬁelds
Patient preferences are used to adjust
timing
Participation
Design should recognize patient
preferences
Sliding widgets to allow patient input for
assumptions
Clinicians with less glaucoma experience
have more difﬁculty
Security
Design should be accessible to
non-experts who care for glaucoma
Option to click on different domains in
the design for additional detail and
explanation
Clinician desires compiled and easy to
use data
Idleness
Design should compile and present data
in an efﬁcient, easy to interpret format
Most pertinent data visible in a single
initial user interface
Clinician desires more certainty when
determining timing
Protection
Design should improve certainty and
communicate the level of certainty
Clear recommendations provided with
statistical information to show level of
certainty
Clinician desires help communicating
with patients regarding timing
Participation
Design should improve communication
with patients
Display of data in graphical form to
facilitate description to patients
Clinician desires help keeping track of
published literature regarding timing
Understanding
Design should incorporate published
literature and inform users
Option to click on different domains for
additional explanation and links to
supporting published literature

4

business case for vendors to improve interoperability as
integrated
data
display
is
something
that
clinicians
strongly desire and has the potential to improve patient care.
Preserving cognitive autonomy was important to the
clinicians during both the cognitive interviews and iterative
design process. This desire for cognitive autonomy is in line
with prior work in the ﬁeld of CDS as systems that preserve
cognitive autonomy are more likely to be used.21e23 The
clinicians also desired data-driven guidance to increase
certainty when determining the appropriate timing for
follow-up visual ﬁeld testing. Our design solution to allow
for both cognitive autonomy and data-driven guidance was
to use sliding widgets that allowed clinicians to see the
impact of their decisions under varying circumstances. As
we work to design CDS systems and informatics in-
terventions to improve glaucoma care, we should remember
the importance of supporting clinician autonomy.
Ophthalmologists and optometrists see many patients
during clinic and experience serious time constraints.24 In a
prior
study,
nearly
90%
of
ophthalmologists
and
optometrists who care for patients with glaucoma felt that
“minimal
time
required
to
use
tool”
would
be
an
important characteristic of CDS systems for glaucoma.12

In the present study, clinicians also felt that having data in
an efﬁcient, easy to interpret format was important. In
future work, we plan to iteratively reﬁne the prototype
CDS system described in this paper in a large-scale work-
ﬂow and EHR integration process. One of the major focuses
of this integration project will be to ensure that the CDS
system is efﬁcient and requires minimal time for the clini-
cians to use. During this workﬂow integration, we will
evaluate the appropriate timing in the workﬂow for CDS
presentation and the appropriate role, if any, of prompts in
the EHR to promote use of the CDS system.
Though not the focus of this manuscript, understanding
the recommendations provided by this prototype CDS sys-
tem is important. The recommendations will be provided by
a statistical calculator based on prior work evaluating the

variability of visual ﬁeld tests.14,25 This statistical calculator
uses a power calculation to determine the frequency of
visual ﬁeld tests spread over a set period of time
necessary to estimate a deﬁned rate of visual ﬁeld loss
given a patient’s test variability with speciﬁed statistical
power. Though this calculator is based on an accepted
understanding of visual ﬁeld test variability and statistical
power, it will be important in future work to develop a
strong evidence base for its effectiveness, as we found
that clinicians desire conﬁdence and certainty in the
recommendations provided by CDS systems for glaucoma.
Our study had limitations. We had an a priori small
sample size of 5 clinicians, though we appeared to reach
thematic saturation and this may be a reasonable sample size
for development of a prototype design based on published
literature.16 The CDS prototype developed in this study will
be further developed and evaluated in a future large-scale
iterative
reﬁnement
and
implementation
process.
Our
study used a purposeful rather than a representative sample.
Because of this, our ﬁndings are not intended to be statis-
tically representative of all clinicians who care for patients
with glaucoma. However, because we used a purposeful
sample that included an appropriate range of clinical spe-
cialties and years in clinical practice, our ﬁndings provide an
inclusive starting point for understanding the design re-
quirements for a CDS system to help clinicians determine
the appropriate timing for follow-up visual ﬁeld testing for
patients with glaucoma. Our study was not designed to
address the recommendations provided by the prototype
CDS system. The focus of this study was on the user-
centered design of this prototype and understanding the
design requirements for glaucoma CDS. This study was not
quantitative and thus did not allow for statistical evaluation
and hypothesis testing. The prototype glaucoma CDS sys-
tem will be evaluated quantitatively in the future. As a
preliminary design project, we employed telephone in-
terviews and interactions with the prototype CDS system for
our iterative design process. In future work, we plan to use

Figure 1. User interface designs for prototype clinical decision support system to help clinicians determine the appropriate timing for follow-up visual ﬁeld
testing for patients with glaucoma. A, Shows the preliminary clinical decision support (CDS) system design prior to iterative reﬁnement. B, Shows the
prototype CDS system after 3 iterative design cycles with 5 clinicians who care for patients with glaucoma and 3 informatics and design researchers. This
interactive design was acceptable to the clinicians and researchers. The Epic interface is a registered trademark of Epic Systems corporation (ª 2022 Epic
Systems Corporation).

5

cognitive task analyses, think-aloud methods, and direct
observation of clinicians using the CDS system. These
methods should provide a more nuanced understanding of
how the users interact with the EHR and CDS system.
In this study, we used a systematic design process based
on the established User-Centered Design Process framework
to rigorously develop a prototype CDS system to help
clinicians determine the appropriate timing for follow-up
visual ﬁeld testing for patients with glaucoma. The proto-
type CDS system we developed will be used as a starting
point for a future, large-scale iterative reﬁnement and EHR

integration process. The systematic design process we used
serves as a pattern for the future development of user-
centered informatics solutions and CDS systems to improve
glaucoma care. During the systematic design process, we
identiﬁed design requirements for this CDS system and
iteratively developed design solutions to address these needs.
Clinicians who care for patients with glaucoma need CDS
systems that preserve clinician autonomy, compile and pre-
sent data, incorporate currently used heuristics, and increase
and communicate the level of certainty regarding the
decision.

Footnotes and Disclosures

Originally received: September 15, 2022.
Final revision: December 5, 2022.
Accepted: January 27, 2023.
Available online: February 2, 2023.
Manuscript no. XOPS-D-22-00196.
1 Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, John Moran Eye
Center, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah.
2 Department of Population Health Sciences, University of Utah, Salt Lake
City, Utah.
3 School of Medicine, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah.
4 Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Center for Eye Policy
& Innovation, Kellogg Eye Center, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor,
Michigan.
5 Institute for Healthcare Policy and Innovation, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, Michigan.
6 Department of Health Management and Policy, University of Michigan
School of Public Health, Ann Arbor, Michigan.
7 Duke Eye Center, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina.
8 Department of Biomedical Informatics, University of Utah, Salt Lake
City, Utah.
9 Clinical Effectiveness, Wolters Kluwer Health, Salt Lake City, Utah.
10 Department of Internal Medicine, University of Utah, Salt Lake City,
Utah.

Disclosures:
All authors have completed and submitted the ICMJE disclosures form.

The authors made the following disclosures:

F.A.M.: Grants e Google, Inc, Carl-Zeiss Meditec, National Eye Institute,
during the conduct of the study; Personal fees e Aerie Pharmaceuticals,
Allergan, Novartis, Biogen, Galimedix, Annexon, Heidelberg Engineering,
Stuart Therapeutics, IDx, Reichert. J.D.S.: Research grant e Abbvie,
outside the submitted work. The other authors have no conﬂicts related to
the proposed work to report.

Financial Support: This work was supported by National Institutes of
Health
(K23EY032577
to
B.C.S.,
R01EY029885
to
F.A.M.,
R01EY026641 to J.D.S.), an Unrestricted Grant from Research to Prevent
Blindness, New York, NY, to the Department of Ophthalmology & Visual
Sciences, University of Utah (B.C.S.) and the Department of Ophthal-
mology & Visual Sciences, University of Utah (J.D.S), and a Mentoring for
the Advancement of Physician Scientists (M.A.P.S) grant from the Amer-
ican Glaucoma Society, San Francisco, California (B.C.S). The funding
organizations had no role in the design or conduct of this research.

HUMAN SUBJECTS: Human subjects data was used in this study. This
study was evaluated by the University of Utah Institutional Review Board
and deemed exempt. The study adhered to the Declaration of Helsinki. This
is a qualitative study using de-identiﬁed subject details.

No animal subjects were used in this study.

Conception and design: Stagg, Tullis, Asare, Stein, Medeiros, Weir, Bor-
bolla, Hess, Kawamoto

Analysis and interpretation: Stagg, Tullis, Asare, Medeiros, Weir, Borbolla,
Hess, Kawamoto

Data collection: Stagg, Tullis, Borbolla

Obtained funding: N/A
Overall responsibility: Stagg, Tullis, Asare, Stein, Medeiros, Weir, Bor-
bolla, Hess, Kawamoto

Abbreviations and Acronyms:
CDS ¼ clinical decision support; EHR ¼ electronic health record.

Keywords:
Clinical decision support, Informatics, Personalized medicine, Perimetry,
Visual ﬁeld testing.

Correspondence:
Brian C. Stagg, MD, MS, 65 Mario Capecchi Drive, Salt Lake City, UT
84132. E-mail: brian.stagg@hsc.utah.edu.