


Citation: Ekstedt, M.; Kirsebom, M.;

Lindqvist, G.; Kneck, Å.; Frykholm,

O.; Flink, M.; Wannheden, C. Design

and Development of an eHealth

Service for Collaborative

Self-Management among Older

Adults with Chronic Diseases: A

Theory-Driven User-Centered

Approach. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public

Health 2022, 19, 391. https://doi.org/

10.3390/ijerph19010391

Academic Editors: Panos Balatsoukas

and Isabel Sassoon

Received: 10 December 2021

Accepted: 28 December 2021

Published: 30 December 2021

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral

with regard to jurisdictional claims in

published maps and institutional afﬁl-

iations.

Copyright:
© 2021 by the authors.

Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.

This article is an open access article

distributed
under
the
terms
and

conditions of the Creative Commons

Attribution (CC BY) license (https://

creativecommons.org/licenses/by/

4.0/).

International  Journal  of
Environmental Research
and Public Health

Article
Design and Development of an eHealth Service for
Collaborative Self-Management among Older Adults with
Chronic Diseases: A Theory-Driven User-Centered Approach

Mirjam Ekstedt 1,2,*
, Marie Kirsebom 3, Gunilla Lindqvist 3
, Åsa Kneck 4, Oscar Frykholm 1, Maria Flink 5,6

and Carolina Wannheden 1,*

1
Department Learning, Informatics, Management and Ethics, Medical Management Centre,

2
Department of Health and Caring Sciences, Faculty of Health and Life Sciences, Linnaeus University,
391 82 Kalmar, Sweden
3
Department of Health and Caring Sciences, Faculty of Health and Life Sciences, Linnaeus University,
351 95 Växjö, Sweden; marie.kirsebom@lnu.se (M.K.); gunilla.lindqvist@lnu.se (G.L.)
4
Department of Health Care Sciences, Ersta Sköndal Bräcke University College, Stigbergsgatan 30, Box 111 89,

5
Department of Neurobiology, Care Sciences and Society, Karolinska Institutet, 141 83 Stockholm, Sweden;

6
Women’s Health and Allied Health Professionals Theme, Karolinska University Hospital,
141 86 Stockholm, Sweden
*
Correspondence: mirjam.ekstedt@lnu.se (M.E.); carolina.wannheden@ki.se (C.W.);
Tel.: +46-(0)480-44-63-99 (M.E.); +46-(0)8-524-839-34 (C.W.)

Abstract: The increasing prevalence of chronic conditions and multimorbidity poses great challenges
to healthcare systems. As patients’ engagement in self-managing their chronic conditions becomes
increasingly important, eHealth interventions are a promising resource for the provision of adequate
and timely support. However, there is inconclusive evidence about how to design eHealth services
to meet the complex needs of patients. This study applied an evidence-based and theory-informed
user-centered design approach in three phases to identify the needs of older adults and healthcare
professionals in the collaborative management of multimorbidity (phase 1), develop an eHealth
service to address these needs (phase 2), and test the feasibility and acceptance of the eHealth service
in a clinical setting (phase 3). Twenty-two user needs were identiﬁed and a web-based application—
ePATH (electronic Patient Activation in Treatment at Home)—with separate user interfaces for
patients and healthcare professionals was developed. The feasibility study with two nurses and ﬁve
patients led to a redesign and highlighted the importance of adequately addressing not only varying
user needs but also the complex nature of healthcare organizations when implementing new services
and processes in chronic care management.

Keywords: eHealth; mHealth; chronic disease; patient activation; person-centered care; self-management

1. Introduction

The increasing prevalence of people living with chronic conditions imposes a large
burden on healthcare services worldwide [1]. The most common chronic conditions that
account for over two thirds of all deaths globally are heart failure, cancer, chronic ob-
structive pulmonary disease (COPD), and diabetes [2]. While a person’s illness trajectory
may start with one chronic condition, multimorbidity increases substantially with age [3].
Healthcare systems that are designed around single diseases pose great challenges for
patients with multimorbidity who need to cope with fragmented care services and recom-
mendations from disease-speciﬁc guidelines that may be contradictory and cumbersome to
comply with [3,4]. Therefore, patients’ engagement in self-managing their condition and
maintaining health becomes increasingly important [5].

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022, 19, 391. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph19010391
https://www.mdpi.com/journal/ijerph

2 of 19

Successful self-management of chronic conditions requires high poly-literacy (health,
medications, and healthcare system), referring to individuals’ ability to take medications
as prescribed; manage their symptoms, emotions and lifestyle changes; solve practical
problems and cope with the impact of the condition(s) on their daily lives; and know
when and how to seek appropriate medical advice when needed [6,7]. Individuals’ ability
to reframe their life narrative when living with chronic conditions and their ability to
accomplish life and patient work successfully are also central to address the demands
that healthcare and life pose [8]. Thus, the planning and implementation of tailored care
interventions for people with multimorbidity should consider the differences in patient
capacity as well as medical characteristics.
Self-management interventions, across different chronic conditions, can contribute
to improved health outcomes [9]. In particular, eHealth interventions, deﬁned as “health
services and information delivered or enhanced through the internet and related tech-
nologies” [10] (p. 1), have been suggested as a promising resource for the provision of
adequate and timely support in the self-management of chronic conditions [11,12] and
multimorbidity [13]. A growing body of promising evidence of improved health outcomes
and cost-effectiveness from clinical studies supports the use of eHealth services [14–17].
However, real-world effectiveness depends on patients’ uptake, engagement, and long
term adherence to these interventions [18].
Despite the major push to harness eHealth services that support self-management
behavior among older adults with chronic conditions in interaction with primary healthcare,
precisely how to develop theory- and evidence-informed eHealth interventions that engage
users remains a challenge and is rarely well documented [12]. Due to the high prevalence
of chronic conditions, older adults represent one of the demographic groups that could
beneﬁt most from eHealth services yet they may also be among those who experience
most difﬁculties in using them [19]. The accumulation of treatment and illness burdens
associated with aging serve as negative feedback loops that may constrain individuals’
capacities for healthy behavior and sustained self-management [4].
To create self-management support interventions that are meaningful, manageable,
and sustainable for the heterogeneous groups of people with multimorbidity, technol-
ogy needs to be based on knowledge about these groups’ speciﬁc needs [7,20–22] and
constructed in a way that takes the complex nature of managing chronic conditions into
account [14]. Thus, the systematic development of complex interventions for speciﬁc user
groups should be based on the best available evidence and appropriate theory [23,24],
following principles of participatory design promoting a common understanding and ac-
knowledging the importance of including all stakeholders’ perspectives during the design
process [25]. Therefore, the aim of this study was to apply an evidence-based and theory-
informed user-centered design approach for (a) identifying the needs of older adults and
healthcare professionals in the collaborative management of multiple chronic conditions,
(b) developing an eHealth service to address these needs, and (c) testing the feasibility and
acceptance of the eHealth service in a clinical setting.

2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Design

This study used a theory-driven user-centered design approach, which implies that the
design builds on theory and existing knowledge, while also promoting close collaboration
between patients with chronic health conditions, healthcare professionals, researchers and
service designers to identify needs and develop design solutions [26].

2.2. Theoretical Underpinnings

The study design was guided in particular by the Chronic Care Model (CCM) [27,28],
the self-determination theory [29], and evidence from a large-scale intervention to improve
care transitions [30]. The CCM is a validated multidimensional framework designed to
improve care for patients with chronic conditions [27,28]. A critical aspect of the CCM

3 of 19

is the close relationship between a prepared and proactive practice team and activated
patients and their families as integrated members of the interdisciplinary teams. A further
developed framework, the eHealth enhanced eCCM, takes into account the opportunities
provided by the use of eHealth [31].
As the adoption of self-management support services is dependent on individuals’
motivation to engage in a change process, we relied on the self-determination theory, which
proposes three fundamental and universal psychological needs that are central for behavior
change [29]. These needs are autonomy (“feeling of willingness and volition with respect
to one’s behaviors”), competence (“feeling effective in one’s interactions with the social
environment”) and relatedness (“experiencing others as responsive and sensitive”) [29]
(p. 86). Previous research has shown that the satisfaction of these needs can explain health
behavior change [32,33] and enhance internalization of health-promoting behavior [34].
Therefore, these needs should be taken into consideration when designing technologies
aimed to foster sustained engagement, behavior change, and wellbeing [35].
Given the heterogeneous results from previous eHealth interventions, our study was
particularly guided by the ﬁndings from a successful large-scale care transition interven-
tion that identiﬁed four essential pillars of self-management support that have proven
effective in keeping patients out of hospital: (1) being knowledgeable about medications
and management of symptoms; (2) understanding and managing a personalized care plan;
(3) being knowledgeable about indications that one’s condition is worsening and how to
respond; (4) knowing when to seek care and whom to turn to [36,37]. These pillars guided
the user-centered design process.

2.3. Overview of the User-Centered Design Process

The user-centered design process was carried out in three interconnected phases
(Figure 1): (1) exploration of user needs (patients and healthcare professionals); (2) design
and development of content and software; (3) testing and redesign. The design process
lasted from January 2016 to December 2017 and involved iteration between the three phases
until user needs had been adequately explored, described, and addressed. In line with the
ISO 9241-210 standard for human-centered design, users were involved throughout the
design and development process [38].

Figure 1. Overview of the three study phases and steps numbered 1–8. The arrows between and
within design phases illustrate iteration in the design process. In particular, steps 6 and 8 link the
three phases through iteration.

2.4. Setting and Participants

The study was conducted in a Swedish healthcare setting, covering several levels of
care. The settings were chosen based on established collaboration with the researchers and
their interest in developmental work. The ﬁrst step was conducted at a tertiary care heart

4 of 19

failure day care clinic. Steps 2–8 were conducted at an integrated care organization, in which
hospital care, primary care, and social services are managed in a single organization [39].
At the integrated care organization, a care development leader was designated as a single
point of contact for the research group and as a facilitator in planning, recruitment, and data
collection. Healthcare professionals from different disciplines and in different positions
in the two settings, as well as patients with heart failure, COPD, or diabetes as their main
diagnosis, were purposefully recruited to participate (Table 1). All participants received
written and verbal information about the study and were informed that participation was
voluntary and that they could withdraw at any time.

Table 1. Overview of participant involvement in all design phases, steps 1–8.

Design Steps

ID
Participant Role
Organization and Level of Care
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

Healthcare management

1
Occupational therapist, Manager
ICO, home care
•
•
•

2
Registered nurse, Manager
ICO, hospital care
•
•
•

3
Physician, Manager
ICO, hospital care
•
•

4
Pharmacist, Manager
ICO, hospital care
•
•

5
Registered nurse, Manager
ICO, primary care
•
•

Healthcare administration & quality development

6
Administrator, Social worker
ICC, social service
•
•
•

7
Quality developer, Registered nurse
ICO, hospital care
•
•
•

8
Quality developer, Social worker
ICC, social service
•
•

9
Administrator/Coordinator
ICO, hospital care
•

Healthcare staff, frontline

10
Specialist nurse, cardiology
ICO, hospital care
•
•
•
•

11
Physician, internal medicine
ICO, hospital care
•

12
Specialist nurse, oncology
ICO, hospital care
•
•

13
Registered nurse
ICO, hospital acute care
•

14–15
Registered nurses (n = 2)
HDC
•

16–17
Assistant nurses (n = 2)
HDC
•

18–19
District nurses (n = 2)
ICO, primary care
•
•
•

20–22
District nurses (n = 3)
ICO, primary care
•
•

Patients & family carers

23–24
Family carers (n = 2)
HDC
•

25–32
Patients, HF/T2D/COPD (n = 8)
HDC
•

33
Patient, T2D
Personal contact
•

34–35
Patients, T2D (n = 2)
ICO, primary care
•

36–38
Patients, HF/COPD (n = 3)
ICO, primary care
•

39
Patient, prostate cancer
Personal contact
•

ICO = integrated care organization; HDC = heart failure day care; HF = heart failure; COPD = chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease; T2D = type 2 diabetes. •: indicates in which design steps participants were involved.

2.5. Phase 1—Exploration of User Needs

The ﬁrst design phase (steps 1–3) focused on the exploration of user needs and contex-
tual conditions for self-management support.

5 of 19

2.5.1. Step 1—Exploration of Self-Management

One researcher (Å.K.) performed ﬁve days of observations at a heart failure day care
clinic to gain a broad understanding of how multimorbidity was managed in patient–
professional interactions and performed interviews with registered nurses (n = 4), patients
(n = 8), and family caregivers (n = 2) who were recruited through the clinic. The interviews
and ﬁeld notes from observations generated rich experience-based data about patients’
capabilities, skills, motivation, and speciﬁc support needs with respect to managing symp-
toms of chronic conditions in everyday life. The interviews were audio-recorded and
transcribed verbatim.

2.5.2. Step 2—Exploration of Cross-Organizational Collaboration

A focus group discussion [40] with healthcare managers (n = 4), administrators and
quality developers (n = 3), and frontline staff (n = 2) from different units (primary care
level, hospital care, and elderly care) of the integrated care organization was performed to
explore cross-organizational care coordination between specialist care and primary care for
older people with chronic conditions. The focus group discussion was facilitated by O.F.,
M.F. and Å.K., lasted 120 min, was audio-recorded and transcribed verbatim.

2.5.3. Step 3—Exploration of Work Processes

To further map work processes and contextual conditions for self-management sup-
port, two researchers (O.F. and Å.K.) performed individual in-depth interviews with
healthcare managers (n = 2), administrators and quality developers (n = 3), and frontline
staff (n = 2). The majority had already participated in the focus group discussion in step 2.
Thus, these interviews contributed to a more in-depth analysis of the patient journey of
chronically ill patients and explored participants’ reﬂections on organizational conditions
and current work processes that could potentially be supported by eHealth. The interviews
were audio-recorded, transcribed verbatim, and analyzed thematically [41] together with
the data collected in steps 1 and 2. After the inductive analysis, we categorized identiﬁed
user needs into themes.

2.6. Phase 2—Design and Development

The second design phase (steps 4–6) focused on developing an eHealth tool for self-
management based on empirical and theoretical assumptions and elicited user needs.

2.6.1. Step 4—Development of Information Content

A design team consisting of researchers (O.F., M.E., Å.K., M.K.), a quality developer
(n = 1), and district nurses (n = 5) from ﬁve primary care centers connected to the integrated
care organization was established to develop the information and knowledge content of
the eHealth service. The design team also had access to an expert panel consisting of a
pharmacist, a physician, and a specialist nurse in cardiology. The design team collected
relevant patient information pamphlets and brochures available at the primary care centers
and met monthly during a 5-month period to adapt self-management information content
for use in an eHealth service.

2.6.2. Step 5—Iterative Software Design, Development, and Testing

In parallel with step 4, the researchers collaborated with a systems developer to design
the software. Using user-centered design principles [42], design sketches and mockups
were developed by an interaction designer in the research group (O.F.) and discussed with
the design team in the monthly meetings. Once satisfaction was reached on the low-ﬁ
prototypes, a web application was developed. A patient representative with diabetes
tested the early prototypes and contributed with advice for reﬁnement and improvements.
The district nurses from the design team were educated in using the eHealth service and
discussed new work routines.

6 of 19

2.6.3. Step 6—Validation of User Needs and Design Adjustments

A functional version of the prototype was demonstrated by O.F. and discussed in
a focus group with healthcare managers (n = 5), administrators and quality developers
(n = 2), and frontline staff (n = 2). All but one of the managers (hospital pharmacist) had
participated in phase 1 (Table 1).

2.7. Phase 3—Testing and Redesign

The third design phase (steps 7–8) focused on testing the feasibility and acceptance of
the developed eHealth service in primary care and on redesign.

2.7.1. Step 7—Feasibility Test in Primary Care

All district nurses from the design team were encouraged to use the eHealth service
and introduce it to a convenience sample of patients who were willing to participate in a
six-week feasibility test. The eHealth service was provided free of charge in the Swedish
language and required that users had access to a computer with internet connectivity. A
test protocol was developed together with the district nurses detailing how to set up patient
accounts with tailored content and how frequently to interact with patients. We performed
follow-up interviews with the patients and district nurses who participated.

2.7.2. Step 8—Reﬁnements and Redesign

In this ﬁnal step, the eHealth service was redesigned to enhance its usability based on
experiences from the feasibility study in primary care. The redesign involved improvements
in the web application as well as a new design process to develop a complementary mobile
application. Thus, an agile development process with a mobile app developer and the web
application developer was initiated. One of the authors (C.W.) created design sketches and
mockups which were discussed during bi-weekly sprint meetings with the developers as
well as a volunteering patient who had not participated in previous design steps.

3. Results
3.1. Phase 1—Exploration of User Needs

Phase 1 resulted in the speciﬁcation of twenty-two user needs from the perspectives
of patients, family caregivers, and healthcare professionals, which were grouped into ﬁve
themes (Table 2). Detailed results from the observation studies and interviews [43], as well
as the information ﬂow in the chronic care pathway [44], are reported elsewhere.

3.1.1. Theme 1—Diagnosis-Speciﬁc Information

Easily accessible information was important to both patients and healthcare profes-
sionals. Participants described information needs as being particularly high at the time
of diagnosis and emphasized that information needs to be trustworthy, comprehensive,
and easily understandable. The information that is provided to patients should be tailored
to their speciﬁc needs and preferences, taking their psychosocial condition and possible
cognitive impairments into account.

In the best of worlds, there would be systems for carrying information around and
not having to have it in your head or on paper slips or something like that . . . a good
anamnesis too, so you’re not, like, starting from scratch. (Staff)

But, like, I think this is really exciting, because I . . . I think that, like, this technology
with gathering information, and then it can really be facilitated by so much being gathered
there, and I know what it says there, I have access to it. (Patient)

7 of 19

Table 2. Identiﬁed user needs grouped into ﬁve themes. Steps 1–3 indicate in which data collection
steps the needs were captured.

Step

Theme
User Need
1
2
3

1. Diagnosis-speciﬁc information

1.1 Easily accessible information
•
•
1.2 Trustworthy (evidence-based) information
•
•
•
1.3 Comprehensive information
•
•
•
1.4 Understandable information
•
•
1.5 Information tailored to individual needs
•
•

2. Medication management
support

2.1 Individualized medication management instructions
•
•
2.2 Medication reminders
•
•
2.3 Access to updated medication lists
•
•
2.4 Medication adherence and reasons for non-adherence
•
•
2.5 Monitoring of intended and unintended effects
•

3. Self-management support

3.1 Monitoring of symptoms and wellbeing
•
•
•
3.2 Support for providing tailored guidance
•
•
•
3.3 Reminders and motivational support
•
•
3.4 Information exchange between patients and HCPs
•
•

4. Care coordination support

4.1 Clariﬁcation of roles, responsibilities and contact details
•
•
4.2 Appointment reminders for patients
•
4.3 Overview of patients’ care plan and trajectory
•
•
•
4.4 Support for collecting patient preferences
•
* 4.5 Information exchange between providers
•

5. Psychosocial support
5.1 Assurance of available support
•
* 5.2 Support for connecting with other patients
•
* 5.3 Support for inviting family caregivers as users
•
•

HCPs: health care professionals; •: indicates in which design steps (1-3) the user needs were identiﬁed.; *: user
needs that were not addressed in phases 2 and 3 of the design process.

3.1.2. Theme 2—Medication Management Support

Patients and family caregivers desired clear information and instructions for managing
their medications, as well as reminders. Healthcare professionals desired access to updated
medication lists across organizational borders. They also wanted to be able to follow
patients’ medication adherence and reasons for non-adherence. Furthermore, the ability to
monitor intended as well as unintended effects of prescribed medications was highlighted.

A lot of people have misunderstood the medication list, I think. . . . or they’ve taken
their medications like they should, but haven’t really, like, understood what it’s all about.
(Staff)

The last time I was admitted to hospital, there was a lady (doctor) there who took care of
all that and she had rewritten the medication list in a very clear and simply way, with
reasons and causes for the tablets and what they were for. And a list like that, where you
get both the regular support for ﬁlling up the pill organizers and because you can see that
this tablet is for that particular thing. (Patient)

3.1.3. Theme 3—Self-Management Support

The ability to monitor symptoms over time and get feedback was important to both
patients and healthcare professionals. To facilitate their self-management, patients desired
self-management guidance through educational material and tailored plans for recom-
mended self-management activities, motivational support, and reminders. Healthcare
professionals expressed a need to understand patients’ self-management competence and
support needs in order to identify demands that may accumulate over time due to an
increasing imbalance between symptom burdens and self-management capacity. They
considered older patients with multiple diagnoses and severely affected by functional

8 of 19

impairments as being less likely to internalize information about self-management and to
actively adopt new behavioural skills.

So maybe they don’t weigh themselves every day either, so they don’t, like, notice right
away when they start to gain weight, it’s just suddenly: “Oh, but now I weigh ten kilos
more than I did two weeks ago.” But if they had weighed themselves every day, then
maybe they would have noticed that already on day two, maybe. And then they could
have gone to the care center and just: “I’ve started to gain weight.” (Staff)

So it feels like it kind of depends on when they got the diagnosis. If they got, let’s say
heart failure or COPD when they were maybe ﬁfty to sixty, then they know more about it,
they’ve had it for a few years and are more familiar with it. But if they get heart failure
or COPD when they’re like eighty-two, then it feels like they can’t be bothered to take in
that information, it feels like they think like: “But you can solve that.” (Staff)

Therefore, healthcare professionals desired decision support to be able to recommend
proactive symptom-management strategies to sustain wellbeing and independence for
patients with multimorbidity. They stressed that simple communication channels between
patients and healthcare professionals are needed to be able to assist with customized
support and feedback to promote patients’ motivation and skills.

It really has to be easy to get started, to get into it, of course . . . I mean, of course, it can’t
be anything childish, but I mean, like, something like . . . “This week you’ve exercised
every single day or . . . seven times, well done!” I think you would see that as something
positive, like feedback . . . I think maybe you could have one of those simple, that you just
have like a smiley, instead of having to write. (Staff)

3.1.4. Theme 4—Care Coordination Support

Patients as well as healthcare professionals emphasized the importance of a mutual
understanding of roles and responsibilities. For patients, it was particularly important
to have access to their healthcare professionals’ contact details, get support in navigating
the healthcare system, and receiving appointment reminders. Similarly, healthcare pro-
fessionals desired support for coordinating a multi-professional care team, for example,
by enabling information exchange between providers and facilitating all members of a
multi-professional team to access patients’ health records and get an overview of their care
trajectory. They also expressed a need for support in collecting patient preferences.

That kind of information could be there, that if the home care staff doesn’t show up, you
call such and such and . . . ? Yeah, or if you feel uncertain or anything like that, and that
there is contact information. (Staff)

3.1.5. Theme 5—Psychosocial Support

It was important to patients and family caregivers to know that support was available
when they needed it. Patients wanted to be able to involve their family caregivers in
their interactions with healthcare, for example, by inviting them as users of a prospective
eHealth service. They also desired to be able to connect with other patients, both to share
experiences and strategies to manage their symptoms and worries.

The thing you think about most is the enormous difference between living in a home
with your wife, active and strong, so strong that she does all the day-to-day stuff. You
think about that, that is an enormous difference. All those people who live alone and only
have an alarm button. I have a, a safe surrounding, without having to use, use an alarm
button. Now that is the big difference. (Patient)

If you think like this, that I know . . . there were next-of-kin, if there had been written
information, then maybe that could have been shared with them . . . by e-mail or like . . .
or through some other system . . . that they are included in this too and can support her
in it. (Staff)

9 of 19

3.2. Phase 2—Design and Development
3.2.1. Information Content

There was limited preexisting patient information available at the integrated care orga-
nization to guide patients in their self-management. Therefore, new content was developed
based on the scientiﬁc literature, clinical practice guidelines, and consultations with the
expert panel. The design team developed a knowledge base consisting of information and
recommendations to support the self-management of type 2 diabetes, heart failure, and
COPD. The knowledge base contained: a collection of short diagnosis-speciﬁc informative
texts covering topics related to symptoms, treatment, and self-management; common
diagnosis-speciﬁc medications with easily understandable descriptions of their purpose,
mechanisms, common side effects and other details; instructions for self-management
activities that could be performed at home (e.g., physical activity or diet plans); instructions
for the self-monitoring of health parameters (symptoms and outcomes) that would be
useful for follow-up.

3.2.2. eHealth Service

In parallel with the development of information content, an iterative software devel-
opment process resulted in a web-based application—ePATH (electronic Patient Activation
in Treatment at Home)—with separate user interfaces for patients and healthcare profes-
sionals. Secure login was implemented using e-identiﬁcation services approved by the
Swedish agency for digital government (BankID for patients; SITHS for nurses). Below, we
describe the core modules of ePATH (Figure 2a).

3.2.3. Templates Module

Using the templates module, healthcare professionals initialized the ePATH service
for patients by setting up individual patient accounts with tailored diagnosis-speciﬁc in-
formation and self-management recommendations (user needs themes 1 and 3). This was
done at an “onboarding” meeting in collaboration with the patients. The content to share
with patients was selected from diagnosis-speciﬁc templates that contained information
content from the knowledge base (i.e., diagnosis-speciﬁc information, self-management and
self-monitoring recommendations, and medications). A minimal amount of content that
was considered relevant for most patients was preselected in the template. Using a toggle
function, healthcare professionals could easily select additional content that would be
relevant to some patients but not all (e.g., support for tobacco cessation or diet recommen-
dations). The content could also be edited to further tailor support to patients, for example
by editing informational texts or ﬁne-tuning the type, intensity and timing of recommended
self-management activities and self-monitoring parameters to individual patients’ needs
and preferences. After initializing a patient account, healthcare professionals could use
the templates module at any time to complement or reﬁne the self-management support
content for individual patients.

3.2.4. Information Module

After initialization of a patient’s ePATH account, tailored diagnosis-speciﬁc infor-
mation was accessible in ePATH’s information module. The information module was
intended to function as a knowledge base that patients could turn to for learning about
their chronic conditions and improving their self-management competence and skills (user
needs theme 1).

10 of 19

Figure 2. Overview of ePATH architecture and modules for different users: (a) illustrates the
initial design (phase 2), which enabled all users to access ePATH through a web-based application;
(b) illustrates how the web-based application was complemented with a patient-facing mobile
application and related functionalities for patients after redesign (phase 3).

3.2.5. Interactive Self-Management Modules

Three interactive self-management modules were developed to support patients in
their self-care and assist healthcare professionals in tailoring support to patients’ needs and
preferences and surveil patient-reported self-monitoring data. Both user groups had the
same rights to add, remove, and edit contents. In the patient interface, a self-monitoring
feature enabled patients to track and report their medication adherence, self-management
performance and health assessments. All tracked data were instantly accessible to patients
and healthcare professionals and could be viewed in both tabular and graphical format.
The medications module enabled patients to add their medication list to their ePATH
proﬁle to get support in taking their medications and tracking adherence (user needs
theme 2). Patients could select medications from the knowledge base and edit details ac-
cording to their prescriptions (e.g., dosing, strength, administration timing and frequency).
Medications that were not available in the knowledge base could be added manually. To
receive reminders and report medication adherence, patients had to add details about the
prescribed timing for medication intake. Adherence was reported on a binary scale (medi-
cation taken/not taken) for each medication administration (i.e., according to prescribed
frequency), with an optional free text comment to report reasons for non-adherence.
The self-management activities module contained instructions for self-management
activities initially provided by healthcare professionals (user needs theme 3). The type,
intensity, and frequency of activities could be edited to adjust to individual needs and
preferences. Furthermore, patients could edit which parameters they wanted to track for
monitoring performance.
The health assessments module provided instructions for how to self-assess symp-
toms and outcomes. Although an initial recommendation was provided by healthcare
professionals, patients had the opportunity to tailor the parameters to track as well as
monitoring frequency.

11 of 19

3.2.6. Messaging Module

The messaging module was designed to enable patients and their assigned healthcare
contacts to exchange free text messages with each other, facilitating the exchange of health-
related information (user need theme 3) and the provision of psychosocial support (user
need theme 5). The ePATH system imposed no restrictions on the number, length, or
content of messages. Users could be notiﬁed of new messages by email. We anticipated
that the messaging module could contribute to strengthen patient’s psychological needs for
competence (through the provision of feedback) and relatedness (through the interaction
with healthcare professionals).

3.2.7. Care Planning and Coordination Modules

Three different modules were designed to support user needs related to care planning
and coordination (user need theme 4), contributing to informed and activated patients in
productive interaction with a prepared and proactive practice team. A calendar module
was developed to enable both patients and healthcare professionals to get an overview
of the patients’ planned self-management activities. Furthermore, patients had access
to a contacts module that provided them with an overview of their healthcare contacts,
along with descriptions of their roles, responsibilities, and contact information. To support
patients in preparing for healthcare visits, an about me module provided a private space
for patients to specify goals, diary notes, and memos for personal use.

3.3. Phase 3—Testing and Redesign

During a 6-month period, two of the district nurses from the design team and ﬁve
patients participated in testing the ePATH service. The participants were positive about
the conceptual design of ePATH but raised some usability issues that were addressed
through redesign. In particular, they experienced challenges gaining an overview of all self-
management tasks, and self-tracking required too much effort as patients had to navigate
between different pages in the web application. More detailed results from the qualitative
analysis will be published elsewhere.
A redesign was made to reﬁne the presentation of content and simplify the interac-
tion with ePATH, e.g., by reducing the number of clicks necessary. The user interface for
patients was complemented with a daily overview module that provided an overview of
all self-management tasks for the day and simpliﬁed tracking (Figure 3). Furthermore, a
mobile application (mPATH) was developed to make it possible for patients to get push
notiﬁcations (if desired), as well as track their self-management and exchange messages
with healthcare professionals from a mobile device without logging in to the web applica-
tion (Figures 2b and 4a). To further reduce the amount of manual data input and clicks, a
speed-tracking functionality was developed which made it possible to set default values
for selected self-management tasks. For example, an aspired value could be set for a health
assessment (e.g., weight = 75 kg) or a self-management activity (e.g., type of physical
activity = cycling, duration = 30 min, and intensity = medium). Whenever the aspired
value was met, tracking was performed by ticking a checkbox without additional data
input. Only deviations from planned self-management activities and anticipated health
parameters required manual editing (Figure 4c).

12 of 19

Figure 3. Screen print of the ePATH daily overview module (patient interface): The horizontal
navigation panel at the top enables the patient to navigate between different modules (overview,
information, self-care, about me, notes, calendar, contacts, messaging). The horizontal panel below
(“Målsättningar” = Goals) enables the patient to add general goals and speciﬁc goals until the next
care visit. The three vertical panels (“Dagens läkemedel” = Medications, “Dagens egenvårdsak-
tiviteter” = Self-care activities, “Dagens hälsoskattningar” = Health assessments) provide an overview
of the planned self-care tasks for the day and enable tracking.

Figure 4. Screen prints of the mPATH app: (a) shows the mPATH home page that allows users
to navigate to different pages: “Registrera” = Tracking, “Läkemedel” = Medications, “Egenvård-
saktiviteter” = Self-management activities, “Hälsoskattningar“ = Health assessments, and “Med-
delanden” = Messaging; (b) illustrates an example from the tracking page which lists all daily
self-management tasks chronologically. If speed-tracking is possible (ﬁrst two items in the list),
default values are spelled out (“Läkemedel taget: Ja” = Medication taken: Yes) and users can simply
click the checkbox to track the task as done; (c) illustrates the editing view where the user can edit
details for individual self-management tasks.

13 of 19

4. Discussion

This study applied a theory- and evidence-driven user-centered design process to
develop a web- and mobile-based eHealth service for supporting the self-management of
chronic conditions among older adults in an integrated care setting. The user needs that we
identiﬁed concerned a core component of the CCM, namely, the facilitation of productive
interactions between informed, activated patients, and prepared, proactive healthcare
professionals [27]. Patients as well as healthcare professionals valued easily accessible
information, support for medication management, self-management, care coordination,
and psychosocial support. While the designed eHealth service addressed identiﬁed user
needs and organizational considerations, only a small number of participants could be
recruited for testing the service in a clinical setting. This may reveal a mismatch between
identiﬁed needs and readiness to change. Our ﬁndings conﬁrm Wagner’s observation that
over two decades after the introduction of the CCM, “helping busy practices to transform
into effective care systems still remains a formidable challenge” [45] (p. 663).

4.1. User-Centered Design Process

We collaborated with patients and healthcare professionals in the user-centered design
and development process. It is widely acknowledged that user involvement in the design
of information technology is central to a system’s success [46], in particular in terms of
user satisfaction and system use [47]. However, user involvement is a double-edged
sword that needs to be managed carefully [48]. Challenges (e.g., time constraints, budget,
lack of top management support, lack of motivation) need to be considered and there
is no clear evidence regarding the optimal degree of user involvement or the stage in
the system development lifecycle in which user involvement is most effective. A review
by Fischer et al. [49] found that older adults are commonly involved at a low level as
informants, testers, and consultants but less frequently as co-designers in the actual design
and development process. Similarly, in our study, patients were mainly involved in the
exploration of user needs and usability testing. In the design and development process, we
involved healthcare professionals as frontline users, primarily to ensure a ﬁt between the
eHealth service and work processes.
In the ﬁrst phase of the user-centered design process, we identiﬁed a comprehensive
list of user needs and organizational considerations. Consistent with the CCM and previous
evidence from the care transition intervention that informed this study [27,30], participants
expressed a need for support services that would enable patients to take a more active
role in their self-care and facilitate collaboration with healthcare professionals through
information exchange. However, we also found that there was variation in patients’ support
needs depending on their health status. Whereas some patients are well-off can and want
to be in charge of their own care, others are vulnerable and in greater need of support [50].
The timing for support was also important. While information needs were high at the
time of diagnosis, healthcare professionals suggested that patients who had lived with
their condition for a long time needed more support as they were less able to acquire new
knowledge and skills. The need for high-quality support increases in parallel with the
accumulation of various factors that negatively affect an individual’s ability or motivation
for self-management, such as lack of health literacy, isolation, poverty, distance from
healthcare, and absence of social support [51]. Therefore, previous research has emphasized
the need to better understand patients’ capacities to manage the burdens of illness and
treatment [52] and called for minimally disruptive interventions oriented explicitly towards
care for patients with complex conditions [53,54]. Given the extremely heterogeneous
group of older adults and the complexity of the illness burden in people with multiple
chronic conditions, the importance of personalized care is at its peak.
In the second phase of the user-centered design process, we co-designed and devel-
oped self-management support modules that could be tailored to the needs and preferences
of individual patients. The developed modules correspond well with self-management
components from the PRISMS taxonomy of self-management support that have been iden-

14 of 19

tiﬁed as suitable for eHealth, namely: patient education and information provision; remote
monitoring with feedback and action plans; eHealth-facilitated clinical review; adherence
support; psychological support; and lifestyle interventions [12,55]. It has been suggested
that the design of self-management support features needs to be aligned with varying user
needs and preferences based on patients’ medical and social complexities, demographic
factors, readiness for change, and motivation [56,57]. However, there is no conclusive
evidence yet about which eHealth components and design features are most effective to
support self-management of long-term conditions [12,58]. Thus, more research is needed to
uncover relationships between the context, mechanisms, and self-management outcomes
related to eHealth interventions [59]. In particular, the question of how to design eHealth
interventions that support personalized care merits further investigation.
We speciﬁcally aimed to support the personalization of self-management support
features to satisfy patients’ psychological needs of autonomy, competence, and relatedness,
based on the self-determination theory [29]: autonomy was supported by enabling the
tailoring of content; competence was supported by the provision of tailored educational
material and by means of self-tracking functionality; relatedness was supported by enabling
patients to contact their nurses and get psychosocial support. Personalization is a design
feature that offers personalized content or services, which is commonly used in persuasive
systems design, where the aim is to promote the reinforcement, change, or shaping of
attitudes and/or behaviors [60]. In combination with self-tracking, individual goal-setting
and personalized feedback are commonly used personalization features to promote lifestyle
changes, whereas it is less common to provide users with the ability to set technical
features, such as layouts or prompts [61]. In the self-management modules developed
in this study, personalization was not an automated feature provided by the eHealth
service. Rather, it was dependent on users’ own settings of technical features and content
adjustments. We acknowledge that this requires both health and eHealth literacy and may
have inﬂuenced ease of use. Previous research shows that eHealth literacy, although an
important predictor of eHealth use, is often overlooked in the design of eHealth services
for socially disadvantaged groups, such as older adults [62]. It should be considered that
physical frailty status per se is negatively associated with older adults’ ICT use independent
of age, education, and opinions about the usefulness and usability of ICT [63]. Furthermore,
it should be considered that while an eHealth service may be experienced as satisfying or
frustrating at the user interface level, behaviors and life in general may be inﬂuenced in
other ways [35,64].
In the third phase of the user-centered design process, the feasibility and acceptance
of the eHealth service was tested in a natural setting and reﬁned. The feasibility test
proved challenging, which is reﬂected in the low number of participants. Only two of the
district nurses from the design team participated. The other three were not available for
participation due to changes in stafﬁng. Technically challenged staff, resistance to change,
age, and eHealth literacy are among the most common reported barriers to the adoption of
telemedicine worldwide [65]. Adoption problems may also reﬂect a mismatch of eHealth
services with peoples’ routines in their daily lives [20]. These may be factors that challenged
the recruitment of participants for the feasibility test. The nurses acted as interventionists
by being tasked with introducing the eHealth service to patients. This contrasts with
ﬁndings from a systematic review that studies of eHealth tools to support self-management
among vulnerable patients with chronic conditions often engage external intervention
providers [59]. We believe that one possible explanation for the poor recruitment of patient
participants may be that the nurses did not feel sufﬁciently conﬁdent in introducing the tool
to their patients, possibly due to insufﬁcient training. A recent systematic review suggests
that successful implementation strategies of eHealth programs for patients with chronic
conditions living at home include internal and external facilitation, audit and feedback,
management support, and training of clinicians [66]. Although training and support was
provided and despite the high engagement in the design process and the expressions of

15 of 19

conﬁdence and motivation to use the eHealth service in their daily practice, we may have
underestimated the effort required by nurses to change existing routines.

4.2. Methodological Considerations

A limitation of our study was that it coincided with other development projects, re-
organization, and staff leave at the integrated care organization that was the setting for
the study. Due to down-prioritization of our project, the process from initial conceptual-
ization of the project to feasibility testing became too long drawn out for the participants
to get a return on their investment of time and effort. Despite the strong commitment
among participants, including care developers and managers, to contribute to the improve-
ment of self-management support in chronic care, the organizational changes were out
of their control. In their review of technology implementation frameworks in health and
social care, Greenhalgh et al. [67] found that surprisingly few frameworks considered the
organizational setting or the extent of implementation work required. They present a
nonadoption, abandonment, scale-up, spread, and sustainability (NASSS) framework that
helps technology and service designers in assessing and addressing complexities in the
implementation of technologies in healthcare [67]. When reﬂecting on our study based on
their proposed framework, we acknowledge that apart from the eHealth service that was
developed, the clinical conditions addressed, the heterogeneous group of patients, and the
clinical setting were characterized by high complexity, which is a substantial risk factor
for non-adoption or abandonment [67]. Thus, although a user-centered design process
that is based on theory and evidence may contribute to successful implementation, the
implementation process needs to account for the multiple complexities in the healthcare
system, in which unpredictability is ever present [68]. The challenges we experienced may
reﬂect a lack of sufﬁcient managerial support and resources for implementation, which are
common challenges in the implementation of eHealth services for self-management [69].
After a lengthy recruitment process, we nevertheless succeeded in performing a small-scale
feasibility test with a few nurses and patients from different healthcare organizations.
Although our data limit us in drawing conclusions about the usability or usefulness of
the developed eHealth service in a real-world setting, we believe that the description of
our design and development process may be of value to researchers who plan similar
projects. We believe that the user needs that we identiﬁed will be applicable in other
chronic care settings. However, we acknowledge that older adults are an extremely hetero-
geneous group with highly varied characteristics and needs, who use, modify, and interact
with technologies in rather diverse ways [70]. The merits of user involvement include
learning, adjusted designs, and achieving a sense of participation among older users [49].
How far this translates into increased viability of the designed products in the everyday
lives of older adults, or even their acceptability, remains an open question for further
empirical inquiry.

5. Conclusions

Our study has identiﬁed needs related to the self-management of chronic conditions
and productive interactions between patients and healthcare professionals that could be
supported by means of eHealth services. The user-centered design and development
process gave insight into the variation of needs and preferences within and between end
users that call for personalized support services that can be adapted over time. The ePATH
service that was developed could only be tested in a small-scale feasibility study, which
limits our ability to draw conclusions about its design features. However, the challenges
we experienced in the lengthy process from design and development to ﬁnally testing the
service highlighted the importance of adequately addressing not only varying user needs
but also the complex nature of healthcare organizations when implementing new services
and processes in chronic care management. We conclude that user engagement in design
and development should not be limited to the elicitation of user needs and creating new
services but should focus more holistically on improving current practices to shape better

16 of 19

care, which requires adequate strategies and resources to implement changes in people’s
lives and complex organizations. We encourage future studies that will further explore
how eHealth services can best be designed and implemented to provide personalized
support that will meet the varying needs and preferences of persons suffering from chronic
conditions and made to ﬁt into the organizational context of healthcare.

and C.W.; software: O.F. and C.W.; formal analysis, M.E., M.K., G.L., Å.K. and C.W.; investigation,
M.E., M.K., G.L., Å.K. and M.F.; data curation, M.E., M.K., O.F. and C.W.; writing—original draft
preparation, M.E. and C.W.; writing—review and editing, M.E., M.K., G.L., Å.K., O.F., M.F. and C.W.;
visualization, M.E. and C.W.; project administration, M.E., O.F. and C.W.; funding acquisition, M.E.
and M.F. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.

Funding: This research and the APC was funded by the Swedish Research Council for Health,
Working Life, and Welfare, grant number 2014-4948. C.W. was also funded by a junior research grant
from the same funder, grant number 2017-01451.

Institutional Review Board Statement: The study was conducted according to the guidelines of the
Declaration of Helsinki and approved by the Regional Ethical Review Board in Stockholm, Sweden
(protocol code 2014/1498-31/2, date of approval 8 October 2014 and protocol code 2016/735-32, date
of approval 27 April 2016).

Informed Consent Statement: Written informed consent to participate in this study and to publish
results was obtained from all study participants.

Data Availability Statement: The data presented in this study are available on request from the

Acknowledgments: We extend our gratitude to the study participants, the integrated care organiza-
tion, and funders that made this research possible. In particular, we want to thank the developers
Magnus Ehlde and Erik Bondesson for developing functional versions of ePATH and mPATH.

Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest. The funders had no role in the design
of the study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or
in the decision to publish the results.