Health Promotion Practice
January 2022 Vol. 23, No. (1) 25­–31
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1177/15248399211003544
Article reuse guidelines: sagepub.com/journals-permissions
© 2021 Society for Public Health Education

25

Resources, Frameworks, and Perspectives

Existing participatory research approaches have failed 
to identify innovative methods that overcome the per-
sistent barriers to adolescent sexual and reproductive 
health service demand and access. Increasingly, pro-
grammers have turned to human-centered design (HCD), 
a problem-solving process that centers the needs, per-
spectives, and experiences of people, when developing 
solutions to complex SRH challenges. This article 
describes the application of a youth-engaged version of 
HCD as part of Adolescents 360, a transdisciplinary ini-
tiative to increase 15- to 19-year-old girls’ use of modern 
contraception in Nigeria, Ethiopia, and Tanzania. 
Youth-adult design teams (including 111 “youth design-
ers” trained in HCD methods) undertook formative 
research to inform the design and implementation of 
interventions. We reflect on the practical implications 
of using instrumental strategies of HCD with a youth-led 
participatory approach. Our experience indicates that 
(1) engaging youth as project partners in transdiscipli-
nary teams requires planned and dedicated financial 
and human resources; (2) involving youth as action 
researchers can help identify opportunities to improve 
program empathy and responsiveness; (3) it is difficult 
to recruit “extreme users” as project partners because of 
the high competencies needed in HCD; (4) centering 
empathy and employing design standards during proto-

typing can drive decision-making and resolve questions 
raised by conflicting evidence claims in existing bodies 
of literature; and (5) testing tangible services and prod-
ucts in real-world settings continues long after the inter-
vention design phase. Youth-adult partnership should 
continue throughout this iterative and adaptive phase 
to ensure that the adolescent experience of the interven-
tion remains at the core of intervention delivery.

Keywords:	
sexual health; community-based partici-
patory research; health research; child/
adolescent health; reproductive health; 
community intervention; health promo-
tion

1003544 HPPXXX10.1177/15248399211003544Health Promotion PracticeFakoya et al. / Ypar for adolescent sexual and reproductive health programming
research-article2021

1King’s College London, London, UK
2Population Services International, Washington, DC, USA
3IDEO.org, New York, NY, USA
4Itad, Hove, UK
5California State University, Sacramento, CA, USA

Enhancing Human-Centered Design With Youth-Led 
Participatory Action Research Approaches for 
Adolescent Sexual and Reproductive Health 
Programming

Ibidun Fakoya, PhD1

Claire Cole, MPH2

Chris Larkin, MS3

Melanie Punton, MA4

Eleanor Brown. MSc4

Ahna Ballonoff Suleiman, DrPH, MPH5

Authors’ Note: We would like to acknowledge our country col-
leagues in Ethiopia, Nigeria, and Tanzania including government 
partners and our youth designers without whom this project could 
not have been possible. For more details about the evaluation of 
this project, visit https://www.itad.com/project/evaluation-of-ado-
lescents-360/. Support for this publication is provided by the Bill 
& Melinda Gates Foundation and the Children’s Investment Fund 
Foundation, Award OPP1134425. Address correspondence to 
Claire Cole, Senior Sexual and Reproductive Health Technical 
Advisor–Implementation Science & Learning, Population Services 
International, 1120 19th Street NW #600, Washington, DC 20036, 
USA;  e-mail: ccole@psi.org.

26  HEALTH PROMOTION PRACTICE / January 2022

C

omplications resulting from pregnancy and 
childbirth are a leading cause of death among 
15- to 19-year-old adolescent girls in low- and 
middle-income countries (Sulley et al., 2020). Histori­
cally, health organizations have invested heavily in 
finding ways to address adolescent sexual and repro-
ductive health (ASRH) needs but typically defining 
problems and solutions for adolescents, rather than 
with them. This creates significant risks for misinter-
pretation of what the problem is and makes assump-
tions about the types of solutions that might work best. 
One strategy that organizations have used to increase 
the effectiveness of ASRH programs is active youth 
participation. However, there is often a lack of youth 
engagement in designing interventions (Villa-Torres & 
Svanemyr, 2015).
Human-centered design (HCD) is an umbrella term that 
describes a creative design process that is a flexible, yet 
disciplined and repeatable approach to solving complex 
problems. At its core, HCD involves adopting a mind-set 
prioritizing the needs and experiences of the population of 
interest (Holeman & Kane, 2020). HCD practitioners have 
increasingly become involved in design and implementa-
tion of myriad projects within global health (Holeman & 
Kane, 2020). However, there is some contention over the 
value of HCD in global health— in particular, what the 
process offers in comparison to established approaches 
to public health intervention design that are grounded in 
socio-behavioral research (Tolley, 2016).
Youth-led participatory action research (YPAR), a 
form of community-based participatory research (CBPR), 
uses methods and pedagogy to focus on young people’s 
lived experience (Anyon et  al., 2018). Fully realized, 
YPAR engages youth as partners and collaborators in an 
iterative cycle of program research, design, and evalu-
ation. Due to resource and time constraints, program 
designers may choose to select specific moments during 
a project to engage components of the YPAR strategy, 
without embracing the full model. YPAR has primarily 
been shown to improve the health and well-being of 
youth researchers, although some evidence suggests that 
actively involving recipients in formative research leads 
to more effective programs (Ozer, 2016).
A recent review comparing HCD and CBPR approaches 
concluded that integrating HCD in CBPR projects may 
lead to more innovative solutions that have greater 
reach, and are more readily adopted (Chen et al., 2020). 
Chen et al. focused on five instrumental strategies prac-
titioners can draw from HCD when conducting CBPR 
projects: (1) form transdisciplinary teams, (2) center 
empathy, (3) recruit and work with “extreme users”—
individuals purposively selected because they fall at 
the far end of the spectrum of a given characteristic—as 

participants and partners, (4) rapidly prototype elements 
of the product or service, and (5) create tangible products 
or services that can be tested. In this article, we present a 
case study of an HCD process enhanced by components 
of YPAR and reflect on the challenges and opportunities 
of five instrumental strategies for integrated HCD into 
CBPR proposed by Chen et al. (2020).

>
>Adolescents 360

Adolescents 360 (A360) is a 4½-year initiative to 
increase modern contraceptive use among 15- to 19-year-
old girls in Nigeria, Ethiopia, and Tanzania. The pro-
gram is implemented by a global consortium that brings 
together a transdisciplinary team of HCD practitioners, 
ASRH programmers, social marketers, and researchers 
from varied disciplines (public health, adolescent devel-
opmental science, anthropology). Although this began 
as an adult-designed project with categorical funding 
focused on contraception, a primary principle was 
meaningful youth engagement. The purpose of adopt-
ing an integrated HCD-YPAR approach was to catalyze 
novel, scaleable, and replicable approaches to reducing 
unmet need for contraception.
A360 consisted of four phases: (1) Inquiry: youth-
engaged formative research to understand the experi-
ences, contexts, and underlying motivations that inform 
adolescent behavior; (2) Insight synthesis: collaborative 
analysis across expertise to generate themes to inform 
design; (3) Prototyping: quickly developing and testing 
rudimentary versions of solutions to understand desir-
ability, develop technical practicality, and generate new 
insights to improve solutions; and (4) Adaptive imple-
mentation: ongoing inquiry and refinement, critical 
reflection, and iterative evaluation of solutions.

Inquiry

Formative research was conducted to understand 
the experiences, contexts, and underlying motivations 
that inform adolescent behavior. Data were collected by 
teams composed of program staff, HCD practitioners, 
and 111 youth designers (20 in Ethiopia, 16 in Nigeria, 
and 75 in Tanzania; see Table 1). A theoretically driven 
youth engagement process informed the training and 
support for youth and adults engaged in the program 
(Ozer, 2016). Adults and youth designers attended one 
of three “bootcamps”: short, intensive courses on effec-
tive youth-adult partnerships; HCD; and data collection, 
analysis, and ethical research. Approval was obtained 
from U.S.- and country-based ethical review boards.
Teams collected data using a range of qualitative 
research methods (e.g., observations, promoted discus-

Fakoya et al. / Ypar for adolescent sexual and reproductive health programming  27

Resources, Frameworks, and Perspectives

sions, photo narratives, card sort, and in-depth inter-
views). During formative research, youth designers acted 
as note-takers, interpreters, and interviewers. Topic guides 
comprised open-ended questions exploring respondents’ 
perception of their lives, goals, needs, and engagement 
in health services. Teams also conducted market analy-
ses and audience segmentation to identify the benefits 
and drawbacks of varied service delivery channels, and 
the opportunities and challenges to improve coverage 
and outreach to adolescents through health sector mod-
els. These findings were iteratively incorporated into 
recruitment strategies. Subsequently, teams interviewed 
married and unmarried, in- and out-of-school, 15- to 

19-year-old girls, their male partners, parents, commu-
nity influencers, and health providers in rural, urban, 
and peri-urban settings. In total, qualitative data were 
collected from 750 participants (294 in Ethiopia, 365 in 
Nigeria, and approximately 100 in Tanzania, where data 
from a previous HCD project informed A360 design).
The youth-adult teams analyzed iteratively in the 
field using simple tools (post-its and flip charts). Team 
members described and reflected on interviews and 
observations, highlighting extreme cases and identify-
ing emerging themes (IDEO.org, 2015). Youth designers 
contributed perspectives and acted as cultural transla-
tors to interpret findings.

TABLE 1
Attributes of Youth as Part of Adolescents 360 Design Teams

Profile
•  Young women and men aged 18–25 years who had completed at least the first stage of secondary 
education
•  Demonstrated strong verbal and written communication skills, fluency in local languages, and an 
adequate level of conversational English

Roles and 
activities
•  Participation in training of teams on power-sharing, effective youth-adult partnerships, and 
meaningful youth engagement shifted the project from a passive model of youth as sources of data 
and intervention recipients, toward a model of youth working with adults as partners, advocates, 
designers, and analysts.
•  Youth designers fully participated in the inquiry phase and were reengaged during critical 
moments of subsequent phases as deemed appropriate and feasible by each in-country team.
•  During the inquiry phase, youth and adults worked as partners in a systematic and cyclical 
process of reviewing existing evidence, collecting and analyzing data, and identifying design 
opportunities.
•  In later design phases, youth engaged in other activities including advocating for social and policy 
change, designing and testing prototypes, and vetting and refining intervention approaches.

Contributions
•  Current, lived youth experience
•  Understanding of social and cultural influences on adolescence and young adulthood specific to 
each country of implementation
•  Expertise in local languages and dialects as they partnered with adult colleagues to research and 
design country-specific interventions

Example
•  Formative research in Ethiopia indicated that financial planning could be used as an entry point 
to discuss contraception with newly married couples. The team focused efforts on constructing a 
dialogue process that Health Extension Workers (HEWs) could implement. The conversation 
brings young married girls and couples on a cognitive journey from life goal setting, to financial 
planning, to understanding the value of contraceptives as a tool to support progress towards their 
goals around securing a healthy and stable future for their family. In this process HEWs support 
young married girls and couples to identify goals and assign a cost to achieve them. In early 
prototyping, however, it became clear that since many of the girls lived in low-income rural 
communities and they did not readily or uniformly understand units of cost using fiat money (the 
Ethiopian birr). Through iteratively inquiring and prototyping with local youth in participating 
regions, youth designers identified sacks of teff—a staple food crop used to make a fermented 
flatbread—as a relatable unit of cost. Teams then developed and prototyped a series of job aids and 
discussion and training guides to enable HEWs to conduct contraceptive counselling in a way that 
was relevant to the life and financial literacy of the participants.

28  HEALTH PROMOTION PRACTICE / January 2022

Insight Synthesis and Prototyping

In the second and third phases, the transdisciplinary 
teams were reformulated, sometimes including youth 
researchers, to systematically review the evidence and 
creatively brainstorm ways to respond to emerging themes 
(e.g., “How might we meet girls’ expressed desire to 
become more financially independent?”). The in-country 
team leads, in partnership with the HCD leads, used these 
data to focus on actionable insights that responded to the 
original design challenge and drove the prototyping pro-
cess. Four opportunity areas for design were identified: (1) 
connecting girls to ASRH services relevant to their culture, 
context, sense of self, and stage of life; (2) aligning ASRH 
with girls’ self-stated desire for improved social and finan-
cial stability; (3) improving girls’ accurate understanding 
of contraception; and (4) fostering trusted systems that 
support girls in accessing ASRH services.
Adult teams developed and tested 73 intervention 
prototypes (Tanzania = 36, Ethiopia = 25, Nigeria = 12). 
A set of design standards were used to assess the desir-
ability, feasibility, and viability of intervention prototypes 
that enabled teams to create user-centered, context-specific 
interventions. To consider the viability of the project at 
scale, adult teams then refined the solutions and selected 
the final design based on feedback from girls, their influ-
encers (e.g., male partners, parents), and health system 
stakeholders (e.g., Ministry of Health, medical providers).

Adaptive Implementation

In the final phase, adult teams piloted the interven-
tions and then transitioned to an evidence-based adap-
tive implementation phase in which adults and youth 
collaborated for continuous program improvement 
as interventions expanded across geographic catch-
ment areas. Youth participated as staff members and 
researchers during this period. Across all countries, the 
interventions offer girls aspirational program elements 
(e.g., life goals planning, financial skills) as part of con-
necting girls with youth-friendly opt-out contraceptive 
counselling and on-demand method provision within 
the fullest extent of local law (see A360 Open Source, 
2019, for full details). An independent process evalu-
ation (including participatory action research) gen-
erated additional evidence on successes, challenges, 
and adaptations, which fed into ongoing learning and 
decision-making.

>
>Implications for practice

As use of HCD increases in global health intervention 
design and implementation, there is an increasing need 
to report on how HCD can enhance YPAR approaches 

to intervention design. Below and in Table 2, we reflect 
on our experiences of using five instrumental strategies 
for incorporating HCD into youth-engaged CBPR (Chen 
et al., 2020).

Form Transdisciplinary Teams

Chen et  al. (2020) recommended including indi-
viduals with complementary skill sets from seemingly 
unrelated fields in project teams. In A360, extensive com-
munication and careful planning were needed to create 
convergence and understanding among the transdiscipli-
nary team and with the youth designers. Youth engage-
ment (and other staffing models) evolved throughout the 
project to find new ways to meaningfully engage youth 
after the design phase, but building the skills and capac-
ity of youth designers and adult partners was costly, both 
financially and in terms of staff time and skill.

Cultivate Greater Empathy

To increase the appropriateness of interventions, 
Chen et  al. (2020) recommended centering empathy 
early and often by collecting qualitative data from users 
in the context of their everyday lives. Engaging youth 
as action researchers during adaptive implementation 
helped identify opportunities to improve program empa-
thy and responsiveness to user perspectives. However, 
we recommend that practitioners broaden the defini-
tion of “user” at the outset of formative research and 
explicitly cultivate empathy, not just with the primary 
intervention priority population but also with service 
providers and other supply-side actors. Additionally, 
transdisciplinary teams may need to generate consensus 
about how to cultivate empathy (Table 2).

Recruit and Work With Extreme Users

Including “extreme users” can spark creativity in 
researchers and ensure that a wide range of perspectives 
and desires are considered (Chen et al., 2020). In the 
context of low- and middle-income countries, recruiting 
extreme users as project partners is frequently challeng-
ing due to security, logistical concerns, and the political 
context. In A360, youth designers needed relatively high 
competencies to engage with HCD practitioners effec-
tively. Therefore, engaging the full spectrum of extreme 
user groups as partners was not feasible. Youth designers 
tended to be more urban, have higher educational attain-
ment, and be from higher socioeconomic groups com-
pared to the research participants. Nonetheless, youth 
designers helped the teams identify and access extreme 
users as respondents (Table 2).

Fakoya et al. / Ypar for adolescent sexual and reproductive health programming  29

TABLE 2
Adolescents 360 Experiences of Integrating Human-Centered Design Strategies Within Participatory Research Projects

Recommended 
action
Descriptions
Relevant case-based experiences: A360

Form 
transdisciplinary 
teams

Include individuals with 
complementary skill sets 
from “unexpected” 
(seemingly unrelated) 
fields.

•  Regular meetings, discussions, webinars, training, and careful work planning were needed to facilitate 
transdisciplinary dialogue of a physically distanced global team, agree on terms and concepts, and create 
convergence between the disciplines. For example, dialogue between HCD practitioners and public health 
researchers early in the project helped to build consensus about what constitutes “data,” what is “data 
management,” and how to reach analysis goals. Collectively the team agreed on feasible methods, aligned 
with research standards of the traditional researchers, that served the project’s design goals. Coming to 
this consensus required significant trust, vulnerability, and willingness to adapt in service of the best 
outcomes for the project.
•  Different phases of the program required different staffing models; teams evolved to incorporate staff with 
programmatic and clinical expertise during the prototyping phases. A360 facilitated involvement from 
Ministry of Health representatives from the outset of the design process, and we noted increased 
engagement and approval of the designed interventions compared with stakeholders who were not 
involved from the beginning of the project. The latter group found the HCD process confusing to follow 
and questioned the efficiency and utility of design research.
•  Embedding youth designers enhanced the validity of the analysis and interpretation of data; however, 
resources were limited for youth engagement, and consequently, in-country teams found it challenging to 
recruit and retain a sustained cohort of young people.

Cultivate greater 
empathy
Collect qualitative data from 
users in the context of 
their everyday lives, not 
just the problem to be 
investigated. Value all that 
they share.

•  In A360, service providers are fundamental to the delivery of the solutions, but this group was not fully 
considered in the initial design phase. By centering the perspectives and desires of adolescent girls, we 
neglected explicit cultivation of empathy with healthcare workers (e.g., deeper consideration for their 
workloads and flow and time constraints). While this was resolved in later stages, earlier engagement 
with service providers could have saved time and resources.
•  A360’s transdisciplinary team agreed that empathy was a central component to understanding adolescent 
contraceptive uptake but differed in their operational approach. For example, in HCD, empathy involves 
“stepping into the shoes” of the end-user to see design opportunities more clearly, whereas, in 
anthropology, empathy is a strategy for reserving judgment or subjectivity to create space to understand 
cultural context deeply. The shared value of cultivating empathy reinforced the concept as a core focus 
throughout design activities, elevating its importance in data collection and decision-making.
•  To cultivate greater empathy with adolescent girls, we used visual tools alongside interview guides that 
covered a broad spectrum of topics and these tools generated large quantities of data. The design research 
coding process occurs collaboratively, relying on in-person deliberations rather than using written 
transcripts and documented coding. Consequently, teams (particularly those who were new to design) 
struggled to synthesize insights using the rapid and iterative methods usual to design research.
•  Compared to socio-behavioral qualitative methods, design research analysis centered on fostering 
empathy can lack transparency; posing difficulty in documenting how themes and insights were 
generated from the data.

(continued)

30  HEALTH PROMOTION PRACTICE / January 2022

Recommended 
action
Descriptions
Relevant case-based experiences: A360

Recruit and work 
with extreme users
Gather data from users who 
fall on the far end of the 
spectrum on a given 
characteristic. List the 
demographic attributes, 
beliefs, and behavioral 
attributes for typical 
(“mainstream”) and 
atypical (“extreme”) users 
and recruit these extreme 
users in your research, 
especially for intervention 
development.

•  In the context of low- and middle-income countries, recruiting and working with extreme users was 
frequently challenging due to security, logistical concerns, and the political context. For example, in 
Ethiopia, inflexible interview timings limited the profile of respondents, and it was difficult to recruit 
male partners of adolescent girls since they may have feared the legal repercussions of being identified as 
married to a minor.
•  Prioritizing the safety of participants, especially when exploring sensitive topics, sometimes took 
precedence over including extreme users. In A360, issues affecting adolescent girls experiencing sexual 
and gender-based violence could not be explored in depth without compromising the privacy and safety 
of this group by isolating them from “mainstream” users.

Rapidly prototype
Test different ideas quickly 
for immediate feedback 
and quickly refine, build, 
and iterate.

•  At times prototypes challenged existing bodies of evidence. For example, design insights indicated girls’ 
desire for stand-alone centers to offer youth-friendly services, and near-peer mentors to support outreach 
and follow up, yet there is evidence of the ineffectiveness of these approaches (Norton et al., 2017). 
Therefore, the teams prototyped these services in a variety of versions or with various complementary 
components, to create an effective ecosystem of services rather than create a solution that the evidence 
did not support.

Create tangible 
products or 
services

Create a tangible solution 
that can be actually 
implemented and tested at 
the end of the research 
project (it can even be a 
piece of a product or 
service).

•  Initially, 6 months were allocated testing tangible solutions. However, delays during the design research 
phases shortened this phase to just 6 weeks per county. This duration was inadequate to rigorously test 
the solutions in real-world settings and feed data and learning back into the solutions to course correct.
•  Due to time and capacity constraints, teams found it challenging to balance refining tangible solutions 
with meeting targets and deadlines. Initially, HCD practitioners created detailed guidance manuals with 
instructions on how to implement the interventions with fidelity to the original design. These manuals 
were static examples of the interventions, and as a result, implementation teams struggled to apply them 
as they continued cultivating empathy with users to improve implementation or adapt the interventions. 
To rectify this problem, the project cocreated (with service providers and implementation teams) 
adaptation guidelines for each intervention. Using insights from the design research, teams distinguished 
between core intervention subcomponents (that should not be altered) and subcomponents requiring 
proactive iterative refinement. Adopting this segmented approach enabled teams to manage testing 
tangible solutions in varying real-world settings effectively.

Note. Adapted from Chen et al. (2020). HCD = human-centered design.

Table 2 (continued)

Fakoya et al. / Ypar for adolescent sexual and reproductive health programming  31

Resources, Frameworks, and Perspectives

Rapidly Prototype

Prototyping ideas that emerge from design research 
insights could increase efficacy and adoption (Chen et al., 
2020). In A360, resource constraints led to less youth 
involvement during the prototyping process than the 
research stage. In Tanzania, we obtained additional funding 
to recruit a team of youth experts to work alongside imple-
menters to develop and roll out innovations to improve 
girls’ engagement. Based on this positive experience, we 
recommend that practitioners ensure sufficient resources 
to sustain youth engagement. Some prototypes challenged 
existing bodies of evidence from one specific discipline 
but were promoted by insights generated through design 
research. We resolved tensions over such conflicting evi-
dence claims by returning to best practices: testing and 
then refining subcomponents of prototypes rather than 
creating interventions unsupported by evidence.

Create Tangible Products or Services

Chen et al. (2020) recommended creating and testing 
tangible solutions (e.g., products, services) in real time. 
We found this to be useful during prototyping; however, 
our experience (Table 2) demonstrated the importance of 
clarifying the purpose of tangible products or services. 
While tangible products are valuable because they make 
prototypes or concepts “real,” and allow practitioners 
to assess stakeholder reactions, these tangible elements 
often evolve as they come together, in part or whole, 
to form the final intervention model and strategy. The 
tangible solutions are not the “core” of the intervention, 
and fidelity to original designs should not be the primary 
goal. What is essential is the user journey—the intended 
adolescent experience of the intervention—and the 
design principles that inform tangible components and 
the theory of change upon which the designed solution is 
based. In A360, understanding implementation in terms 
of fidelity to this user journey has been paramount and 
has required the involvement of young people. Youth 
should have myriad roles in this pursuit—as research 
respondents, researchers, and staff empowered to adapt 
in response to emerging adolescent client experience.

>
>Conclusion

Chen et al. (2020) offered a useful framework for reflec-
tion on how HCD can enhance YPAR for intervention 

design and implementation. For A360, a key proposed 
area for continued learning is meaningful partnership 
with “extreme” adolescent users throughout design and 
implementation.

ORCID iDs

Ibidun Fakoya 
 https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3490-7607
Claire Cole 
 https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1725-822X