Original Paper

Web-Based System to Capture Consistent and Complete
Real-world Data of Physical Therapy Interventions Following Total
Knee Replacement: Design and Evaluation Study

Patricia D Franklin1, MBA, MPH, MD; Carol A Oatis2, PT, PhD; Hua Zheng3, PhD; Marie D Westby4, BScPT, PhD;
Wilfred Peter5, PhD; Jeremie Laraque-Two Elk6, PT, MPH, DPT; Joseph Rizk7, DPT; Ellen Benbow8, DPT; Wenjun
Li9, PhD

1Department of Medical Social Sciences, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, United States
2Arcadia University, Glenside, PA, United States
3Department of Orthopedics and Physical Rehabilitation, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA, United States
4Centre for Hip Health and Mobility, Vancouver Coastal Health Research Institute, Vancouver, BC, Canada
5Department of Orthopedics, Rehabilitation, and Physical Therapy, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands
6HealthPRO Heritage, Bellevue, WA, United States
7Cascade Rehabilitation Associates, Everett, WA, United States
8Magee Rehabilitation Hospital, Philadelphia, PA, United States
9Department of Public Health, University of Massachusetts-Lowell, Lowell, MA, United States

Patricia D Franklin, MBA, MPH, MD
Department of Medical Social Sciences
Feinberg School of Medicine
Northwestern University
625 N Michigan Ave
21st Floor
Chicago, IL, 60611
United States
Phone: 1 312 503 4645

Abstract

Background: 
Electronic health records (EHRs) have the potential to facilitate consistent clinical data capture to support
excellence in patient care, quality improvement, and knowledge generation. Despite widespread EHR use, the vision to transform
health care system and its data to a "learning health care system" generating knowledge from real-world data is limited by the
lack of consistent, structured clinical data.
Objective: The purpose of this paper was to demonstrate the design of a web-based structured clinical intervention data capture
system and its evaluation in practice. The use case was ambulatory physical therapy (PT) treatment after total knee replacement
(TKR), one of the most common and costly procedures today.
Methods: To identify the PT intervention type and intensity (or dose) used to treat patients with knee arthritis following TKR,
an iterative user-centered design process refined an initial list of PT interventions generated during preliminary chart reviews.
Input from practicing physical therapists and national and international experts refined and categorized the interventions. Next,
a web-based, hierarchical structured system for intervention and intensity documentation was designed and deployed.
Results: The PT documentation system was implemented by 114 physical therapists agreeing to record all interventions at
patient visits. Data for 161 patients with 2615 PT visits were entered by 83 physical therapists. No technical problems with data
entry were reported, and data entry required less than 2 minutes per visit. A total of 42 (2%) interventions could not be categorized
and were recorded using free text.
Conclusions: The use of user-centered design principles provides a road map for developing clinically feasible data capture
systems that employ structured collection of uniform data for use by multiple practitioners across institutions to complement and
augment existing EHRs. Secondarily, these data can be analyzed to define best practices and disseminate knowledge to practice.

JMIR Rehabil Assist Technol 2022 | vol. 9 | iss. 4 | e37714 | p. 1

(JMIR Rehabil Assist Technol 2022;9(4):e37714) doi: 10.2196/37714

KEYWORDS
structured data; web-based clinical data capture; physical therapy; total knee replacement; electronic health records; real-world
evidence; real-world data; data; therapy; knee; knee replacement; clinical intervention

Introduction

The health care system in the United States has moved
aggressively in the last decade to the use of electronic health
records (EHRs). A primary goal driving the transition to an
EHR is the EHR’s potential to facilitate consistent data capture
to support patient care and quality improvement in health care
[1,2]. Moreover, routine collection of clinical data, in
conjunction with insurance claims data, has the potential to
enhance comparative effectiveness research (CER), all leading
to improved patient outcomes. "Pragmatic trials" using
real-world evidence from EHRs can include many more diverse
individuals recruited from real-world settings and can assess
the interventions provided during standard clinical care. In
contrast, the usefulness of traditional randomized controlled
trials has been limited by the relatively small study sample sizes,
the tightly controlled inclusion and exclusion criteria of
participants, and the tightly regimented interventions tested
[3,4]. The realization of this vision will transform the clinical
care system to a “learning health care system” to generate new
knowledge from real-world data, while providing optimal care
to today’s patients. In contrast to this vision, data regarding the
EHR’s ability to improve clinical care, clinical research, and
ultimately patient outcomes are limited. Bartlett et al [5] report
that only 15% of US-based clinical trials published in 2017 in
high-impact journals could be replicated using data found in
EHRs or claims data. The investigators note that fewer than
40% of the reported interventions studied in randomized
controlled trials could be assessed using EHR data. The authors
suggest that improved EHR systems with predefined, consistent
data capture might enhance the ability to study interventions
via EHRs.

As an example, osteoarthritis (OA) is the most common
disabling condition in the United States, and knee OA is among
the most prevalent OAs [6,7]. When knee OA symptoms persist
despite medical care and physical therapy (PT), total knee
replacement (TKR) surgery is commonly elected. However,
limited CER evidence exists to define the components of optimal
post-TKR PT to achieve peak knee performance and physical
function. A 2018 retrospective study [8] of PT paper records
from patients seen at home or in ambulatory settings found that
of 156 records available for review, only 112 provided sufficient
intervention details to assess the quality of even a portion of
the interventions. Review of those records revealed that
interventions varied widely among physical therapists, with
only 5 exercises reported in more than 50% of the records.
Review also suggested that dosage of strengthening exercises
might be inadequate to derive a physiological response.
However, documentation was limited by incompleteness,
illegibility, lack of consistent vocabulary, and the use of jargon.

Beyond incomplete and inconsistent EHR documentation,
generalizable research requires integrating data across locations

and time. Today’s EHRs vary in structure, functions, and their
ability to capture structured data and extract and integrate
existing data. Inconsistent discrete variable definitions, broad
use of free-text fields, and limited embedded technical functions
to identify post-TKR patients and extract data are barriers [2].
Today’s PT practices use EHRs to serve billing and
administrative functions, but nonstructured treatment notes
persist and perpetuate the challenge of using real-world data to
define optimal PT practice in patients post TKR.

The purpose of this paper is to demonstrate the ability of a
user-designed, web-based data capture system to track detailed,
complete, and quantifiable PT interventions in patients following
TKR to serve CER. This paper presents the development,
deployment, and assessment of a structured data capture system
for physical therapists treating patients in any ambulatory setting
following TKR. The future goal of this data capture system is
to describe and quantify the interventions provided by physical
therapists to patients in all ambulatory care settings after TKR,
in preparation for a pragmatic study to determine the PT
interventions associated with optimal functional outcomes.
Although the data capture system presented in this paper is
designed for the specific patient population with knee OA post
TKR surgery, albeit one that constitutes a large proportion of
ambulatory PT care, we believe the existing system can be
applied to many patient populations with minor modifications.
More importantly, this paper offers design principles and a road
map for developing clinically feasible web-based data capture
systems that employ a structured collection of uniform clinical
data, allowing use by multiple practitioners across institutions
to complement and augment existing EHRs.

Methods

Ethics Approval

This research was approved by the Human Subjects Review
Board at the University of Massachusetts Chan Medical School
(H00012294_19).

Patient Involvement

Development of an interoperable data capture system involved
the following two distinct tasks proceeding in parallel: (1)
identification of the relevant content to be captured for a
thorough description of the PT intervention and (2) construction
of a user-friendly, Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act (HIPAA) Privacy Rule–compliant web-based
data capture method for use across diverse PT practices. The
following section presents these two tasks separately.

Content Development

To identify the PT intervention content to be captured, we used
an iterative user-centered design process building on the initial
list of treatments generated during our retrospective chart
review. The original list of interventions identified by chart

JMIR Rehabil Assist Technol 2022 | vol. 9 | iss. 4 | e37714 | p. 2

review was entered into a Microsoft Excel spreadsheet and
provided to 7 physical therapists and PT interns at 4 ambulatory
PT clinics. The clinics were located in geographic regions that
were different from those of clinics used in the original study.
The 7 physical therapists and interns were asked to record their
interventions on the spreadsheet and to add any interventions
they used that were not listed on the spreadsheet. The original
list of interventions was revised using the comments from the
new set of users.

The revised list was then sent to 4 nationally recognized experts
in PT post TKR care. These experts were asked to review the
list of interventions and revise them as needed. All 4 experts
shared the list with at least one practicing clinician for additional
input. We interviewed all 4 national experts to review their
comments and suggestions. The suggestions were compiled in
the next version of the intervention list and returned to the
national experts for further comment. Another round of revisions
occurred. These revisions included dividing the list of
interventions into 8 distinct categories. Finally, the next version
of the intervention list was sent to 2 international physical
therapist experts. They reviewed the list of interventions and
discussed their suggestions in a series of 2 conference calls with
the investigators. These discussions included suggestions on
how to describe intensity and dosage. The investigators

incorporated the suggestions and developed a final menu of
possible interventions that could be provided by a physical
therapist in an ambulatory setting to patients post TKR.

The process of review and revision took approximately one year
to complete and resulted in a list of 141 interventions organized
in 8 categories. Each intervention included additional parameters
used to describe dosage and intensity. A file of intervention
definitions was also generated, so clinicians could recognize an
intervention by the definition, regardless of the name of the
intervention (Multimedia Appendix 1).

Informatics Development

The primary purpose of this research was to validate and refine,
as needed, the PT intervention documentation system prior to
future integration with EHRs. Because this documentation would
supplement 
the 
existing 
PT 
EHR 
system, 
efficient
documentation and ease of use were priorities. The informatics
team identified a HIPAA-compliant web-based software
(Quickbase) that can capture discrete PT interventions and
intensity details. Priority features included (1) secure and simple
log-in and patient registration for PT efficiency and (2)
hierarchical documentation structure to allow the physical
therapist to quickly review the 8 categories and select
interventions within only the relevant categories for each PT
visit (Figure 1).

Figure 1. Sample structure of web-based physical therapy intervention capture system.

JMIR Rehabil Assist Technol 2022 | vol. 9 | iss. 4 | e37714 | p. 3

Log-in and Patient Registration

Each physical therapist is assigned a unique log-in account and
the password is updated every 60 days for data security purpose.
The home page of the system includes an “Add New Patient”
button from which the physical therapist enters basic patient
information to register a new patient. The system automatically
generates a unique ID for each patient.

Intervention: Hierarchical Documentation of
Interventions and Intensity

Once a patient is registered in the system, an “Add Visit” button
is displayed on the patient record. The physical therapist can
add as many PT visits as needed for one patient, and each visit
is assigned a record ID as well. On each visit page, the visit

date and the interventions provided by the physical therapist
are entered. The intervention data collection is structured by
category. For each of the 8 categories, the physical therapist
selects interventions from the list within the relevant category.
Once the intervention is selected, repetitions, sets, resistance,
and other related fields appear for data entry (Figure 2). A
complex branching logic was built to support the entry screen
that displays or hides the data fields for each selected
intervention. This hierarchical structure provides an efficient
and organized user interface for detailed and accurate
intervention documentation.

The workflow for the physical therapist entering documentation
data into the system is listed in Figure 3. This process exactly
parallels how the EHR fits into the PT clinical workflow.

Figure 2. Data entry fields for physical therapy intervention intensity details, including repetitions, sets, resistance, and other related options.

Figure 3. Workflow for physical therapist entering physical therapy intervention documentation.

JMIR Rehabil Assist Technol 2022 | vol. 9 | iss. 4 | e37714 | p. 4

System Deployment

We deployed the data capture system in 8 PT practices with 33
different office sites; 3 practices were located in central
Massachusetts, 1 in Rhode Island, and 4 in southeastern
Pennsylvania. A total of 107 physical therapists and 7 physical
therapist assistants who treat patients post TKR at these practices
agreed to document in the intervention system at each patient
visit. Each physical therapist agreed to help identify eligible
patients, complete a brief survey describing his or her
educational and professional background, and enter the complete
intervention data for every visit for up to 5 enrolled patients.
Participating practices were reimbursed US $50 for each
completed patient record documenting the content of each PT
visit. Each participating physical therapist attended one or two
45-minute web-based training sessions to learn about the study
and to learn how to use the data capture system.

Assessment

The clinical feasibility of the data capture system was assessed
in multiple ways. Therapists could contact IT support if they
experienced problems with the website or technical difficulties
in entering data. System function was assessed by the number
and type of IT support contacts during the study. Physical
therapists were also instructed to use a “Clinical Notes” text
box in the data capture system to identify any interventions they
used but were unable to find in the intervention menus.
Therapists could also use the text box to add additional
information that they wished to include for daily documentation.
At least two trained PT reviewers reviewed the “Clinical Notes”
text boxes to determine if they contained (1) additional
information about interventions already included in the menus,
(2) interventions that were available in the menu but not entered,
or (3) interventions not represented in the menus. To evaluate
the completeness of the documentation system, we identified
the frequency of visits in which the text box was used, the
frequency of visits where interventions were identified in the
clinical texts but not entered in the menus, and the number of
physical therapists associated with these texts. We also

determined how often interventions listed in the text box were
unavailable in the menus.

Statistical Methods

We used descriptive analysis of aggregate data on the use of
the PT data reporting system. No other statistical analyses were
used.

Results

Content and Informatics Development

The final post-TKR PT intervention system is a web-based,
menu-driven data collection system using a HIPAA-compliant
platform. Interventions are organized into 8 categories, each
with its own drop-down menu. The categories include the
following: strengthening exercises; flexibility exercises; aerobic
exercises; balance, mobility, and agility; task-specific training;
manual therapy; modalities; and patient education. The number
of possible interventions varied within each of these categories
from a high of 62 possible knee or hip strengthening
interventions to a low of 6 possible patient education
interventions. Within each intervention, additional drop-down
menus appear to describe dose and intensity of each intervention.

The original menus included 141 interventions; however, after
monitoring the “Clinical Notes” text boxes for approximately
two months, two additional interventions (n=143) were added
to the menus, and definitions for 3 interventions were revised
for clarity.

System Deployment

A total of 107 therapists and 7 physical therapist assistants were
trained in data entry. Over a period of approximately two years,
data for 161 patients with 2615 patient visits were entered by
83 physical therapists or physical therapist assistants. Only
therapists and assistants treating participating patients with new
unilateral TKRs during the study recruitment period entered
data. The characteristics of the participating patients are reported
in Table 1 and are consistent with the national averages of
patients receiving TKR.

Table 1. Patient characteristics (N=161).

Values
Characteristics

66 (8.4)
Age (years), mean (SD)

108 (67)
Female, n (%)

30.4 (5.4)
BMI, mean (SD)

15.8 (9.8)
Visits, mean (SD)

42 (26.1)
Side of surgery (right), n (%)a

aA total of 81 (50.2%) cases were unspecified.

Assessment

No technical problems with the data capture system were
reported over that period, and therapists noted that data entry
was quick and easy, typically taking less than 2 minutes. When
therapists had questions about how to enter individual
interventions, support was provided to help them locate the

intervention in the menu. Questions regarding interventions
were infrequent and usually occurred on first attempts to enter
data.

A total of 47 (57%) physical therapists used the “Clinical Notes”
text box at least once to describe or list at least one intervention
or to add assessment data for a daily note. Investigator review
found clinical notes from 16% (428/2615) of visits’ listed

JMIR Rehabil Assist Technol 2022 | vol. 9 | iss. 4 | e37714 | p. 5

interventions. Thus, 84% (n=2187) of total PT visits documented
all interventions using existing system categories. The most
common reason (162 visits, 6.2%) for including interventions
in the text box was that the therapist exceeded the maximum
allowable number (ie, 10) of strengthening exercises. In 262
(10%) visits, the physical therapist listed interventions in the
text box that were available in the intervention menus, but the
therapist did not choose from the menu. A total of 42 (2%) visits
included interventions in the text box that were not available in
the menus. In these 42 visits, there were only 5 unique
interventions not available in the menus.

Discussion

Principal Findings

In this paper we demonstrate that it is possible to develop a
structured, menu-driven data capture system to collect detailed,
discrete, and quantifiable intervention data across multiple
physical therapists and practice sites in patients post TKR. The
system was technically reliable with no reported technical
difficulties. The system’s usability is supported by the
longitudinal documentation of post-TKR sessions by 83 physical
therapists or physical therapist assistants across diverse PT
practices. The users noted that data entry was easy and quick.
One user noted that it was easier than the clinic’s own EHR.

A total of 16% (428/2615) of visits included text to describe
PT interventions, but much of the text provided additional
information about the patient encounter, such as objective
measures of outcomes. Some of the data entries listed
interventions that were available in the intervention menus that
the physical therapist had not identified. One reason for this
was that the system imposed a maximum of 10 interventions
for the strengthening exercise category. Removing this limit
will eliminate the need to document more exercises in text.
Some physical therapists listed interventions that they had not
found in the menus, although those interventions were available.
More extensive training of the users to ensure that they are
familiar with all intervention menus will further minimize the
need for text entry. In only 42 (2%) of over 2600 PT visits, there
were new interventions listed in the text box that were not
included in the menus. If our future outcome analyses find that
any of these interventions are associated with positive outcomes,
they can easily be added to the menus. Overall, fewer than 2%
of the thousands of visits included an intervention that was not
included in the documentation system.

Prusaczyk et al [9] suggest that complex interventions may be
assessed through the use of EHRs if assessors evaluate all the
data found in the record including open text extraction.
However, wide application of open text extraction is challenged
by the absence of a common vocabulary across treatment sites
and the common use of jargon. Further, our preliminary research
found that physical therapists did not document all interventions,
compromising the use of text extraction [8]. The use of the
EHRs for clinical research or quality improvement assessments
of daily practice requires that uniform data are collected using
a structured format.

It is important to note that the extensive list of interventions in
our data capture system was designed to provide an exhaustive
list of any conceivable intervention that a physical therapist or
physical therapist assistant might use with a patient post TKR.
The ultimate goal of our study is to identify those interventions
and treatment factors that are associated with greatest knee
performance and functional outcomes. These analyses are
ongoing. After those interventions and factors are identified,
the data capture system can be simplified and tailored to
facilitate the application of the preferred interventions. For
example, the most commonly used interventions can be listed
first. In addition, a future iteration of the system can incorporate
real-time clinical decision support principles to encourage
physical therapists to adopt interventions associated with optimal
outcomes or to advance intensity and repetitions. Despite the
use of our exhaustive list of interventions, the users estimated
that the time for data entry was approximately 2 minutes per
visit. The proposed future enhancements may further improve
upon the documentation efficiency and add clinical value
through recording comprehensive and specific intervention
details. Last, the structure and content could be integrated with
existing PT EHRs to eliminate the second log-in and assure no
redundancy exists between the administrative EHR functions
and consistent PT intervention documentation.

The ability to successfully capture detailed intervention data
representing real-world evidence, across multiple sites and
providers, enhances the potential of future CER to identify best
PT practices. The current data capture system can be readily
adapted for use in many populations receiving PT, where care
is known to exhibit significant unexplained practice variation.
Importantly, we believe that the framework we used to develop
this data capture system can be applied across the health care
system, with a priority on treatments for which additional
comparative effectiveness evidence is needed. Our data capture
system was successful for several reasons. The data capture
system was intended to capture relevant and detailed clinical
data. Although the intervention data could easily be mapped
onto reimbursement algorithms for billing purposes, its primary
focus was clinical applications. Additionally, the system was
designed by individuals familiar with the health services being
provided, so the information gathered was consistent with
clinical practice. The process of identifying the data to be
captured was iterative, involving a broader review by more
potential users at each level. Finally, a dictionary of clinical
interventions was generated to ensure the collection of uniform
data.

Limitations and Future Considerations

The data collection system described in this paper is a prototype;
it is not integrated into any health system’s electronic medical
record. Future studies will assess its effectiveness and efficiency
in the real world by integrating it into existing EHRs. Although
almost 100 clinicians entered data collected from over 160
patients, testing will be improved by increasing the number of
therapists entering data and the number of patients whose data
are recorded. Finally, some therapists did not use the available
menus effectively. Improved training for clinicians and their
use of the data capture system over an extended period will

JMIR Rehabil Assist Technol 2022 | vol. 9 | iss. 4 | e37714 | p. 6

improve their ability to use the system effectively and
efficiently.

In conclusion, we have demonstrated that a structured data
capture system to collect detailed quantifiable intervention data
from multiple physical therapists at multiple sites is feasible
and effective. Development of the system required involvement
of potential end users and broad review to ensure the collection
of a uniform yet complete data set. We believe this approach

can be used by multiple health care disciplines to develop data
capture systems that produce real-world evidence, suitable for
quality improvement processes as well as for comparative
effectiveness and outcomes research. In the future, clinical
registries and EHRs can adopt structured health intervention
documentation taxonomies, such as we describe, to assure
complete, consistent real-world evidence to accelerate the
potential for learning health systems