Original Paper

Promoting Engagement With Smartphone Apps for Suicidal
Ideation in Young People: Development of an Adjunctive Strategy
Using a Lived Experience Participatory Design Approach

Daniel Z Q Gan, MSocSci; Lauren McGillivray, PhD; Mark Erik Larsen, PhD; Taylor Bloomfield, BPsychSc; Michelle
Torok, PhD

Black Dog Institute, University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia

Daniel Z Q Gan, MSocSci
Black Dog Institute
University of New South Wales
Hospital Road
Sydney, NSW 2031
Australia
Phone: 61 423828945

Abstract

Background: 
Suicide among young people is a worrying public health concern. Despite this, there is a lack of suitable
interventions aligned with the needs of this priority population. Emerging evidence supports the effectiveness of digital interventions
in alleviating the severity of suicidal thoughts. However, their efficacy may be undermined by poor engagement.
Technology-supported strategies (eg, electronic prompts and reminders) have been deployed alongside digital interventions to
increase engagement with the latter. However, evidence of their efficacy is inconclusive. User-centered design approaches may
be key to developing feasible and effective engagement strategies. Currently, no study has been published on how such an approach
might be expressly applied toward developing strategies for promoting engagement with digital interventions.
Objective: This study aimed to detail the processes and activities involved in developing an adjunctive strategy for promoting
engagement with LifeBuoy—a smartphone app that helps young people manage suicidal thoughts.

Methods: Development of the engagement strategy took place in 2 phases. The discovery phase aimed to create an initial
prototype by synthesizing earlier findings—from 2 systematic reviews and a cross-sectional survey of the broader mental health
app user population—with qualitative insights from LifeBuoy users. A total of 16 web-based interviews were conducted with
young people who participated in the LifeBuoy trial. Following the discovery phase, 3 interviewees were invited by the research
team to take part in the workshops in the design phase, which sought to create a final prototype by making iterative improvements
to the initial prototype. These improvements were conducted over 2 workshops. Thematic analysis was used to analyze the
qualitative data obtained from the interviews and workshops.
Results: 
Main themes from the interviews centered around the characteristics of the strategy, timing of notifications, and
suitability of social media platforms. Subsequently, themes that emerged from the design workshops emphasized having a wider
variety of content, greater visual consistency with LifeBuoy, and a component with more detailed information to cater to users
with greater informational needs. Thus, refinements to the prototype were focused on (1) improving the succinctness, variety,
and practical value of Instagram content, (2) creating a blog containing articles contributed by mental health professionals and
young people with lived experience of suicide, and (3) standardizing the use of marine-themed color palettes across the Instagram
and blog components.
Conclusions: This is the first study to describe the development of a technology-supported adjunctive strategy for promoting
engagement with a digital intervention. It was developed by integrating perspectives from end users with lived experience of
suicide with evidence from the existing literature. The development process documented in this study may be useful for guiding
similar projects aimed at supporting the use of digital interventions for suicide prevention or mental health.

(JMIR Form Res 2023;7:e45234) doi: 10.2196/45234

JMIR Form Res 2023 | vol. 7 | e45234 | p. 1

KEYWORDS
eHealth; digital mental health; smartphone app; engagement; youth suicide prevention; qualitative methods; suicide; development;
youth; mental health; support; user-centered; design; survey; interview; prototype; prevention; participatory design; mobile phone

Introduction

Suicide among young people is a significant global public health
concern [1]. In Australia, suicide is the leading cause of death
among individuals aged 15 to 24 years [2]. Though it is well
recognized that young people have different and unique mental
health needs compared to adults [3], there continue to be few
resources and interventions that have been specifically designed
for young people and that have evidence for preventing
suicide-related outcomes [4]. Self-guided digital mental health
interventions (DMHIs) delivered through smartphone apps or
web-based platforms without human guidance have rapidly
emerged as a potential low-cost and scalable model of care for
young people experiencing suicidal ideation, self-harm, and
mental health issues [5].

Findings from a recent meta-analysis of self-guided DMHIs for
suicide prevention show that self-guided digital interventions
directly targeting suicidal ideation are effective in reducing the
severity of suicidal thoughts, although evidence specifically in
relation to young people is still rare [6]. However, there is ample
evidence indicating that low levels of user engagement with
DMHIs have hindered the real-world uptake of these
interventions [7,8], including DMHIs targeted at younger users
[9,10]. In addition, poor engagement—stopping use of a digital
intervention before the minimum number of modules that are
expected to lead to clinical benefits have been completed—may
also impede mental health benefits that could potentially be
gained from DMHIs [11]. For these reasons, solutions for
optimizing user engagement with DMHIs represent a critical
step toward advancing the wider integration of digital
interventions in routine practices of health, education, and
community settings where they can reach and benefit young
people.

To date, there is inconclusive evidence supporting the efficacy
of technology-supported strategies (eg, reminders, coaching,
and personalized feedback) toward improving engagement with
DMHIs [12]. It has been hypothesized that the lack of efficacy
associated with these engagement strategies may be due to poor
alignment with the needs and preferences of users [13]. Indeed,
there is little evidence that such engagement strategies have
been co-designed with, or incorporated the perspectives of,
those who are intended to benefit from DMHIs [4]. To improve
the effectiveness of both DMHIs and any supporting engagement
strategies, adopting user-centered design approaches—such as
participatory design or co-design—has been strongly
recommended [14]. While several studies have now described

processes of actively involving service users in the development
of mental health–focused digital interventions for youth and
young people [4,15], no studies have yet discussed such
processes in the context of adjunctive strategies—strategies that
are accessed externally to DMHIs (eg, via social media or the
internet) but are designed to be used in conjunction with the
latter—for promoting engagement with digital interventions.

This study details the development of a technology-supported
adjunctive strategy for increasing engagement with LifeBuoy
[16]—a smartphone app designed to help young people manage
suicidal thoughts. LifeBuoy seeks to achieve this by imparting
distress tolerance and emotional regulation skills that are
grounded in dialectical behavior therapy and acceptance and
commitment therapy.

A recent evaluation of LifeBuoy supported the app’s efficacy
in reducing the severity of suicidal ideation but not other
outcomes of interest such as depression, anxiety, or general
psychological distress [16]. Additionally, while module
completion rates were high, most participants stopped engaging
with the app after a month [16]. By adding an adjunctive strategy
to reinforce therapeutic content and enhance sustained
engagement with the app, we hoped to see improvements across
both mental health and suicidality-related outcomes.

Our design approach integrated existing literature with
qualitative insights obtained from young people with lived
experience of suicide. This study is the first to discuss how
user-focused design practices may be applied in developing
strategies for promoting engagement with DMHIs for young
people.

Methods

Overview

The development process, summarized in Figure 1, consisted
of 2 main phases. The aim of the discovery phase was to develop
an initial prototype of the engagement strategy. This was carried
out by integrating existing evidence from the literature with the
perspectives of (1) the broader population of mental health app
users and (2) LifeBuoy users. Subsequently, the design phase
sought to iteratively refine this initial prototype. This was
achieved by collaborating with a smaller group of LifeBuoy
users across 2 design workshops, culminating in the final version
of the strategy. The sections that follow will focus on the
interviews conducted during the discovery phase and the
workshops conducted during the design phase.

JMIR Form Res 2023 | vol. 7 | e45234 | p. 2

Figure 1. Overview of the approach used in developing the adjunctive strategy for LifeBuoy.

Discovery Phase: Development of the Initial Prototype

Activities

Three broad activities were conducted in the discovery phase.
First, 2 systematic reviews were conducted to (1) clarify the
association between engagement and mental health outcomes
in the context of digital interventions [11] and (2) explore the
range of strategies that have been used to promote engagement
with these interventions [12]. The main findings of these reviews
have been discussed earlier. Collectively, they highlighted the
importance of adopting a user-centered approach in developing
strategies for promoting engagement with DMHIs.

Second, a cross-sectional survey of mental health app users in
Australia was conducted to gather insights on the feasibility
and acceptability of potential strategies for promoting
engagement [17]. Key insights that were directly relevant to the

development of the engagement strategy for LifeBuoy were that
(1) content should be brief, practical, and digestible; (2) the
strategy should be visually appealing; and (3) social media
might be an acceptable platform for the strategy among young
adult users [17].

This paper is focused on describing the third group of
activities—semistructured qualitative interviews of LifeBuoy
users. The interviews were conducted to assess the acceptability
of having an adjunctive strategy and gain users’ perspectives
on the specific characteristics (eg, content, design, medium or
platform, and frequency of delivery) that this strategy should
possess.

Interview Participants

A total of 16 young people who had been allocated to the
intervention condition in the LifeBuoy trial were invited to take
part in the interviews. All participants were recruited on a

JMIR Form Res 2023 | vol. 7 | e45234 | p. 3

first-in-first-served basis and met the trial inclusion criteria: (1)
being aged 18 to 25 years, (2) having previously experienced
suicidal thoughts, (3) being conversant in English, (4) living in
Australia, and (5) being a smartphone user.

Interview Materials

Interviews were conducted using a semistructured guide
developed by LM and MT (see Multimedia Appendix 1). Young
people were asked about their views regarding the suitability
of possible adjunctive strategies for promoting engagement with
LifeBuoy. Based on the existing literature, strategies that have
been used to increase engagement with digital interventions for
mental health include electronic prompts [18], fun facts [19],
and quizzes [20]. These strategies were of interest in this study,
as they did not require ongoing human support, consistent with
the self-guided delivery model of the LifeBuoy app. In addition,
given the widespread use of social media among young
Australians [21], interviewees were also asked whether they
thought an accompanying social media account would help
improve engagement with LifeBuoy.

Interview Procedure

After completing the 6-week postintervention survey in the
LifeBuoy trial, invitations to participate in a qualitative interview
were sent to young people allocated to the intervention
condition. Invitation distribution was automated using the Black
Dog Institute’s bespoke trial management software.

Young people who expressed interest in being interviewed were
subsequently contacted, via email, by a member of the research
team to schedule a date and time. They were also provided with
a soft copy of the participant information sheet and consent
form that was specific to the qualitative interview. Before
starting the interview, participants were given a chance to ask
any questions about the study and asked to read the declaration
of consent aloud to demonstrate opt-in consent.

All interviews were conducted and recorded using Zoom
videoconferencing software. Each interview lasted no longer
than 30 minutes. Audio recordings of the interviews were
transcribed by a professional transcription service.

Design Phase: Refining the Initial Prototype

Activities

Findings from the interviews were analyzed (see Data Analysis
section) and integrated with insights from the survey and
systematic reviews to create an initial prototype of the
engagement strategy. Two design workshops were then
conducted to iteratively refine this initial prototype. An agenda
for each workshop can be found in Multimedia Appendix 2.
Best 
practices 
in 
participatory 
and 
co-design
methodology—including adopting a design-led approach,
sharing decision-making power fairly between researchers and
end users, and treating professional expertise and lived
experience with equal value [22,23]—were applied to the way
in which the workshops were conducted.

Workshop Participants

Three young people who took part in the qualitative interviews
were invited to participate in the workshops as lived experience

advisors. They were invited to these workshops by LM and
DZQG based on the depth of insights and expressive
communication displayed during the qualitative interviews.
Verbal consent to participate was recorded at the first workshop.

Workshop Procedure

Before starting the first workshop, advisors were given a chance
to ask any questions about the study and read the declaration
of consent aloud. To preserve anonymity, advisors were asked
to turn off their cameras and change their display names to
pseudonyms before audio recording commenced. Both
workshops were conducted remotely over Zoom.

The first workshop was focused on the content and aesthetics
of the engagement strategy. Discussions were centered on
improving the quality and alignment of existing content with
the profile of LifeBuoy users. Similarly, advisors were asked
for their feedback on the aesthetics of the current prototype.
Insights obtained from this workshop were used to revise the
initial prototype.

Two weeks before the second workshop, the revised prototype
was disseminated to advisors via email. Besides further
discussions on the content and design of the revised strategy,
the second workshop also focused on the implementation of
this strategy. Specific prompts and questions used to elicit
discussion can be found in Multimedia Appendix 2.

Data Analysis

Thematic analysis was used to analyze qualitative data from
the interviews and workshops because of its rigorous
methodology and suitability for use in applied research [24,25].
The first step involved familiarization with the data sets and
concurrent verification of transcription accuracy by the first
author (DZQG). Grammatical and spelling errors for each
transcript were corrected as the audio was cross-checked against
the transcription. Initial impressions of the data set were then
used to generate a list of preliminary codes. Thereafter, an initial
coding framework was drafted, and potential themes were
generated. An inductive approach was used to identify and
organize codes into themes to minimize the potential influence
of preconceived opinions.

A second researcher (LM) helped to refine and finalize the
coding frame. Consensus on the suggested themes and codes
was reached through a discussion between DZQG and LM. In
total, 50% of the interview and workshop data sets were double
coded by DZQG and LM using the final coding framework,
achieving an average agreement of 82%. The remaining
transcripts were coded by DZQG. All authors conducted a final
evaluation of the alignment between the suggested themes and
the codes. NVivo (version 12; QSR International) was used to
perform all qualitative analyses.

Risk Management

Young people who took part in the interviews and workshops
were encouraged to inform the researchers verbally, or by
private chat message in the videoconferencing platform, if they
were feeling distressed, needed a break, wanted the session to
be stopped, or wanted to withdraw their participation. In
addition, they were informed that they had immediate access

JMIR Form Res 2023 | vol. 7 | e45234 | p. 4

to speak with the team clinical psychologist and would be
contacted by the team clinical psychologist within 48 hours if
they required support. At the end of every interview and
workshop, participants were asked if they were feeling distressed
and reminded of this support as well as external supports such
as their primary health care professional or Lifeline Australia
(24-hour crisis contact).

Ethics Approval

These research activities were conducted in accordance with
the Declaration of Helsinki and approved by the University of
New South Wales Human Research Ethics Committee
(HC190764 and HC200616). Participants for both the
semistructured interviews and design workshops were provided
with a soft copy of the participant information sheet and consent
form at least 2 days before the scheduled research activity. All
study data were anonymous. Pseudonyms were used during the
interviews and design workshops to ensure protection of the
identities of participants. Interview participants each received
an AUD $30 (US $20) e-gift card to reimburse them for their
time. Lived experience advisors were reimbursed at a rate of
AUD $60 (US $40) per hour for time spent during the design
workshops and reviewing content shared via email outside of
the workshops. This rate was based on the Black Dog Institute’s
paid participation policy for individuals with lived experience
[26].

Results

Characteristics of Interview and Workshop
Participants

The 16 participants interviewed were mostly female (n=12,
75%; n=2, 13% male; n=2, 13% nonbinary) and had a mean
age of 21.1 (SD 2.49) years. Just over half of the participants
(n=9, 56%) identified as belonging to a sexual minority group.
All 16 participants reported previously being diagnosed with a
mental illness, and 15 (94%) reported receiving prior mental
health treatment. In total, 8 participants (50%) reported a history
of attempted suicide. Participants completed an average of 5.94
(SD 1.88) modules, with 10 participants (63%) completing all
7 modules. Overall, these demographic, clinical, and intervention
usage characteristics were representative of the subsample of
participants randomized to the intervention condition (n=228)
in the LifeBuoy evaluation study [16]. Workshop participants
were 2 women and 1 man (age range 19-24 years). In this study,
we did not have any participants reporting distress or requiring
follow-up intervention.

Developing the Initial Prototype

Findings from the interviews and their implications for the
design of the engagement strategy are summarized in Table 1.

Table 1. Themes and design implications from the qualitative interviews.

Design implications
Quotes
Key themes and subthemes

1. Characteristics of the adjunctive strategy

Type of content provided, and the way
it is presented, needs to capture the inter-
est of users.

I love learning things … a quiz would be a lot of fun and
little fun facts would, stick out more against all the notifica-
tions on the phone. [Participant #1]

Unique or interesting features

Content needs to be well-aligned with
users’ needs.
If it's stuff where it's like, oh, I can actually use that informa-
tion, or do something with that. [Participant #5]
Useful and applicable content

2. Timing of notifications

Weekly notifications may be most appro-
priate.
I guess personally, I find when I have a reminder on my
phone that goes off every day, I quickly start to ignore it. So
maybe if it's too consistent, it sort of gets overlooked. [Par-
ticipant #15]

Regular, but not too frequent

Users may be more available to attend
to notifications pushed out on weekends
than weekdays.

…maybe weekends, where I don't have other things on.
[Participant #3]
Type of day

Mornings and early evenings may be the
most suitable times of the day for push-
ing notifications.

I guess probably two times, either in the morning before
9AM, like before I wake up… Or the other time would
probably be maybe towards the end of the day. So, maybe
like 7-8PM. [Participant #8]

Time of day

3. Suitability of social media

Using Instagram as a platform will re-
duce the inertia toward users having to
learn a new platform.

I love a good social media page. I think most people our age
probably do. [Participant #5]
Familiarity

Users may feel more motivated to attend
to the strategy and app if they are aware
that they are not alone in the challenges
they face.

I like when there's sort of a community aspect to it. Liking
this page and doing that, it just sort of makes you more in-
volved in the whole process. And it also reminds you if you're
just scrolling through Facebook and then you see a post,
then it will remind you, oh, maybe I'll use the app now or
later because sometimes it's easy to forget. [Participant #3]

Sense of community

JMIR Form Res 2023 | vol. 7 | e45234 | p. 5

Theme 1: Characteristics of the Adjunctive Strategy

Participants agreed that the strategy needed to be able to pique
users’ attention and interest and that the best way to achieve
this would be to use methods different than conventional
notifications or reminders on smartphone apps. These might
motivate users to attend to the strategy and, subsequently,
engage with the app.

Participants also expressed being more inclined to attend to the
strategy if it provided information that they found useful and
applicable to their situation. This might then lead them to engage
with the app.

Theme 2: Timing of Notifications

When asked about their preferred frequency at which
notifications should be disseminated, participants expressed
preference for receiving them regularly (eg, weekly) but not too
frequently (eg, daily). Most of them explained that being notified
too frequently could be frustrating or desensitizing and would
lead them to ignore notifications.

Some participants expressed that they were more likely to
respond to notifications from the adjunctive strategy on
weekends, as they were less likely to be busy with other
activities compared to weekdays. Other participants felt that
they would attend to notifications sent on weekdays if these
were sent at the beginning or at the end of their day. Specifically,
the time intervals between (1) waking up and before school or

working hours and (2) after school or working hours but before
bed were the most feasible.

Theme 3: Suitability of Social Media

There was strong support for leveraging social media to engage
young people with the intervention. All but 2 participants had
positive views about using social media as a platform through
which the engagement strategy is accessed. This was due to
general familiarity with these platforms, as well as prior use of
these platforms for the specific purpose of seeking help for
mental health needs. Most participants reported that Instagram
was their preferred platform.

Furthermore, some participants noted that a social media
platform has the potential to foster a sense of community among
LifeBuoy users. This would assist with reminding users that
they are in the help-seeking process together with others who
share their struggles. Engagement with social media will also
serve as an indirect reminder for them to check the app out.

Refining the Initial Prototype

Overall, three main themes emerged over the 2 design
workshops, and these themes were centered around (1)
characteristics (content and dissemination), (2) aesthetic design,
and (3) a component with in-depth information. Subthemes,
representative quotes, and design implications are outlined in
Table 2.

JMIR Form Res 2023 | vol. 7 | e45234 | p. 6

Table 2. Themes and design implications from the design workshops.

Design implications
Quotes
Key themes and sub-
themes

1. Content and information provided

Practical and easy
to use in everyday
life

•
•
Include simple, time-effective activities that
can provide immediate benefits in mental
health.

I'd probably more likely engage with mindfulness self-care or dis-
tress management, maybe breathing as well. [Advisor #1]

Uplifting and moti-
vational
•
•
Include information that encourages and in-
spires.
… self-care and self-value, self-worth, belief is something that I just
constantly need drilled into me [Advisor #2]

•
•
Avoid clichéd, idealistic phrases.
I really appreciated some of the messages behind the posts…I feel
like they would be really uplifting and inspiring, which I think is
what we're going for here, which is great...definitely somewhere
between corny and inspirational. [Advisor #3]

Emotionally vali-
dating
•
•
Information should resonate with the feelings
that users may be experiencing.
It doesn't even have to necessarily talk about how it (suicidal
thoughts) works biologically, but just some info regarding... Even
just statistics, the reminder that it is normal to experience these
things occasionally. Just a little bit about how many people have
it, or ways to cope … any sort of message, whichever way it's put,
really needs to have that backing of validation. [Advisor #1]

•
Avoid presenting facts, tips, or advice in a
stoic manner. Instead, wording of content
needs to be positive, optimistic, and nurtur-
ing.

Refrain from adver-
tising or hard-sell-
ing LifeBuoy

•
•
Avoid language that may come across as
promoting the app too strongly.
I think it is very important that we don't come off as a “Here's a
corporation that are pretending to care about you” kind of thing,
which I know obviously LifeBuoy is not, but it is important to try
and not be seen as that. [Advisor #3]

Frequency and
timing
•
•
Weekly notifications may have a greater
likelihood of being attended to if sent in the
late afternoon or early evening on weekdays,
once a week.

I think it's good to have it once a week to remind people that it is
important to look after your mental health, but it's not too much
that it's like, “My gosh, I'm being bombarded with having to look
after myself”. [Advisor #3]
•
I think 4:00(pm) till 7:00(pm) is good. I do believe that after a cer-
tain time, you've already sort of wound down. You're not going to
get engagement. I certainly don't want to engage after a certain
time of the night. [Advisor #1]

2. Aesthetic design

Calming
•
•
Use backgrounds that users find calming; for
instance, nature-themed backgrounds with
less vibrant colors or a water-themed color
palette.

I feel like nature's always one of those things that a lot of people
find it kind of rejuvenating to see … a simple aesthetic stock photo
would be my favourite. [Advisor #3]
•
The nature ones would be good for breathing and mindfulness…
the colors were nice. I thought the light blue was really calming to
come into. [Advisor #1]

Clear to read
•
•
Ensure sufficient color contrast between
words and their background for easier read-
ing.

Instead of just having the plain background, there's like a tiny, semi-
transparent white text box behind the actual text, which I think
makes a text a lot easier to read. It doesn't overload your brain on
trying to find where the words are. [Advisor #3]

3. Option for more detailed content

Preference for
more information
•
•
Cater to users with greater information needs.
I agree, it (blog) would be a great resource to be able to go to if
you wanted to know more, if you finished ‘Isle Know-It-All’(one
of the islands in the LifeBuoy app) in two seconds and you're like,
“Oh, I don't know at all yet. I want to know more”. [Advisor #2]

Targeted advice on
help-seeking
•
•
Provide tips for first-time therapy seekers on
what to expect and how to manage their sui-
cidal feelings.

One topic that really stands out for me, that goes in line with the
posts that are already there, would be what would happen if you
were to tell your psychologist that you have suicidal thoughts or I
have suicidal ideation and it's scaring me, sort of thing, what do I
do about it? [Advisor #1]

JMIR Form Res 2023 | vol. 7 | e45234 | p. 7

Theme 1: Characteristics of the Engagement Strategy

Advisors expressed a preference for content that was simple
and actionable. They shared that, during times of acute
psychological distress, they found it very difficult to consciously
and independently engage with complex methods of coping.
Simple strategies with clear instructions might therefore be the
best way of helping young people tide over more intense periods
of distress.

Motivational and uplifting messages would be helpful for
reminding users that their well-being is important and
encouraging them in their everyday life. Advisors felt that these
messages should be focused on encouraging young people to
persevere in their life challenges. In doing so, the messages
should not come across as clichéd, patronizing, or overly
idealistic.

Content should also be emotionally validating. Advisors
emphasized that the general tone of any wording should be
gentle and emotionally supportive. In addition, they
recommended that some content be designed specifically to
validate negative emotions that young people might be
experiencing, as they may not have had opportunities to express
these feelings. They suggested that one way this could be done
was to provide information, such as prevalence statistics, that
reminds users that they are not alone in their struggles.

Advisors stressed the importance of ensuring that content not
be perceived by users as advertising or hard-selling the LifeBuoy
app. They felt that users who developed such perceptions would
significantly be less willing to engage with both the strategy
and the app. According to advisors, this concern stems from a
broader discontentment among their contemporaries with the
way corporations have used social media to promote their
products. Thus, it was imperative that messages convey genuine
concern for the well-being of users.

Regarding the frequency and timing of dissemination of content,
weekly updates were considered sufficient to keep users
reminded of the LifeBuoy app. Advisors expressed that they
were more likely to attend to Instagram notifications sent in the
late afternoon to early evening. This time window was perceived
to be suitable as it represents a block of time after the end of
school and work but before bedtime.

Theme 2: Aesthetics and Design

Advisors unanimously supported the use of nature-themed
backgrounds. They felt that the nature-themed backgrounds
would be better paired with the content topics and provided
consistency with the marine-themed design of the LifeBuoy
app. Aesthetic features of the posts could also help to reduce
feelings of distress by having a calming effect on mood.
Advisors also recommended improving the visibility of
text-based content by increasing the color contrast between the
text and the background. Specifically, they suggested placing
text-based content in front of a white background to enhance
readability. Finally, advisors expressed that a key reason why
Instagram was more suitable than platforms such as Facebook
was because Instagram was better at delivering information in
a visually appealing way.

Theme 3: Component With More Detailed Content

During the workshops, advisors reflected on the possibility that
some users, like themselves, may be avid information seekers
who appreciate more in-depth content. They also felt that certain
pertinent topics should feature in the content of the strategy. In
particular, they explained that a topic on help-seeking for suicide
ideation would be very relevant for users seeking therapy for
the first time. Content on such a topic might not be very helpful
for users if it were too concise. Advisors concurred that social
media platforms might not be an ideal way of presenting topics
that contain more comprehensive information. In the discussions,
a spontaneous suggestion about having a blog as one component
of the adjunctive strategy was well-received by advisors.

Initial, Revised, and Final Design Samples of the
Engagement Strategy Through the Design Process

Sample social media posts and blog posts at different stages of
the design process are summarized in Figures 2 to 5. Based on
insights from the qualitative interviews, sample Instagram posts,
which were informative, uplifting, and aligned with content in
LifeBuoy were created to start discussions at the first workshop
(Figure 2). Several variations of each post were created using
different types of color schemes, aesthetics (eg, nature and baby
animals), and fonts, with the objective of getting feedback from
workshop participants about their preferred styles.

Feedback and insights from the workshops were used to refine
the initial samples before the second workshop (Figure 3).
Motivational posts were worded to read as encouraging but
realistic. Psychoeducational posts were written in simple and
clear language. Instructional posts were presented in bite-sized
pieces of information with succinct steps provided. A blog was
also created. A water-themed nature background was used for
the blog to align its design with that of the LifeBuoy app and
with the preferences of young people. The blog posts provided
detailed information on a range of topics related to mental
well-being and help-seeking. They were written by a trained
clinical psychologist (LM) or young adults with lived experience
of suicide. Each post had an estimated reading time of 2 to 4
minutes.

The final version of the engagement strategy was created from
the initial prototype following 3 rounds of iterative refinements
arising from the workshops. It consisted of three main
components: (1) an Instagram account (Figure 4) containing
posts that delivered concise informational or inspirational
content aligned with the content in the app, (2) a blog (Figure
5) with entries containing more detailed and in-depth therapeutic
information and advice for maintaining mental wellness, and
(3) weekly emails inviting users to visit these platforms. A total
of 42 Instagram posts and 12 blog articles were created,
collectively allowing for new material to be posted every 2 to
3 days over the course of the trial. To balance safety
considerations and ensure the strategy required only minimal
ongoing human support, user comments were disabled for both
Instagram and the blog. To ensure that users could access
Instagram content anonymously, the account was made public
instead of private. The like count was also hidden to preserve
the identity of users who liked any of the Instagram posts.

JMIR Form Res 2023 | vol. 7 | e45234 | p. 8

Figure 2. Initial Instagram designs were generated based on the qualitative interviews, using LifeBuoy app–themed (left) versus stock image–themed
backgrounds (right).

Figure 3. Samples of the revised Instagram posts (above) and initial blog design (below), following feedback from the first workshop.

JMIR Form Res 2023 | vol. 7 | e45234 | p. 9

Figure 4. Final Instagram design: landing page (left), sample informational post (center), and sample inspirational post (right).

Figure 5. Final blog design: landing page (left) and sample post (right).

Discussion

Principal Findings

This paper described the qualitative processes and activities
undertaken with young people who had a lived experience of
suicidal ideation to develop an adjunctive strategy aimed at
promoting engagement with the LifeBuoy smartphone
intervention. Social media, particularly Instagram, was seen as
an acceptable medium to deliver brief, practical, and
inspirational content that could motivate and encourage young
people to engage with the intervention. A blog with articles
contributed by a clinician and people with lived experience of
suicide was identified as the preferred medium to deliver
in-depth information on (1) living with and (2) seeking help for
suicidal thoughts. Nature-themed visuals with calming colors
were used as the design theme.

Comparison With Previous Literature

To date, no study has reported on the process of designing
adjunctive strategies for supporting engagement with DMHIs.
Notwithstanding, our study findings were generally consistent
with past research on the co-design of digital interventions for
younger users, which found young people to have a preference
for direct, practical information [27], content that positively
impacts mood (such as relaxation techniques, distraction
activities, or uplifting quotes) [23], and designs that are visually
appealing [28].

Nature-themed backgrounds appealed most to advisors because
of their calming effect on mood. These views are congruent
with theories and findings from environmental psychology.
According to Stress Reduction Theory [29], exposure to nature
reduces stress and has therapeutic effects on both physiological
and psychological well-being. Importantly, earlier research has
extended the postulations of Stress Reduction Theory by

JMIR Form Res 2023 | vol. 7 | e45234 | p. 10

demonstrating that virtual exposure to natural environments can
be effective toward reducing stress and attenuating subsequent
reactivity toward stressful stimuli [30]. This is aligned with
feedback from the design workshops that looking at
nature-themed stock photos has a rejuvenating effect.

The young people who were interviewed felt that Instagram
was a suitable social media platform for the adjunctive strategy.
This was attributed to their existing familiarity with the platform
and the perceived sense of community support provided by
other users. This finding appears to contradict previous research
reporting an inverse association between Instagram use and
mental health among youth and young adults [31,32]. However,
a recent study found that Instagram use had an indirect effect
on reducing suicidal ideation through the mediating effect of
perceived burdensomeness among young people aged 18-25
years [33]. Although more research is needed to elucidate the
relationship between Instagram use and mental health, these
findings collectively suggest that an accompanying Instagram
account might be a suitable complement to DMHIs targeting
suicide ideation among young people.

Currently, there are no studies promoting engagement with
digital interventions, which have examined the feasibility or
acceptability of adjunctive digital strategies that provide detailed
content on topics relevant to users [12,18]. Using a blog emerged
as a novel way to provide in-depth information on topics of
interest to young people with suicidal ideation and reinforce
the therapeutic content covered in LifeBuoy. Importantly, the
blog allowed young people with lived experience of suicide to
directly contribute content that would likely resonate with the
needs and challenges faced by intended users of the LifeBuoy
app. It is also hoped that this would increase the acceptability
of the blog among young people who use LifeBuoy.
Nevertheless, whether the blog is efficacious toward promoting
engagement with LifeBuoy requires empirical investigation.

Strengths

As far as the authors are aware, this study is the first to discuss
the application of a participatory design approach in the context
of developing an adjunctive strategy to complement a digital
intervention for mental health. The workshop aspect of the
design process drew from principles and recommendations of
participatory and co-design frameworks [22,34]. Young people’s
perspectives on what facilitates engagement with DMHIs were
generally consistent with the extant literature.

A rigorous methodological approach integrating evidence,
professional input, and lived experience insights was used in
the planning, design, and refinement of the adjunctive strategy.
The rationale for developing the strategy was grounded in
evidence from the research literature and perspectives of the
broader mental health app user population in Australia. Young
persons who contributed their insights during the interviews
and workshops came directly from the target population that
the app was designed for. Development of the initial prototype
was based on data from the qualitative interviews. Finally, the
initial, revised, and final versions of the adjunctive strategy
were developed in an iterative manner between each round of
design activities. Although only 2 workshops were conducted,
this was sufficient given that a high degree of consensus between

advisors and researchers regarding the strategy had been reached
by the second workshop.

A robust coding frame was developed to consolidate and make
sense of the feedback obtained. In total, 50% of all qualitative
data were double coded, and a reasonable overall level of
intercoder agreement was achieved even though this was not
an essential requirement for thematic analysis [35].

Finally, this work is well-aligned with high-level national [36]
and international [37] efforts aimed at supporting suicide
prevention by empowering young people with lived experience
to play a greater role in the creation and dissemination of mental
health services.

Limitations

This study had several limitations. Only the research team was
involved in every phase of this project. As such, they may
invariably have shaped some aspects of the strategy’s
development. For example, as described in the Methods section,
decisions on the types of engagement strategies to explore
further during the interviews and workshops were made before
users were involved. Nonetheless, it was necessary and
pragmatic to streamline the qualitative data collection to focus
on solutions that were feasible based on existing resources.
However, these decisions were informed by the existing
literature and are therefore consistent with what young people
have identified as potentially useful engagement strategies.
Moreover, all suggestions provided by young people were fully
considered. In other words, the eventual version of strategy was
based not only on their perspectives of what might work but
also on what might not work.

Resource 
constraints 
affected 
the 
implementation 
of
development activities in several ways. Workforce and financial
constraints did not allow for multiple parallel workshops to be
conducted with different groups of young people. Doing so may
have generated additional insights that could inform the
development of the adjunctive strategy. Finally, operational
constraints associated with technical expertise and funding
meant that not all feedback from the design activities could be
incorporated into the adjunctive strategy. However, the research
team was transparent with participants by informing them that
not all the feedback provided could feasibly be acted on.

Characteristics relating to the study sample may have restricted
the scope of design activities conducted, and consequently, the
insights obtained. Young people who took part in the interviews
represented only a small proportion of all LifeBuoy users
(n=228) [16]. Notwithstanding, the demographic and clinical
profiles of young people involved in this study were similar to
the wider sample. Finally, only potential end users of LifeBuoy
were involved in the design process. Engaging other
stakeholders, such as mental health professionals or caregivers,
may have yielded useful perspectives that could have contributed
positively to the development of the strategy.

Conclusions and Future Directions

This study is the first to thoroughly describe the process of
designing an adjunctive strategy for promoting engagement
with a digital intervention. Characteristics pertaining to the

JMIR Form Res 2023 | vol. 7 | e45234 | p. 11

platform, content, aesthetics, and dissemination of this strategy
were based on integrating past literature with insights from
young people with lived experience of suicide. The design
approach, its associated activities, and how the findings were
used toward creating and refining the adjunctive strategy were
documented in detail. The work undertaken in this study may
be helpful for informing subsequent projects aimed at creating
resources to support engagement with digital interventions for
suicide prevention or mental health.

The next step for this research will be to explore the
acceptability and satisfaction of the adjunctive strategy in a
large sample of young people who fit the intended user profile
for LifeBuoy. This step is important for confirming the
representativeness of end-user feedback received during the

design process and provides an opportunity to identify and
improve upon any potential limitations in the strategy before
efficacy testing.

Future efforts should strive to embrace a co-design approach in
developing adjunctive strategies for promoting engagement
with digital interventions. Co-design is one of the most
important emerging concepts in modern health care research
because of its focus on addressing gaps in the availability of
mental health–related services that are appropriate, acceptable,
and relevant to priority populations [38]. Empowering users to
be equal partners in the design and development processes may
be crucial for improving engagement with mental health
interventions which, thus far, has been tied to lack of relevancy
or mismatch in needs.