Citation: Goode, A.D.; Frith, M.;

Hyne, S.A.; Burzic, J.; Healy, G.N.

Applying a User Centred Design

Approach to Optimise a Workplace

Initiative for Wide-Scale

Implementation. Int. J. Environ. Res.

Public Health 2022, 19, 8096. https://

doi.org/10.3390/ijerph19138096

Academic Editors: Paul B.

Tchounwou and Giulio Arcangeli

Received: 20 April 2022

Accepted: 30 June 2022

Published: 1 July 2022

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral

with regard to jurisdictional claims in

published maps and institutional afﬁl-

iations.

Copyright:
© 2022 by the authors.

Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.

This article is an open access article

distributed
under
the
terms
and

conditions of the Creative Commons

Attribution (CC BY) license (https://

creativecommons.org/licenses/by/

4.0/).

International  Journal  of
Environmental Research
and Public Health

Article
Applying a User Centred Design Approach to Optimise a
Workplace Initiative for Wide-Scale Implementation

Ana D. Goode 1,*, Matthew Frith 2, Sarah A. Hyne 3, Jennifer Burzic 4 and Genevieve N. Healy 1

1
School of Human Movement and Nutrition Sciences, The University of Queensland,

2

3

4

*

Abstract: Translation of an effective research intervention into a program able to be implemented in
practice typically requires adaptations to ensure the outcomes can be achieved within the applied
setting. User centred design (UCD) methodologies can support these iterative adaptations, with
this approach being particularly well suited to peer-led interventions, due to a focus on usability.
We describe and reﬂect on the UCD approach that was applied to optimise an online, peer-led
workplace health promotion initiative (BeUpstanding: ACTRN12617000682347) to be suitable for
wide-scale implementation and evaluation. Optimisation was aligned against the indicators of
the RE-AIM (reach, effectiveness, adoption, implementation, maintenance) framework, with UCD
methodologies (discovery interviews, persona and scenario mapping, facilitated workshops, surveys
and prototyping) employed to enhance the program according to all RE-AIM dimensions. The core
team (content experts, implementation scientist, interaction designer, software developer, business
developer) worked closely with policy and practice partners and end users (workplace champions,
management and staff) to iteratively develop and test across the RE-AIM indicators. This description
and reﬂection of the process of applying UCD and the RE-AIM framework to the optimisation of
BeUpstanding is intended to provide guidance for other behaviour change research adaptations
into practice.

Keywords: user centred design; RE-AIM; implementation; workplace; sedentary; health promotion;
behaviour change; champion; peer-led

1. Introduction

Adaptations of evidence-based health practices or interventions are almost always
needed to maximise and maintain outcomes within applied settings [1–3]. Although many
implementation and adaptation frameworks and models exist [4,5], to date there have been
relatively few attempts to understand how and why adaptations occur, what informs them,
and their ultimate impact. User-centred design may offer a methodology to support and
understand rapid, continued and iterative adaptations to improve evidence-based health
programs [6–8]. User centred design (UCD) is by its nature iterative and collaborative,
bringing together research in human-computer interaction, user experience design, service
design, behavioural science and cognitive psychology [9,10]. The main strength of this
methodology is that it quickly identiﬁes multiple stakeholders and/or end users and
grounds the design of an innovation (such as an evidence-based health behaviour program)
in information about them and their needs in context [11,12]. A collaborative, participatory
and partnered approach of co-creation is used to consider and incorporate these multiple
perspectives [13]. This early identiﬁcation and engagement process increases the chance
that a program will be taken up and used by the people it was designed for. This approach

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022, 19, 8096. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph19138096
https://www.mdpi.com/journal/ijerph

2 of 18

is likely to be particularly well suited to interventions that are peer-led, where feasibility
and usability are of prime importance for intervention delivery and evaluation.
A user-centred design approach was used for the optimisation of the evidence-
informed BeUpstanding program and accompanying BeUpstanding Champion Toolkit
to ensure it was ﬁt-for-purpose for a national implementation trial. The BeUpstanding
program is a workplace health initiative designed to support work teams to sit less and
move more for their health and wellbeing [14]. The program employs a ‘train the cham-
pion’ approach, with workplace champions accessing an online toolkit with a step-by-step
guide and accompanying resources (e.g., videos, email templates, posters, survey links) to
support the set up, delivery and evaluation of the program within their work team. The
goals of the program are to raise awareness of the beneﬁts of sitting less and to create a
supportive workplace culture where sitting less and moving more is the norm.
From its inception, the BeUpstanding program was designed with wide-scale uptake
and implementation in mind; employing an iterative, phased process of development and
adaptation [15–17]. These planned phases and corresponding development and testing
have been grounded in the well-established RE-AIM (Reach, Effectiveness, Adoption,
Implementation, Maintenance) framework [18]. Due to its ease of use and balanced focus
on internal and external validity, RE-AIM has been used extensively to guide the design and
evaluation of programs in applied contexts [19]. It can also be used to highlight common
elements that will require attention from researchers and program designers to promote
the success of programs in these contexts [20]. Details of the phased approach of adapting
BeUpstanding according to the RE-AIM framework have been reported elsewhere [15,16],
with ﬁndings summarised below.
Phase 1 focussed on the development of the ‘BeUpstanding Champion Toolkit’ and
establishing research-government/industry partnerships [15]. During this phase, interven-
tion material and protocols from the researcher-delivered Stand Up Australia program of
workplace intervention research [21,22] were adapted to be more suitable for wide-scale de-
livery, with a key adaptation being the change in delivery agent from trained researcher to
workplace champion. Use of such peer champions has been shown to be an effective way to
disseminate knowledge within workplaces, with champions acting as necessary role mod-
els and drivers for staff participation and team change [23–25]. This “train-the-champion”
model also aligned with the preferences of the workplace policy/practice partner that
provided seed funding to enable this adaptation process.
Phase 2 tested the feasibility and acceptability of this champion-led approach via the
evaluation of a beta (test) version of the program. Findings showed that this approach was
acceptable and feasible for champions [26], with ﬁndings also showing the program was
effective in reducing self-reported workplace sitting time [17]. This phase speciﬁcally tested
the feasibility of program delivery by a workplace champion. It did not design or test
features that would make it easily adopted or evaluated at scale (i.e., researchers recruited
champions and guided evaluation).
Phase 3 involved the development and testing of features and functions to enable
workplaces and champions to ﬁnd out about the program, as well as evaluate it without
direct researcher involvement [16]. These features and functions included the integration
of online on-boarding pages and evaluation components (e.g., surveys) via a bespoke
technology platform, with the intention that program evaluation became a ‘core component’
for champions to lead. Correspondingly, changes to the user interface were made to
highlight the core intervention elements, and incentives were added to the user experience
for completing these tasks, including a customisable poster template and real-time data
reporting of the main behavioural outcome (workplace sitting, standing and moving). The
updated website and toolkit was made freely accessible across Australia with limited and
targeted promotion by established partners via a “soft-launch” on 1st September 2017. In
user-centred design terms, this could be considered the minimal viable product (MVP),
where the purpose was to test the new on-boarding and recruitment channels and the new
integrated delivery and evaluation platform with end-users “in-the-wild”. The ultimate

3 of 18

goal of this phase was to inform further redesign to optimise the program prior to it’s’
evaluation in the context of a planned national implementation trial (Phase 4) [14].
The aim of this paper is to describe the redesign process that was conducted from
Phase 3 to Phase 4 in order to make the program suitable for wide-scale implementa-
tion by workplace champions according to the indicators of RE-AIM. Objectives are to:
(1) provide examples of the application of UCD strategies for the redesign of the program
and (2) highlight priorities for redesign according to stakeholders and (3) reﬂect on the
process of optimization including the key elements required for success. Provision of this
detailed description of the optimisation process, and the UCD methodology underpinning
the process, is intended to provide guidance for bringing other adaptations of behaviour
changing programs into practice.

2. Methods
2.1. Methodological Approach and Participants

A UCD methodology [27] was applied to optimise the BeUpstanding Champion
Toolkit for wide scale implementation and evaluation. The research team contracted experts
in design thinking and interaction design (SH), and business and product development
(MF), to form the core expert team which included an implementation scientist (AG).
The core expert team led the iterative process of redesigning the toolkit. The primary
stakeholders involved in the redesign were an expert interdisciplinary team that included
foundational members involved in the research to practice translation process. These
foundational stakeholders included a software developer, and state, national policy and
practice partners. Workplace end users including champions, management and staff were
also represented (Table 1). The toolkit’s online registration form provided details for ‘user’
organisations to be recruited via email, with ‘non user’ organisations recruited through
partner channels via email. Ethics approval was granted by the Human Research Ethics
Committee of The University of Queensland (#2016001743).

Table 1. Primary stakeholders and end users involved in the redesign of the BeUpstanding program.

Stakeholder
Group
Who They Were
How They Contributed

Core expert
team

•
Design thinking and interaction
design (SH)
•
Business and product
development (MF)
•
Implementation science (AG)
•
Content expertise (GNH)
•
Software development

Led redesign and integration
of changes within
online toolkit

Policy and
practice
partners

•
SafeWork Australia (National
Regulator)
•
Comcare (National Work Health and
Safety Authority)
•
Ofﬁce of Industrial Relations,
Queensland
•
VicHealth
•
Healthier Happier Workplaces/Cancer
Council WA

Identiﬁed priority needs of
organisations and provided
formal and informal feedback
through stakeholder meetings
and emails and telephone
calls with core team

Workplace end
users

•
Current, past and potential users of the
toolkit (i.e., champions and overseers)
•
Current, past and potential users of the
program (i.e., staff)

Provided formal and informal
feedback via online survey
data, email and phone
feedback, direct
discovery interviews

4 of 18

2.2. Redesign Process and Data Collection

The study process was underpinned by three key design phases: ‘inspiration, ideation,
implementation’, with all phases overlapping and being iterative in nature [28]. The inspi-
ration phase [10] focused on identifying the problems inhibiting the BeUpstanding program
and toolkit from being ﬁt-for-purpose for the national implementation trial. These factors
were identiﬁed according to the RE-AIM framework, as described previously [16]. Multiple
data sources were used, including the online champion and staff program survey and
website analytic data, as well as direct discovery interviews with end users (described fur-
ther below). During the ideation phase, the core team then synthesised and interpreted this
feedback in relation to the design elements. User journey maps and personas of workplaces,
champions, staff and researchers were developed to draw insights and identify needs, chal-
lenges and any required actions. Mock-ups of the user journeys (champion, manager, staff)
for the implementation trial were developed, as were wireframes and prototypes of the
new elements for the toolkit including mixed-media promotional and program materials
and data insights and reports. In line with recommendations [29–31], the core team took
into account multiple user perspectives including staff, team champions and management,
partners, researchers and resource constraints. The prototypes and redesigned assets were
then presented and workshopped with the core evaluation group and partners as part of
the implementation phase, with workplace users provided with the opportunity to provide
written and verbal feedback on prototypes following the adaptions made from the work-
shops and meetings. The ﬁnal redesigned elements were then integrated into the toolkit by
the software developer for use in the national implementation trial. Workplace users were
informed of the updates to the toolkit and program via the existing communication path-
ways (program newsletter, blog article on the dedicated program blogsite, and promotion
through partner channels such as their websites and e-mailing lists).
The process of gaining feedback was iterative, and included multiple stakeholders as
outlined in Table 1. Numerous methods [10] were used to generate, collect, and synthesise
ideas and feedback provided from the multiple stakeholders (workplace users; practice
and policy partners; core expert team) across these three phases. These are described in
detail below:

2.2.1. Workplace Users

Online surveys: Open-ended responses in the online surveys (champions; staff) were
collected through the BeUpstanding toolkit and supporting implementation platform on
what worked and didn’t work/could be improved. These were reviewed and synthesised.
Analytics: Objective user data (e.g., tasks completed by user champions) was collected
automatically by the implementation platform, while information such as page visits and
recruitment channels were evaluated through Google Analytics. This information was
interpreted by the core team to understand challenges, and what was and what was not
working as intended.
Adhoc email and phone communication: champions who acted in the champion and
champion/overseer roles were purposely sampled from a mix of organisations (i.e., private
sector, government, small and large organisational size) and across Australian states. They
were asked to provide iterative feedback on the program and various elements that were
redesigned (e.g., prototypes of data reports).
Direct discovery interviews and ﬁeld visits: three organisations were chosen to conduct
discovery research across management, champion and staff users. Workplaces were delib-
erately recruited to ensure a representation of engagement with the program. That is, one
workplace was selected that was actively using the program and the others had not imple-
mented the program, despite signing up. The interviews were conducted in-person by the
core team (a project manager and honours level student). They followed a semi-structured
interview script developed for the purposes of this work by the expert team (i.e., implemen-
tation scientist, content expert, product developer). Interviews were recorded using mobile
application software, and ﬁeld visit notes were collected and compared across three visiting

5 of 18

team members. The interviews aimed to understand how the user was engaging, or how
they would engage with the program. For existing champions, the questions centred on
understanding how they were using the program and any changes they were making (e.g.,
to the delivery; to the materials) to enable suitability for their team. For management, the
questions focused on understanding the uptake of the program and the information they
needed to inform return-on-investment. For staff, the questions centred on their experience
with BeUpstanding. For non-users, the questions were designed to understand what would
help them engage with and deliver BeUpstanding in the future and any current barriers
to implementation.

2.2.2. Practice and Policy Partners

Stakeholder meetings: Formal six-weekly meetings (via video conferencing or phone)
with the core research team and representatives from the policy and practice partner
organisations were held, with a standard agenda item covering updates on the redesign.
Where appropriate and needed, prototypes were shown via screen sharing technology or
email, with feedback sought and encouraged. All stakeholder meetings were recorded
and minuted.
Adhoc email and phone communication: Depending on the focus, at least one team
member from each of the policy and practice partners was asked to provide feedback on
redesigned program elements. For example, for the promotional materials and collateral
that were designed to enhance reach and adoption, feedback from their communications
and marketing team was provided. This happened on a needs basis.

2.2.3. Core Expert Team

Researcher meetings: The research team held weekly project meetings, with a standing
agenda item to review feedback collected via website analytics, adhoc feedback, survey
data and interviews, as well as redesigned toolkit elements. Researchers led the collection
of data in the inspiration phase.
Intensive product development workshop: A 1.5 day intensive workshop with the business
and product developer and implementation scientist was conducted during the ideation
phase. Personas of workplace champions, staff and researchers were developed to draw
insights and identify needs, concerns and challenges.
Intensive design workshops: The interaction designer and implementation scientist held
two, 1 day workshops to discuss, develop and prioritise ideas to redesign the toolkit in
preparation for the implementation trial phase. Personas were further developed and
journey maps and low ﬁdelity prototypes were ideated.
Adhoc email and collaboration tools: The core expert team met regularly on a needs basis
and used online team collaboration software (e.g., Slack, Slack Production 4.17.1 64-bit,
Slack Technologies, San Francisco, CA, USA, InVision, Invision V6, InVision Enterprise,
New York, NY, USA, Trello, Trello 4.3, Fog Creek Software, NewYork, NY, USA) to review
designs and provide feedback. Ongoing iterative ideation and development also occurred
informally via email and team meetings
High ﬁdelity prototype testing: Testing was conducted by the core team once the software
developer had integrated changes into the toolkit. Further redesign was communicated
via email and in-person during meetings with the implementation scientist, interaction
designer and software developer.

2.3. Analysis

Data are reported descriptively, in line with key frameworks as appropriate. Qualita-
tive data were reviewed and synthesised thematically, with quotes used to highlight key
user opinions as appropriate.

6 of 18

3. Results

A total of 113 Australian organisations (135 toolkit users) took part in the soft launch
or ‘early adopters’ phase, providing at least sign-up data [16]. Workplace audit data was
obtained from 71 champions, while staff survey data was obtained from 337 staff at pre-
program and 167 staff post-program. Program outcomes according to RE-AIM are reported
elsewhere [16]. Seven purposely sampled workplaces (i.e., a customer panel comprising
3 overseers and 12 champions from 5 Australian states) provided detailed adhoc feedback
via email and/or phone. A further three purposely sampled workplaces (3 managers,
7 champions, 2 staff from Queensland: large government and nongovernment) and Victoria
(small, non government) took part in the direct discovery interviews.
In line with our ﬁrst objective, a summary of the UCD strategies employed during
the design phases are presented in Table 2. The UCD strategies were used to identify key
intervention features and processes that required redesign, according to the terms and
deﬁnitions by Dopp et al., 2019 [12]. Overall, we used 22 of the 30 strategies, with the
majority of the ones not used either not being applicable to this stage of optimisation or
too time intense and costly to undertake. UCD strategies focussed on a broad array of
characteristics, including the individual (e.g., personas), the intervention (e.g., co-creation
sessions and prototyping), as well as the organisation (e.g., observational ﬁeld visits).
Through the UCD strategies noted in Table 2, and synthesis of the feedback, key
priorities for redesign emerged. In line with our second objective, a summary of these
priorities according to key stakeholder or user are described in Table 3. In addition to
the users highlighted in Table 3, commercialisation and business development partners
also informed priorities for redesign, includingthe branding and logo, while the software
developer advised on the redesign in relation to the constraints of the platform and the
underlying data structure. The interaction designer advised on best practice in design
thinking and user-centred design.

7 of 18

Table 2. Examples of the application of user-centred design strategies for the redesign and optimisation of the BeUpstanding program.

Term *
Example(s) of What Was Done

Apply process maps to system-level behaviour
Mapped all champion interactions that occur with the toolkit (e.g., journey map: when and how champion interacts with toolkit
guide and resources), and staff interations with the program

Apply task analysis to user behaviour
Ideated and deﬁned engagement strategies to be built into the toolkit for champions (e.g., incentives for completing tasks including
customised champion certiﬁcate)

Collect qualitative survey data on users
Champion and staff surveys from soft launch included open text data collection around what worked well and barriers to
implementation

Conduct co-creation sessions
Researchers and interaction designer mocked up prototypes of intervention elements (e.g., data reports) and sought feedback
from users

Conduct design charette sessions with stakeholders
Members of the core team participated in intensive workshops to redesign program and toolkit elements

Conduct competitive user experience research
Business product development expert and researchers asked workplaces about other health and wellbeing programs they used or
were aware of during discovery interviews

Conduct focus groups about user perspectives
Obtained management, champion and staff perspectives through discovery interviews

Conduct heuristic evaluation
Engaged design thinking and user-centred design expert to redesign the intervention toolkit and associated collateral (e.g.,
downloaded reports, information and tip sheets)

Conduct interpretation sessions with stakeholders
Discussion held at regular partner meetings concerning any conﬂicting perspectives of workplaces vs. partner/funders on desired
look and feel and features of the toolkit and program

Conduct interviews about user perspectives
Obtained management, champion and staff perspectives on features

Conduct observational ﬁeld visits
Observed workplaces through direct discovery interviews and ﬁeld visits

Deﬁne target users and their needs
Core team identiﬁed and spoke directly with various stakeholders/users to redesign elements of the program and product based on
problems they identiﬁed

Deﬁne work ﬂows
Deﬁned the process by which a champion takes up the program, enlists their team and delivers and evaluates it

Design in teams
Included interaction designer, software developer, business and product development expert and behaviour science experts in
core team

Develop a user research plan
The research team planned this phase of work from the inception of the project with corresponding data collection methods, tools
and personnel identiﬁed

Develop experience models
Proﬁles of workplaces were created (e.g., small with one team, large with multiple teams taking part in BeUpstanding)

Develop personas and scenarios
Proﬁles of the main users were created (i.e., researchers, overseers/management, champions, staff)

8 of 18

Table 2. Cont.

Term *
Example(s) of What Was Done

Engage in cycles of rapid prototyping
Mock-ups of the toolkit elements and collateral were created by the interaction designer and feedback sought

Engage in iterative development
Revised toolkit dashboard elements and collateral based on feedback and tested the generalisability of improvements/changes by
asking different stakeholders to review

Examine automatically generated data
Objective user data (e.g., tasks completed by user champions) was collected automatically by the implementation platform

Prepare and present user research reports
Findings about the needs of each of the users were presented to the partners during regular stakeholder meetings and via
emailed reports

Recruit potential users
Engaged users in different types of user research (via discovery interviews, workshops etc)to understand their needs, preferences
and ideas for solutions

* Terms and associated deﬁnitions from Dopp et al., 2019 [12]. Glossary of terms and deﬁnitions for user-centered design strategies.

9 of 18

Table 3. Priorities for redesign according to stakeholder/end user.

Stakeholder
Priorities for Redesign

Researchers

•
Capture information adequately to meet needs of
implementation research trial
•
Encourage uptake, engagement and ﬁdelity with
the program
•
Program to be delivered and evaluated within
budget constraints
•
Maintain alignment with evidence-base and best
practice in behaviour change

Policy and practice partners

•
Alignment with best practice in work health and
wellbeing
•
Encourage uptake in high priority ‘at need’
workplaces (i.e., small business, regional/rural, call
centre and blue collar industries)
•
Collection of data relevant to inform practice
•
Provision of an evidence hub and a centralised
resource they could refer workplaces to
•
Provision of collateral and guidance to
promote referral

Users of the toolkit (i.e., those
delivering and evaluating the
program)

•
More data and feedback that was easily digestible
and compelling
•
Change survey questions to be clearly relevant and
as short as possible
•
Increased guidance across the program related to
structure and content of the program
•
More engaging program materials for uptake,
delivery and evaluation
•
Streamlining the user experience and highlighting
key/core components
•
Adherence to a participatory approach whilst
making the champion journey discrete and
step based

Users of the program (i.e., staff taking
part in BeUpstanding)

•
More collateral that was fun and engaging to
maintain interest
•
Wanted to feel visible support from management
•
Concerns about data privacy and length of surveys
•
Wanted more tips and tools

Table 4 summarises the design challenges and improvements made to optimise the
program and the personnel support required to make the enhancements according to each
of the ﬁve RE-AIM dimensions. Further detail is provided below.

10 of 18

Table 4. Modiﬁcations made to the BeUpstanding program and toolkit to ensure it was ﬁt-for-purpose
for national implementation and personnel support required to make the enhancements.

RE-AIM
Dimension
Early Adopter Version
Challenges
Improvements for Optimising the Program
Personnel Support Required
to Make Enhancements

Reach
Lack of engaging materials
to support champions to
recruit and encourage staff

Revision of online and printed support materials
to help champions invite and engage staff in the
program (e.g., emails, posters).

Research team; interaction
and graphic designer

Inaccurate assessment of
team numbers (a key
denominator

Champions were given the ability to adjust and
correct their initial data entry (provided in the
champion proﬁle survey) on their team numbers.
Team numbers were visible in the survey portal
and used to inform response rates.

Software developer

Effectiveness
Non-optimal staff survey
response rate

Additional online content provided in the toolkit
around the importance of evaluation. Desired
response rates added to staff survey portal.

Research team;
software developer

Data feedback did not
match expectations of
champion/management
end-user

Increased real-time feedback provided through
staff survey portal. Incentive provided through
bespoke reports for the workplace audit and
following completion of the program
completion survey.

Research team identiﬁed data
points, graphic designer
designed report, software
developer integrated report.

Adoption

Limited business case for
program
Confusing champion
journey

The free resources on the boarding page were
reﬁned and added to, including an animation of
the program able to be shared with
management.One page and two page
infographics developed to capture time key
actions and time commitment required
from champions

Graphic designer,
videographer, business
consultants, research
teamGraphic designer,
research team and
business developer

Multi-stage onboarding
process
Onboarding streamlined and simpliﬁed
Business developer,
interaction designer,
software developer

Minimal recruitment
channels with teams
purposely approached and
chosen by research staff

Development of a communications strategy
(including recruitment goals, suggested target
groups and recruitment avenues) and a
communications package (including key content
and graphics) for core partners to promote the
program nationally to champions and worksites
through existing networks and channels

Business consultants
developed the comms and
marketing strategy and
package after consultation
with each of the partners

Implementation
Program requirements
and core steps not explicit

Development of champion journey infographics;
dashboard redesigned to include more
signposting and visual cues; collateral organised
in weekly guide

Interaction and graphic
designer; business consultants;
research team

Implementation data
poorly captured

Addition of new survey for champions and new
hard coded data entry with incentive (i.e., poster)
to capture strategies and staff engagement in
the workshop

Research team;
software developer

Maintenance
No data captured

Staff survey portal (accessible by champions)
expanded to include sustainability surveys.
Sustainability audit (and report) added. Design
features (e.g., lock and fade) to help avoid
incorrectly times data completion incorporated
into dashboard

Research team developed
content; graphic designer
developed report; software
developer integrated
into toolkit.

11 of 18

3.1. Optimising Program Reach

Two major changes were undertaken to the toolkit and program design to enhance and
understand program reach: professional design of the program materials, and modiﬁcations
to the data collection platform.
Professional design of materials: Feedback from champions and staff revealed the im-
portance of engaging, ‘fun’ and ‘fresh’ materials (e.g., emails, videos and posters) to
convey the main messages of the program in order to encourage and motivate ongoing
staff participation.

“...make it more fun and interactive” Champion 112

Input from policy and practice partners revealed some tension between end user’s
desire for funny and irreverent content and their desire for an ‘ofﬁcial’ feel and focus on
evidence-based content. Consequently, a professional videographer and graphic designer
were employed to revise all online, printed and video resources to ensure consistent,
engaging and evidence-informed resources. The research team devised the core messaging,
with policy and practice partners signing off on end content.
Modiﬁcations to the data collection platform: The bespoke Wildfyre platform developed
for the project integrated a survey management and data collection system which allowed
the capture of team and staff characteristics to assess reach. Some champions struggled
to initially identify the number of staff that would participate in the program as part of
their team. Consequently, champions were provided with the ability to adjust their team
numbers via their proﬁle settings. Survey response rates, according to the team number,
were displayed in the survey portal, providing another opportunity for the champion to
review and check this important denominator.

3.2. Measuring Program Effectiveness

The majority of effectiveness indicators were adequately captured by the staff surveys
at pre- and post-program [16]. However, the survey participation rate by staff was lower
than desired (43%) in those teams taking part in the evaluation. When asked, champions
reported hesitancy about sending the survey out and not wanting to “over-survey” staff.
There were also concerns about data privacy and the length of the survey.

“People did not complete [the] survey because they feared what would happen
to their data” Champion 121

To address this tension between the needs of the researchers to collect detailed and
validated data, and the workplace concerns identiﬁed, education on the need and usefulness
of surveys was incorporated, in line with the suggestion from champions. Champions were
also provided with the opportunity to view the survey prior to sending the survey link
to staff.

“Maybe a little summary at the beginning of the survey on what the survey was
aiming to achieve and goals at the end of the survey” Champion 126

Managers and champions also reported wanting more access to engaging data insights
to assist with further scale out across other work teams within the organisation and/or
repeat rollout of the program. Incentives for data completion were added to help address
this issue.

” . . . need for feedback on the activities that were put in place . . . we did not get
outcomes” Champion 102

Incentivising survey completion: Incentives were added to the toolkit to encourage
completion of key self-report surveys including more detailed real-time data insights at
baseline and follow-up survey times displayed for the champion (e.g., the common barriers
staff reported to sitting less and moving more were displayed in a table)/Tailored target
response rates and feedback were also added (e.g., It’s great if at least 36/55 staff respond to
this survey). A new, customisable poster and a 9-page downloadable bespoke data report

12 of 18

available at program end, following completion of the core evaluation elements, were also
developed and integrated into the toolkit. Decisions around the data to present in the
bespoke report were informed by the feedback from champions and management. Here,
the research team had used custom-generated Powerpoint slides to iteratively trial how to
present the data collected in ways that were meaningful and appropriately interpreted by
the end-users (champions; management; staff).

3.3. Enhancing and Tracking Adoption

To enhance and more readily track the adoption of the BeUpstanding program, three
changes to the design of the toolkit were identiﬁed: clear presentation of the business case;
clariﬁcation of the champion journey; and, streamlining onboarding. The need for targeted
recruitment pathways was also acknowledged.
Clear presentation of the business case: Champion and management feedback highlighted
the importance of presenting program outcomes that were of relevance to management
when deciding to adopt the program in their organisation/team.

“need to be able to promote it more . . . to get management on board” Champion 102

Expected key program outcomes, such as behaviour change (i.e., change in workplace
sitting time) were important, but so too were work outcomes including employee satisfac-
tion, productivity and reduction in sick days. Consequently, the user’s onboarding journey
included free downloads (e.g., “Dear Boss” letter) and an engaging short animation to help
potential champions present the ‘business case’ to management to take part in the program
and facilitate uptake.
Champion journey: Management and champion feedback indicated that they were keen
to know exactly ‘what they were signing up for’ in delivering and evaluating the program.
Management also wanted additional resources outside of the program information sheets to
help recruit champions. A colourful two page and one page version of a ‘champion journey’
infographic (See Figure 1) was developed to outline the necessary time commitment, and
key steps involved in this peer-led program.
Streamlining onboarding: To enable the automatic monitoring of the number and type
of organisations coming into the program, an online sign-on form that captured basic team
and organisational information was integrated during the soft launch phase. However,
these forms were further streamlined and simpliﬁed to make it as easy as possible for a
team representative (usually a champion) to complete the form before accessing the toolkit.
Establishing targeted recruitment pathways: For the program to be adopted at a national
level and across all the sectors identiﬁed as priority targets, it was necessary to develop
recruitment targets and referral pathways in collaboration with policy and practice partners.
Planning sessions were held with each policy and practice partner to determine key audi-
ences and potentially appropriate channels to promote the program. A tailored promotions
and marketing plan with associated content and collateral was developed for each partner.
Engagement with the partners was led by the implementation scientist (AG) and business
strategist (MF).

13 of 18

Figure 1. The BeUpstanding™Journey Map© was one of the additional assets developed.

3.4. Supporting Champion Implementation

Overall, champions found the toolkit and supporting materials easy to use and helpful
to supporting implementation, but several elements were identiﬁed as not ﬁt-for-purpose
for either supporting or evaluating the program [16]. To address this, we developed new
assets and made changes to the champion dashboard to help guide program delivery and
enhance the data collection process.
Development of additional assets and dashboard changes: Champions often liked the
supporting materials provided to help them implement the program, but commonly asked
for additional collateral, particularly posters and tips sheets including ideas for strategies
to keep messages ‘fresh’ and enhance staff engagement with the program.

“I have been using many of the posters available and think some more would be
good, as I am rotating them around so they don’t become part of the furniture.
I think it’s more useful for the posters to have a tip (e.g., walk over rather than

14 of 18

sending an email) instead of a general statement (e.g., take a stand for your
health)” Champion 168

In line with what was described for reach, new weekly posters and associated email
content were developed and organised in a week-by-week guide to make it easier for
champions to implement the main program messages. The “champion journey” asset (as
mentioned above) was used to roadmap the main tasks involved in the implementation
trial (see Figure 1). The numerous tasks involved in delivering and evaluating the program
were grouped into key stages of the champion journey with simple terms such as ‘set up,
stand up, wrap up’ ascribed to each stage to make it more memorable. The champion
dashboard interface was changed to include visual signposts so champions could readily
see what they had completed (e.g., ﬂag and fade/ghosting) and identify ‘must do’ or core
components (e.g., use of a star and bolded text). The ﬂagging of core components was
important to maintain ﬁdelity but also to help champions tailor their BeUpstanding journey,
as not all teams needed to complete all steps.

“We are a small dynamic team, in a small office and already had all the equipment
necessary. We could have jumped a few of the steps in the program.” Champion 422

Design features were added to the well liked ‘push button’ design layout to encourage
champions to complete tasks, check that they had completed them and stay on track (e.g.,
an autoﬁll coloured program task bar). Visual cues (e.g., a preview of the bespoke report)
were added to the dashboard to encourage champions to complete the workplace audit
tool, which was a key planning step in the program.
Enhancing implementation data collection and feedback: A new champion-completion
survey was added to the end of the program. This survey was designed to capture
both champion and staff engagement and experiences with the program components and
program costs. This data, coupled with other evaluation data, was used to generate a
bespoke team performance report that the champion could then share with their team
and management (see Effectiveness). To provide an incentive to complete the evaluation
components, the report was only made available once there was sufﬁcient evaluation data
collected (i.e., a minimum of two staff had completed both the pre- and post-program staff
surveys; the champion had completed the post-program survey).

3.5. Measuring Program Maintenance

The toolkit version used by early adopters (during the soft launch phase) did not
include any measurement of program maintenance. Sustainability of program outcomes
was a key consideration and concern for many organisations, with maintenance also a key
indicator of the RE-AIM framework. To address this gap, additional data capture elements
were built into the toolkit.
Additional data capture: A staff survey with associated real-time feedback for the
champion on team level data (i.e., the ‘prize’ for completion) was added to the toolkit to
assess sustainability. Like the pre- and post-program surveys, champions could monitor
the number of responses (with tailored target response rates) and the data responses in
real time. This sustainability staff survey became unlocked and visually highlighted (e.g.,
increased colour vibrancy from faded to full saturation) after the completion of the post-
program survey. This design feature was intended to reduce the visible number of tasks
and avoid incorrect data entry (i.e., from those not up to the maintenance assessment). A
sustainability workplace audit was also included for the champion to complete. Both the
staff survey and the audit included informational text about the beneﬁts of evaluating long
term changes at both the organisational team and individual level.

4. Discussion

This study described the application of a user-centred design process to optimise
a peer-led behaviour-change program to be suitable for delivery and evaluation in the
context of a national implementation trial. It provides insight into a thorough and iterative

15 of 18

way of redeveloping an evidence-informed and usable online workplace health program
delivered by workplace champions, using a “train-the-champion” approach. The champion
dashboard, toolkit and associated collateral were redesigned to better meet the needs of
workplace users, but also researchers and policy and practice partners who helped fund
the program. Involving multiple stakeholders and end users, including experts from
design and behavioural science, workplaces and industry was necessary to increase the
likelihood that the program would be successfully implemented and evaluated during
the next planned national implementation phase. The resulting minimal viable product
or intervention adheres to UCD principles and best practice in behaviour change, and has
been optimised for success according to all ﬁve RE-AIM dimensions.
Peer- or champion-led interventions offer a beneﬁcial way of scaling evidence-based
health behaviour programs delivered in the workplace [15,30]. If they are to reach their
potential for wide scale impact, it is critical that researchers and the developers of such
programs understand champion user needs and preferences, and respond to their priorities,
concerns and challenges. Exploring ways to improve methods for involving workplace
users (including champions, management and staff), as well other relevant stakeholders
such as policy and practice partners, is important to ensuring programs are developed
that are responsive to the contexts in which they are delivered [6], and thereby more likely
to succeed. User centred design offers a methodology that helps achieve this, while also
potentially making the best possible use of limited research funds by quickly focussing
design and adaptations on data from end users. In the case of BeUpstanding, UCD
aligned well with the participatory design principles [31] underpinning the program where
champions are encouraged and supported to tailor the program to suit their team’s unique
needs and existing culture.
Despite the ground breaking work of the Expert Recommendations for Implementing
Change (ERIC) study [32] that highlighted best practice strategies in implementation
research and practice, researchers have called for more attention to factors inﬂuencing
uptake and more complete approaches to the promotion of implementation success [6].
UCD appears to be a useful approach to help researchers bridge limitations of existing
frameworks (i.e., CFIR, ERIC) while encouraging interdisciplinary collaboration [6]. UCD
can guide initial creation and subsequent adaptations of innovations by helping to highlight
and address design problems related to the programs and their implementation strategies
(such as low ease of use and high complexity). This in turn can impact uptake and
effectiveness [7]. The usability of evidence-based health programs is a critical determinant
of program outcomes including acceptability, feasibility, appropriateness and ultimately
sustainability [33]. As such, it makes sense that users are placed at the centre of design and
redesign efforts.
Use of the glossary of user-centred design strategies for implementation science by
Dopp and colleagues (2019) [12] helped to highlight the multiple UCD strategies used
during the redesign of the BeUpstanding toolkit and program. This was one of the ﬁrst
examples of a real-world application of UCD strategies according to the glossary, with 22
of the 30 strategies deployed. Some of the strategies outlined in the glossary such as ‘deﬁne
target users and their needs’ were not relevant, as they had been completed prior to this
phase of work. Other strategies such as ‘use of dialogic object-based techniques’ were too
resource intensive to undertake. The glossary was not available when our redesign efforts
were undertaken but it appears to be a useful tool to highlight the strategies undertaken, as
well as to guide future redesign efforts to enhance implementation.
RE-AIM provided the other key framework that informed the redesign. To our knowl-
edge, this is the ﬁrst study that has integrated UCD methodologies to enhance RE-AIM
indicators. Mapping design changes against this well-established framework ensured that
changes made were going to meet the needs of the implementation trial. Our experience
shows that RE-AIM can be used to organise redesign efforts, providing balanced focus
particularly to issues of design that impact adoption and reach.

16 of 18

A critical element that informed the redesign was the iterative input gained from
multiple sources (including end users, content experts, and policy/practice partners), using
multiple data collection techniques. This occasionally conﬂicting feedback needed to be
considered in the context of other considerations, including alignment with research aims
and budgetary, technological and timeline constraints. Consequently, not all feedback was
considered equally. Recently developed tools, such as the House of Quality for Behavioural
Science [29], can be used to more systematically weight these perspectives from the different
stakeholders to inform adaptations. This tool was published after our adaptation process,
but the principles were in-line with our redesign decisions made. Deliberate consideration
and documentation of how feedback should be weighted will help to ensure multiple user
perspectives including ‘gatekeepers’ such as managers or decision makers in workplaces
are considered [34], thereby advancing implementation and dissemination efforts [29].
While the formation of a multidisciplinary expert design team and involvement of
stakeholders is a critical strength of UCD, the coordination of a large (10–15 person) team
across diverse disciplines and holding distinct perspectives and needs was challenging.
Relatedly, UCD involves a process that can sometimes be ambiguous, involving tolerance
of differing opinions, pivots and repeated prototyping [35]. This process is somewhat in
opposition to traditional research driven research methodologies [35]. UCD may not be
feasible for all project timelines and resources particularly when stakeholders buy in and
active engagement is difﬁcult.
The redesign was used to optimise the BeUpstanding program and toolkit to be ﬁt-
for-purpose for the national implementation trial. This process highlighted the value in
multidisciplinary expertise in helping to specify user and program needs, and make and
test modiﬁcations. The trial will be completed in late 2022, and a similar UCD process is
now been deployed to integrate the learnings from the trial to enable both scale out as
well as scale up of the program. The core team are exploring the viability of the program
through market research to ascertain funding models and potential commercial avenues to
support the sustainability of the program in practice.

5. Conclusions

This paper described how UCD methodologies were applied to redesign an online,
peer-led workplace health initiative to ensure it was ﬁt-for-purpose for a national implemen-
tation trial. It highlights the multiple perspectives and data sources that were considered,
and the personnel that were required, to ensure that the redesigned elements meet both the
user needs and the research needs, according to the indicators of RE-AIM. These ﬁndings
and reﬂections are intended to provide guidance to inform the design of other behaviour
change research adaptations into practice.

S.A.H. Analysis, A.D.G., G.N.H. and M.F. Writing—original draft preparation, A.D.G. and G.N.H.;
Writing—Review & Editing, A.D.G., M.F., S.A.H., J.B. and G.N.H. Project Administration, A.D.G.,
J.B. and G.N.H.; Funding Acquisition, G.N.H. and A.D.G.; Data curation, A.D.G., G.N.H. and J.B.;
Investigation, A.D.G., M.F., J.B. and G.N.H.; Supervision A.D.G. and G.N.H.; Visualisation A.D.G.,
M.F., S.A.H. and G.N.H. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.

Funding: The BeUpstanding program was supported by funding from the Queensland Government
“Healthier. Happier. Workplaces” program, Safe Work Australia, Comcare, and the National Health
and Medical Research Council of Australia through a Partnership Project Grant (#1149936) conducted
in partnership with Comcare, Safe Work Australia, the Queensland Ofﬁce of Industrial Relations,
VicHealth, and Healthier Workplace WA. GNH was supported by an MRFF-NHMRC Emerging
Leadership Investigator Grant (#1193815). NHMRC had no role in the study in terms of the design,
data collection, management, analysis and interpretation.

Institutional Review Board Statement: The study was conducted according to the guidelines of the
Declaration of Helsinki, and approved by the Ethics Committee of The University of Queensland
(protocol code #2016001743 on the 9 January 2017).

17 of 18

Informed Consent Statement: Written informed consent was obtained for all survey and discovery
interview data and verbal feedback was obtained from the champions who provided the iterative
feedback. No formal consent was obtained for feedback provided through meetings or that was
provided ad hoc (e.g., voluntarily sent through by a champion). No identiﬁable or personal data has
been included in this paper.

Data Availability Statement: Details on the early adopters can be found here: https://espace.library.
uq.edu.au/view/UQ:8f73a27 (accessed on 11 April 2022). Other data (e.g., from discovery interviews;
from meeting minutes) is identiﬁable and not able to be made publicly available, but is available on
request and upon ethical approval from the corresponding author.

Acknowledgments: We acknowledge and thank the partner investigators, academic investigators,
and project staff for their contribution to the BeUpstanding program of research. We also acknowledge
and thank all the participants who have taken part in the program.

Conﬂicts of Interest: A.D.G. and G.N.H. have received grants to continue the iterative development
of the BeUpstanding program of research by the NHMRC in partnership with Comcare, Safe Work
Australia, the Queensland Ofﬁce of Industrial Relations, VicHealth, and Healthier Workplace WA,
as well as the Queensland Government. Although the sponsors had a key role in informing the
redesign of the program in line with the user centred methodology described, they had no role in
the development, interpretation or writing of the study presented in this paper. The BeUpstanding
program does include consultancy options within the toolkit. All and any proceeds from consultancy
activities return to the research to continue to develop the research program. M.F. and S.A.H. were
employed as external consultants to support the implementation of the co-design process. They did
not receive payment for their input into the drafting and editing of the manuscript.