Original Paper

A Web-Based Intervention for Relatives of People Experiencing
Psychosis or Bipolar Disorder: Design Study Using a
User-Centered Approach

Mahsa Honary1*, PhD; Naomi Ruth Fisher2*, PhD; Roisin McNaney1*, PhD; Fiona Lobban2*, PhD

1School of Computing and Communications, Lancaster University, Lancaster, United Kingdom
2Spectrum Center for Mental Health Research, Division of Health Research, Lancaster University, Lancaster, United Kingdom
*all authors contributed equally

Mahsa Honary, PhD
School of Computing and Communications
Lancaster University
Room C51
InfoLab21, South Drive
Lancaster, LA1 4WA
United Kingdom
Phone: 44 1524 593222

Abstract

Background: Relatives of people experiencing bipolar mood episodes or psychosis face a multitude of challenges (eg, social
isolation, limited coping strategies, and issues with maintaining relationships). Despite this, there is limited informational and
emotional support for people who find themselves in supporting or caring roles. Digital technologies provide us with an opportunity
to offer accessible tools, which can be used flexibly to provide evidence-based information and support, allowing relatives to
build their understanding of mental health problems and learn from others who have similar experiences. However, to design
tools that are useful to relatives, we first need to understand their needs.
Objective: The aim of this study was to use a user-centered design approach to develop an accessible Web-based intervention,
based on the Relatives Education And Coping Toolkit (REACT) booklet, to support the informational and emotional needs of
relatives of people experiencing psychosis or bipolar disorder.
Methods: We engaged relatives of people with experiences of bipolar disorder or psychosis in workshops to identify their needs
and design requirements for developing a Web-based version of a paper-based toolkit. We used a 2-phase qualitative approach
to explore relatives’ views on content, design, and functionalities, which are considered to be engaging and useful in a Web-based
intervention. In phase 1, we consulted 24 relatives in 2 workshops to better understand their existing support infrastructure, their
barriers for accessing support, unmet needs, and relatives’ views on online support. On the basis of the results of these workshops,
we developed a set of design considerations to be explored in a smaller workshop. Workshop 3 then involved working with 2
digitally literate relatives to design a usable and acceptable interface for our Web-based toolkit. Finally, in phase 2, we conducted
a heuristic evaluation to assess the usability of the toolkit.
Results: Our findings indicated that relatives require technologies that (1) they can place their trust in, particularly when
discussing a highly sensitive topic, (2) enable learning from the lived experiences of others while retaining confidentiality, and
(3) they can work through at their own pace in a personalized manner.
Conclusions: Our study highlights the need for providing a trustworthy, supportive tool where relatives can engage with people
who have similar experiences to their own. Our heuristic evaluation showed promise in terms of perceived usability of the REACT
Web-based intervention. Through this work, we emphasize the need to involve stakeholders with various characteristics, including
users with limited computer literacy or experience in online support.

(JMIR Ment Health 2018;5(4):e11473)   doi:10.2196/11473

JMIR Ment Health 2018 | vol. 5 | iss. 4 | e11473 | p.1

KEYWORDS

mental health; Web-based intervention; user-centered design; caregivers; bipolar disorder; psychosis

Introduction

Background

Psychosis is an umbrella term that covers many different
conditions, the common feature of which is a loss of touch with
reality. The most common ways this manifests in are believing
things that are generally accepted to be untrue by other people
(often called delusions); not being able to think straight, thus
sounding very muddled and confused (often called thought
disorder); experiencing things that are not actually happening,
for example, hearing or seeing things that other people cannot
(often called hallucinations).

Along with the presence of these unusual experiences, many
people with psychosis also report a loss of valued experiences,
most notably, pleasure in everyday activities (anhedonia) and
loss of motivation (apathy). These losses are sometimes referred
to as negative symptoms and are particularly challenging for
relatives: not least because they are hard to differentiate from
normal teenage angst, side effects of medication, or depression.
It is difficult to report exact figures on the number of people
who will experience psychosis as many may never have contact
with mental health services. However, most recent estimates
include worldwide incidence at approximately 1 in 13 people
(7.7%; [1]) and up to 10% in the United Kingdom [2]. Only a
fraction of these people will come into contact with mental
health services and receive a diagnosis of a mental health
condition. In general, these are likely to be people for whom
these experiences are particularly distressing or cause significant
changes in behavior.

Bipolar disorder (BD) is the third most common mental health
cause of disability globally [3], affecting 1% to 4.5% of adults
[4] and costing the English economy £5.2 billion annually,
largely because of inadequate treatment [5]. BD is characterized
by episodes of extreme low mood (depression) and extreme
high or irritable mood (mania or hypomania in its milder form).
Challenging behaviors such as increased self-harm and suicidal
behavior, excessive financial spending, sexual disinhibition,
and heightened irritability can all escalate during mood episodes,
and psychotic symptoms are also more likely to occur. Between
episodes, functioning may return to normal levels, although
many people do report problematic subsyndromal levels of
depression, which impact on their functioning and relationships
[6].

Both psychosis and BD present significant challenges to
relatives, particularly in recognizing and understanding what is
happening, living with the elevated risk of suicide, the impact
on relationships within the family, and having to balance
commitments such as caring and work.

First episodes usually appear in adolescents, at which point the
individuals are still living with families [7]. In this study, we
refer to the wider community of partners, friends, family, and
caregivers as relatives, as this was deemed to be the most
inclusive term without assuming the nature of the relationship.

Relatives play a significant role at all stages of recovery;
however, this unrecognized caregiving role can have adverse
effects on relative’s psychological well-being, relationships,
finances, employment, and quality of life [8-13]. Due to societal
stigma related to mental health, relatives may struggle to seek
help or to share their feelings and lived experiences with others
[14]. This can result in isolation and loneliness and can influence
their capacity to cope as well as to affect their own mental health
[15].

The family unit affected by BD and psychosis-like experiences
can benefit from information and educational support on how
to support their relative [16]. Family intervention is used to
involve all members of the family to discuss how such
experiences affect the family unit and individual relationships.
The aim of family interventions is to identify changes and
strategies that could improve coping strategies of family
members and establish a better family relationship. Family
interventions require a trained member of staff to meet with
family members face-to-face on a regular basis and have shown
to be effective in reducing relapse rates for people with mental
health problems [17,18] and improving the relative’s well-being
[19]. However, delivering a family intervention through health
and social care services can be challenging because of the (1)
practical difficulties in gathering all family members in 1 room
during working hours because of work and family commitments,
(2) costly nature of face-to-face model, and (3) lack of resources
in services [20]. The rates of implementation for family
interventions in the United Kingdom vary from 0% to 53% [20],
is up to 15% in Western Europe, and only about 10% of families
receive family intervention in the United States [21].

Relatives Education And Coping Toolkit Booklet
(REACT)

To improve delivery of family intervention, we consulted
relatives about the key challenges they faced and what kinds of
support they most needed [22]. The outcomes of the consultation
process informed the design of the Relatives Education And
Coping Toolkit (REACT) booklet. The REACT booklet is an
informative modular toolkit, which draws on key elements of
family intervention, and can be used by relatives directly without
the involvement of other family members or extensive service
support. The REACT modules include information on managing
symptoms, managing difficult behavior, coping with their own
stress, information about medication, and understanding mental
health services. The REACT booklet has shown to be effective
during a randomized controlled trial (RCT; N=103) [23]. Those
who had access to the REACT booklet in addition to usual
treatment showed reduced distress, increased perceived support,
and increased perceived ability to cope compared with controls
with access to usual treatment only [24].

Digital as a Vehicle for Providing Support

Despite the success of the printed REACT booklet, there are
several limitations that the use of digital tools can address: (1)
scalability both in terms of cost and access; (2) updating the
information while health and social care services are constantly

JMIR Ment Health 2018 | vol. 5 | iss. 4 | e11473 | p.2

changing; and (3) booklets tend to be more generic and limited
in scope. As we have progressed into the digital age, the
provision of health and social care services has moved toward
online models, which has, in turn, improved access for a wide
variety of patient and caregiver groups [25-27]. Digital platforms
that provide support for mental health have also proven to be
successful and cost-effective [28-31] as they offer flexibility,
accessibility, inclusivity, and anonymity, which can be
appreciated in a stigmatized mental health context [32].
Therefore, we aimed to develop a Web-based version of the
REACT booklet. In this paper, we describe a qualitative study
that used a user-centered approach to design a widely accessible
REACT Web-based intervention.

User-Centered Approaches in the Design of Digital
Health Interventions

Research suggests that effectiveness of Web-based health
interventions correlates with users’ level of engagement [33-35].
However, attrition is a common problem across digital health
technologies [36-38]. The importance of investigating
approaches to improve user engagement has been highlighted
in the literature [39], with the use of incentives [40] and prompts
[41] identified as being methods of increasing engagement. The
importance of taking users’ perception into account in the design
of the content of Web-based interventions is needed to ensure
(1) relevancy of content to their lived experiences, (2)
consistency with their values, and (3) that the content provides
additional benefit [42]. As such, the employment of
user-centered methods, which aim to understand end users’
needs and values throughout the lifecycle of design,
development, and evaluation, intended to improve user
engagement [43]. Although the literature highlights the
importance of user-centered design [44-49], using this approach
in a mental health context can be challenging in terms of
recruiting participants and understanding the lived experiences
of those affected by mental health conditions [50,51].

In this paper, we present the results of our qualitative study.
First, we conducted 2 workshop sessions with 24 relatives.
These workshops aimed to understand (1) the current
infrastructure (eg, the lived experiences of relatives and what
support is currently available for them), (2) the barriers (eg, the
main challenges for accessing existing support), and (3) the gap
(eg, the support currently missing from the care system). This
was followed by a workshop involving 2 relatives. This
workshop aimed to verify and expand on the findings from the
first 2 workshops and further explore the features that needed
to be considered in the design of a supportive Web-based toolkit
for relatives. Second, we conducted a small heuristic evaluation
of a design prototype to better inform our final set of
requirements. However, we focus the majority of our study on
reporting the experience-driven needs and values that
participants shared during our design process. The specific
challenges faced by our participants, who were mainly older
parental relatives of people with mental health problems, can
be used as a starting point toward understanding how we might
design inclusive and accessible digital interventions to support
this complex user group. In this paper, the term participants is
used when discussing relatives who took part in our study.

Through this study, we contribute (1) insight into the needs of
relatives and their concerns about Web-based interventions
intended to provide information and support, (2) a pragmatic
example of a user-centered approach in designing a Web-based
intervention, including the complexities of engaging a
representative sample of full-time relatives in the discussion of
highly sensitive topics, and (3) a set of design considerations
for the development of a Web-based toolkit to support the
informational and emotional needs of relatives.

Methods

Phase 1 Method: User-Centered Approach

In accordance with our ethics approval from Lancaster National
Research Ethics Service Committee (15/NW/0732), participants
were invited to take part in our study if they identified as a
relative or close friend involved in supporting someone with
BD or psychosis-like experiences. Our recruitment strategy
involved advertising locally to obtain a convenience sample
who would be able to attend face-to-face workshops. An email
advertisement was circulated through the Lancaster University’s
Spectrum Centre, which specializes in conducting research in
BD and psychosis. Once participants indicated interest in taking
part, an information sheet was sent by an email or post before
attending the workshop to allow them to make an informed
decision about attending and ask any questions in advance.
Participants were offered a £20 Amazon voucher as an
appreciation for their time and input. Each workshop was
audio-recorded with participants’ permission and transcribed
verbatim for later analysis (approach described below in the
section Data Analysis). A total of 25 participants took part in
this qualitative study. Although we aimed to recruit participants
from a diverse demographic background in terms of age, gender,
and relationship with the person with a mental health problem,
the length of time being a relative, and computer literacy, the
participants were predominantly female (18 females), over the
age of 65 years (age range 21-75 years), parents (n=20), and
infrequent computer users. Most participants had many years
of experience of caring for their relatives (on average,
approximately 10 years).

Phase 1 Design Workshops

Workshops 1 and 2

We conducted 2 workshops with 13 participants in workshop
1 and 11 participants in workshop 2 (total n=24), which lasted
for 2 hours each. Two researchers facilitated the workshops
using a semistructured topic guide to lead the discussions and
asking open questions to elicit a range of views. Our aim was
to better understand the relatives’ needs, their context of use,
and how they may, or may not, engage with online support in
their caring role. First, the participants were encouraged to
reflect and share their lived experiences as relatives of someone
with a mental health problem, including how their relative was
first diagnosed, how they became involved as relatives, the
impact of mental health problems on their family unit and daily
life, their current support-seeking practices, and any specific
type of support or strategies they find most useful. Second, they
were asked about the gaps in the support system for relatives,

JMIR Ment Health 2018 | vol. 5 | iss. 4 | e11473 | p.3

their views on how to overcome this gap, and their views on
the role of online support. We then looked at the REACT
booklets together and discussed the best ways in which these
could be redesigned as a Web-based intervention and the types
of support relatives would need to use this intervention.

Workshop 3

We conducted a third workshop with 2 participants to allow for
an in-depth discussion around scoping the types of features that
could be implemented on the REACT Web-based intervention.
For this workshop, we aimed to bring together participants who
were comfortable using computers. We also wanted to have an
older and a younger representative to identify any possible
age-related challenges relatives might have. The first participant
(older adult, aged 61 years) had taken part in workshop 1 and
so acted as a representative for the initial discussions, and the
second participant (younger adult, aged 21 years) was new to
the study.

Before the workshop, participants were given access to a website
containing PDF information taken directly from the REACT
booklet, which both the participants spent a considerable amount
of time reading. During the workshop, participants were given
brief information about the REACT project. First, participants
were asked to highlight mental health–related and nonrelated
webpages they liked or disliked, then we looked into their
aesthetics and functionalities together. This was followed by
visual demonstration of a series of prototypes, which represented
design choices for the REACT Web-based intervention based
on data from workshops 1 and 2. The prototypes were designed
in conjunction with a Web design company and mainly focused
on aesthetic aspects of the Web interface, that is, logo, font style
and size, navigation menu, color scheme, and multimedia
choices.

We wanted to know how to translate the values and needs
participants highlighted in workshops 1 and 2 into functionalities
that can be implemented in the REACT Web-based intervention.
In particular, we wanted to know how to provide a positive user
experience and, therefore, asked the participants to discuss (1)
how to design the REACT Web-based intervention to be more
engaging, (2) what features could motivate relatives to revisit
the intervention, and (3) the types of support features, which
can only be offered online. These design decisions were explored
in depth in workshop 3, which focused on attempting to make
clear design decisions to bring forward to the development phase
for the REACT Web-based intervention.

Data Analysis: Phase 1

The qualitative data collected from all 3 workshops were coded
in NVivo 11 software (QSR International) [52] by 2 researchers
using the Braun and Clarke [53] thematic analysis to identify
key ideas to inform the design of the REACT Web-based
intervention. The analysis was inductive and, therefore, data
driven. Coders then worked together and discussed any
discrepancies before agreeing on a final set of themes. Identified
themes were discussed and refined with input from another

researcher to ensure the themes were representative of the data
and could inform the design of the Web-based version of
REACT.

Phase 2 Method: Heuristic Evaluation

The clinical effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of the REACT
Web-based intervention is currently undergoing a national RCT
[54]. We wanted to run a preliminary, surface-level usability
evaluation of the REACT Web-based intervention with a small
group of participants in preparation for the RCT. Our intention
with this heuristic evaluation was not to evaluate the clinical
effectiveness of the REACT Web-based intervention but to
identify any inconsistencies, which could be addressed before
the start of the RCT. We were looking for any inconsistencies
in relation to language, functionalities, content, and structure
of the intervention as well as whether the registration process
is easy to follow and would make sense to the relatives. Using
a similar approach to van der Krieke et al [55], we created a
table of the questions that we were looking to address in this
evaluation stage (see Table 1; questions adapted from the study
by van der Krieke et al [55]). The questions were designed based
on the 10 usability principles of Neilsen’s heuristic evaluation
guideline [56]. All participants were informed about the aim of
the evaluation and were instructed to think about our questions
during their evaluation. To gain a better perspective of the
typical users, we conducted this evaluation in 2 different settings
of controlled and uncontrolled environments.

Controlled Setting Testing

This session was conducted in a controlled setting in a
computing laboratory at Lancaster University. Overall, 3
participants took part; all were relatives and had mixed computer
abilities. Two participants were new to the study. The one-to-one
sessions were planned as think-aloud
activities where
participants were asked to walk through the intervention starting
with the registration process, then using and testing
functionalities, and documenting their experiences as they went
through. The participants were asked to talk about their
experience as they were using the intervention and report any
incidents related to the questions in Table 1. Each session was
audio-recorded and was used as a feedback to evaluate and
refine the system requirements. Participants were provided with
the opportunity to get in touch via email after the session to
provide any further thoughts or ideas they wished to be included
in the final development stage.

Uncontrolled Field-Testing

Because relatives are more likely to access the intervention from
their own personal environment and without any assistance, it
is important to review the intervention in an uncontrolled setting.
A total of 8 participants were given access to the REACT
Web-based intervention for 2 weeks, were asked to use it from
their preferred environment (eg, their home), and provide
feedback via email. Participants were recruited from our service
user researcher group, which is a group comprising people with
mental health problems and their relatives.

JMIR Ment Health 2018 | vol. 5 | iss. 4 | e11473 | p.4

Table 1. Questions adapted from the study by van der Krieke et al to examine the usability of the Relatives Education And Coping Toolkit (REACT)
Web-based intervention.

Question
Usability principle

Are the steps in the registration process clear to relatives?
Visibility of system status

Is the intervention unresponsive or slow at any point?

Does this intervention represent real-world experiences of relatives’ population and
whether or not speaks in a language or uses terminologies that are familiar to this group?
Match between system and the real world

Is it clear for relatives which actions or activities are private and public?
User control and freedom

Is it clear that user can make the decision on how to engage with the intervention (unre-
strictive model)?

Are the content, terminologies, and features of the intervention consistent throughout the
intervention?
Consistency and standards

What mistakes are likely to occur during the registration process and completion of the
eligibility questionnaires?
Error prevention

Does the intervention have capacity to prevent or act on these mistakes?

Are the list of available functionalities, icons, and structure of the intervention clearly
explained to the relative at all time?
Recognition rather than recall

Does the relative have control over how they wish to use the intervention (personalized
manner)?
Flexibility and efficiency of use

Are features of the intervention easy to understand, distinguish, and use?
Aesthetic and minimalist design

Is there enough clear instruction on how to get in touch and report any issues to the team?
Help users recognize, diagnose, and recover from errors

Is there enough guidance on how to use the intervention?
Help and documentation

Data Analysis: Phase 2

The qualitative data collected from the controlled setting testing
were analyzed by 1 researcher using content analysis [57] to
identify the improvements suggested by our participants.
Participants who took part in the uncontrolled field testing
provided their feedback by email, which consisted of mainly
bullet points of recommended changes. The list of all identified
changes from both settings was collated by 1 researcher, which
was then passed to our internal software team to be addressed.

Results

Phase 1 Findings

Although the themes and subthemes are described as discrete,
themes are to a large extent intertwined, building, or expanding
on previous themes. A total of 9 themes emerged from all 3
workshops’ data, which were then synthesized into the 3 wider
theme headings that we used to illustrate our findings. The 3
main identified overarching themes are (1) caring as an invisible
role, (2) support needed for relatives, and (3) concerns about
online support. Although relatives’ experiences as caregivers
have been widely researched and described elsewhere [58-60],
it is important to provide a context for the experiences of those
involved in our study. We first report these broad themes to
provide an insight into the themes of discussion. We then move
to discuss the design requirements for the REACT Web-based
intervention, which was generated from workshop 3. We append
the quotes along with both workshop and participant number
to distinguish sources of data (eg, a quote from workshop 1
participant 9 would be [WS1, P9]). In workshop 3, P2 represents
the younger adult participant.

Caring as an Invisible Role

A Change in Identity

Participants reflected on their personal experiences around the
process of becoming a relative of someone with a mental health
problem. Participants talked about feeling a loss of sense of self
in their journey of becoming a carer. They felt they had been
pushed into a carer role and found it hard to maintain their
identity as a mother, brother, and so on. The role of the carer
was particularly unappealing as there was no formal training or
guidance for this role; so, as well as being enforced, it was also
very challenging:

I don’t want to be a carer, I don’t like the word. I’m
a Mother. [WS1, P9]
Many participants described how it took years for them to learn
strategies to cope with the impact of mental health problems on
the rest of the family, including (1) how to cope with new
responsibilities and burden of care, (2) the changes the
caregiving role brings to relative’s personal and professional
life, (3) coping with emotional side effects, and (4) societal
stigma surrounding mental health.

Impact on the Whole Family

Participants described the very broad impact of mental health
on the wider family and the need for support for all family
members:

Our youngest son didn’t understand what his brother
was going through. He may have known about his
brother thinking that people were after him, but it
must have been terrible for him and in fact not long
ago he actually left the family. [WS1, P1]

JMIR Ment Health 2018 | vol. 5 | iss. 4 | e11473 | p.5

In addition, participants discussed requiring support not just as
relatives but also as individuals in their own right, with other
responsibilities in their lives:

I might have had a right morning with my son;
threatening suicide or wrestling for my own. And I’d
have to go in work...change into my uniform and drive
to work and I’ve got a lump in my throat. And I’d
phone my partner [saying] I’m going to cry. [WS2,
P3]

Social Isolation

Social interaction is challenging for relatives of those with
physical illness as they may have little respite because of the
need for constant caring. However, with mental health, social
isolation can be further exacerbated by the result of stigma and
lack of public awareness about mental health. Participants talked
about having found it difficult to open up and discuss their
mental health–related experiences with others. Finding other
people with similar lived experiences had been initially
challenging, but once accessed, became invaluable, not only
for emotional support but also for signposting to important
information and guidance elsewhere. Many were part of
charity-run face-to-face peer support groups facilitated by an
expert relative:

The person who runs our small group is a God send,
what’s worrying is if she couldn’t do that job what
would we do with it? That’s what I always think about
because there’s got to be a system there that does
what she does... [WS1, P4]
Although valuable, these groups were considered to be scarce
and almost invisible to newly adopted relatives.

Support Needed for Relatives

Informational Support

Participants acknowledged that it can take years for relatives to
learn about the mental health problems and, on reflection,
identified 3 types of educational information sources that could
be useful for other relatives:

1.
All available sources of support (eg, local support groups
and national charity organizations):

This exists. That exists. You can read this. You can
read that. You can go here. You can go there. You’ve
got a right to this—this is practical help—not the
general pat you on the back and say everything’s
alright and happy clappy, and let’s be friends. But
actual hard practical, meaningful. [WS1, P6]

2.
Information about medication, including types, side effects,
and how to manage doses:

We’re never given sort of like a comparative—
information about the various anti-psychotics. They
had awful side effects. [WS2, P5]

3.
Legal rights:

I think actually what carers are entitled to under the
law is very different from what they get in real life.
And you’ve got to know. [WS1, P1]

Overall, participants agreed that knowledge is power and that
relatives of those who have been newly diagnosed would benefit
from guidance on how to get help and to be signposted to trusted
and up-to-date resources.

One of the challenges of a self-management toolkit is that there
are often no right or wrong answers. Participants highlighted
the importance of vicarious learning in addition to didactic
instruction. One participant felt that a limitation of many of
online support they had reviewed was that they tried to provide
checklists of what to do:

like a lot of websites will say, oh why don’t you try
meditation, going for a walk. [WS3, P2]
Instead, it was suggested that online support needs to be thought
provoking; it needs to facilitate thinking and reflecting exercises
that enable relatives to learn problem-solving strategies that can
then be applied to their own particular context:

...like stuff that helps you ask questions and helps you
think about what you’re feeling rather than like, try
this, because there’s only like so much a hot bath can
cure. [WS3, P2]
Participants suggested more emphasis should be placed on
inviting relatives to dip in and out, in an order and frequency
of their choosing, without the need to complete the intervention
in a sequential order:

Normally websites like this are just information, read
it and then go. But because this is more of a
programme that you can work through. So I’d have
to understand that’s what it was for and that was how
I’d used it in a really good clear way. [WS3, P2]

Emotional Support

Participants talked about the emotional impact of supporting
someone with psychosis and the importance of emotional and
practical support:

I had some professional experience [in mental health]
but it’s completely different when you are emotionally
involved in somebody. And it’s literally like
somebody’s just parachuted you into a foreign
country. You’ve no idea of what should be happening,
what is available. And you need to know that
sometimes to be able to get it. But the peer support
is about emotional support. And I think what health
professionals sometimes don’t understand is by the
time you get to them you’ve been doing this for
months. Twenty four hours a day, seven days a week.
And the emotional toll on you. [WS2, P2]
They talked about the importance of hearing that their
experiences were not unique, the need for explicit reassurances
that the development of mental health problems within the
family was not their fault, and that they were doing all they
could to manage the situation:

My mum never forgets this nurse who said to her, it
could happen to anybody. This is not your fault.
You’re doing everything you can. And that just lifted
that guilt off my parents. [WS2, P7]

JMIR Ment Health 2018 | vol. 5 | iss. 4 | e11473 | p.6

Opportunities to have social contact with similar relatives to
share lived experiences and feel connected and supported were
particularly valued:

But there’s nothing better than seeing that somebody
else has had the same fears and guilt to start with.
Worries about the future and practical travel
problems, just to hear that other people have got the
same issues that you have. [WS3, P1]
Participants explained that for some questions, there is a lack
of informative answers on Google:

How much am I supposed to do? How strict am I
supposed to be? When’s the point when I back off?
And that’s not really a question that I felt I could ask
Google cause I’m not going to get anything useful
from that. [WS3, P2]
Instead, relatives are looking for someone to talk to even if they
realize that there is nothing they can do to resolve the situation;
at times knowing that they are not the only person debating the
issue could serve to help them cope better.

A Recovery-Focused Approach

Although most of the discussion revolved around challenges
relatives faced, the need to focus on positive outcomes was also
important to relatives. One participant explained how she
desperately struggled in finding positive role models for her
son:

But then I realised that the positive role models don’t
want to go back and look again. And there’s got to
be thousands of recovered or people who are
managing their condition but they don’t really want
to join the club. And that would be priceless to have
more positive role models. People who have managed
and are managing their conditions or have completely
recovered. [WS3, P1]
There was a general feeling that both relatives and people with
mental health problems would benefit from hearing positive
stories to give them hope that recovery is possible.

Participants expressed that supporting someone with a mental
health condition is often an ongoing journey and suggested to
offer a personal space in which relatives can save useful
information to revisit easily in the future:

Like some kind of like scrapbook section. Not called
that but that kind of thing where like people just put
different stuff in. [WS3, P2]
The value of this was not only in having a useful place to store
things to be revisited but also to facilitate a process of reflection
on progress over time:

...it’s very affirming to go back to some of the earlier
learning content to realise that you have learnt, you
know, I’ve acted correctly. You have been a good
carer. [WS3, P1]

Concerns About Online Support

Questioning the Confidentiality of Online Support

Participants debated on the use of Web resources in a mental
health context and expressed that online support can be seen as
a "big scary virtual world" for some relatives. Some participants
expressed fears toward online activity, and many felt reluctant
to input personal information to any website. Their fears were
that once shared, information posted online could never be
removed and will always be “Googleable.” There was also an
ethical dilemma that, in sharing their own experiences online,
they may be sharing their relatives’ personal experiences without
their explicit consent. Participants agreed that it is often unclear
as "whose story is it” that they might be sharing online:

I don’t mind saying anything about my own medical
symptoms or if I had a mental health problem but I
don’t feel comfortable about using it about my
relatives.No, but on the other hand if my anxiety and
stress and my needs are because myrelative’s issues
aren’t being addressed.Then it is about me but it’s
still about her. So I wouldn’t feel comfortable putting
anything down there. But everybody’s different so I
think there needs to be a number of ways to access
this information. [WS1, P10]

Wider Impact of Being Active Online

They described several practical challenges about using the
internet, including limited access and skills:

I live in the country and my internet doesn’t work half
the time and my computer is probably my biggest
source of stress. [WS1, P10]
However, it was not only practical issues that made them
concerned. This dilemma was exacerbated by the fear of the
impact their posts might have on their relative if they saw them:

I feel uncomfortable about discussing [my relative
online] if my relative happened to get access to it, it
could trigger a major episode. [WS1, P8]
Many reported that receiving destructive comments on social
media could place significant strains on relatives:

You might just get some people who are just time
wasters. You might get some destructive things. [WS2,
P1]
However, they acknowledged the need for moderators:

Usually though you have moderators on sites like
that. [WS2, P6]
Participants acknowledged that to eliminate stigma, mental
health needs to be discussed openly but feared this could cause
more damage:

But I’ve always feared letting [my relative] know how
I’m feeling about things...I’m not sure how far we can
open up... [WS1, P5]
In discussions around prompts, participants felt that options
should be made available for people to customize the frequency
and mode of delivery of prompts. They disliked receiving too
many prompts and expressed that if they received prompts too

JMIR Ment Health 2018 | vol. 5 | iss. 4 | e11473 | p.7

often they would feel “suffocated” or “pressured,” especially if
they are having a good day and, therefore, “reject” and
“unsubscribe.” They also preferred receiving person-centered
prompts:

What’s your question this week? What are you
worrying about this week? You never get any e-mails
that just say how are you doing? How are you [WS3,
P2]

Legitimacy of Online Support

Simplicity, easy navigation, and professional look were all seen
as features that would attract relatives by assuring them that this
intervention is legitimate:

...cause you look at it and you go, oh wow, this looks
legitimate like I can trust this. And then you start
building up that trust and start using it. [WS3, P2]
Participants compared the look of a website with a building and
suggested not to aim for a slick look, such as a building with
shiny floors that feels corporate, instead, something professional
that provides the information but looks simple. Overall, the
design of the toolkit was felt to be very important in engendering
a sense of trust in participants. Participants emphasized on the
importance of privacy and security and that they need to be
assured that the online support is a safe environment for sharing
stories and experiences:

It would have to be very secure the site, because who
can access this site, I mean I don’t go on Facebook
or anything like that because I just think that a lot of
it is not secure. Anybody can [access], you know.
[WS2, P1]
Overall, participants had mixed views about the value of online
support but felt that people in the next generation may be more
positive:

We’re all of a certain age. And what I’m finding is
that, the people in the group who are a lot younger
are actually perfectly happy to go all over Facebook.
[WS1, P1]
And may even be put off by paper-based support:

But it’s often a generational thing and a lot of younger
carers are siblings. Would never dream of getting
something off paper they would automatically go
online. [WS2, P6]

Relatives Education And Coping Toolkit Web-Based
Intervention Design

The REACT Web-based intervention was developed using
WordPress [61]—an open source Content Management
System—and can be accessed via a weblink to sign up.
However, the weblink is currently not openly available as

REACT’s clinical effectiveness is still being tested under
controlled conditions. The interface is responsive to various
devices, including mobile phones, tablets, and desktop. The
REACT Web-based intervention (Figure 1) is composed of 6
features: educational modules (REACT), list of national and
local support resources (resource directory), discussion forum
(REACT group), moderators (REACT supporters), personal
space (my toolbox), and a blog section.

The REACT Toolkit was designed based on the REACT booklet
and features 12 modules covering various aspects of mental
health. Each module contains information, self-reflection
activities, and short video clips of clinicians, REACT supporters,
and lived experiences of relatives (who are played by actors).
Further details of the modules can be found in the study by
Lobban et al [54].

To support participants’ concerns around finding reliable and
trusted information online, we created the resources directory
feature, which aims to bring together an extensive list of Web
resources that relatives may find useful at all stages of caring.
The resource directory offers more detailed explanations and
information on various topics relevant to supporting someone
with a mental health problem. This feature has 4 main categories,
each covering a range of different topics: (1) national
organizations supporting relatives, that is, charity organizations;
(2) government guidance, that is, the department of work and
pension; (3) topic-specific information, that is, insurance and
driving license;and (4) local resources to support relatives of
people with mental health problems—relatives would access
the UK map and by selecting the area they live in, they will be
provided with a list of support available in their area.

In response to participants desire to be emotionally supported
and linked to others with similar experiences, we created the
REACT group—a moderated space for sharing knowledge and
emotional peer support. The REACT supporters who are trained
relatives with lived experience of caring for a family member
moderate the REACT group are available for private questions.
They also update the resource directory on a regular basis.

My Toolbox is a private space to store the information that is
important to the relative. My Toolbox was created in response
to participants’ desire for a personal approach to be able to save
interesting content and the ability to revisit in a less
time-consuming and less stressful manner, particularly during
crises. Throughout the intervention, relatives will see the save
to toolbox symbol, which once clicked allows the page to
become stored in their My Toolbox space. The blog facilitates
an opportunity to update relatives of the latest news or to provide
a topic-relevant story of the most sought-after topics on the
REACT group by invited guests, that is, clinicians, researchers,
or our REACT supporters.

JMIR Ment Health 2018 | vol. 5 | iss. 4 | e11473 | p.8

Figure 1. Screenshots to show features of the Relatives Education And Coping Toolkit (REACT) Web-based intervention.

Phase 2: Findings

We evaluated the initial system requirements against the
feedback from both heuristic evaluations, and where possible,
the findings are related to the Neilsen’s guideline [57]. Any
identified changes were addressed by our internal software team.
The majority of reported issues were relevant to Neilsen’s
Consistency and Standards principle, which was focused on
typos within the text, rewording some sentences, and resizing
images. There were also some instances in which some features
were unresponsive, for example, a video would not play or a
link would not redirect, which were related to the Visibility of
System Status principle. Some participants who conducted the
evaluation from home reported that initially they found it

difficult to understand how to use the intervention, that is, the
role of My Toolbox was unclear; this corresponds to the
aesthetic and minimalist design principle. Furthermore, related
to the Match between System and the Real World principle,
they recommended that using more images of the REACT
supporters’ faces throughout the intervention would add value
in terms of getting a sense of the real people behind the
intervention and promoting relatability and trust. In response
to the 2 former comments, we created additional short videos
of the REACT supporters introducing themselves, explaining
the functionalities of the REACT Web-based intervention, and
providing instructions on how to navigate and use the
intervention. With regard to the content of the REACT and the

JMIR Ment Health 2018 | vol. 5 | iss. 4 | e11473 | p.9

Match between System and the Real World principle,
participants found the topics covered relevant and useful:

...this is really useful information that I was never
made fully aware of when we needed it.
A number of participants highlighted a further issue with respect
to the Match between System and the Real World principle, and
they expressed how they disliked acronyms as they find them
difficult to understand. They suggested to list both the acronyms
and their full names as a “jargon buster” type approach, which
was added to our resource directory. Related to the Visibility
of System status principle, participants commented that they
could watch the lived experience videos using their home
internet network and found them useful to get a sense of “
someone else understands what this is like” and to give hope to
relatives when they are struggling or are in a crisis. This
confirmed that the intervention is representing real-world
experiences of relatives related to the Match between System
and the Real World principle. Participants commented positively
on the REACT group and found it easy to use:

I really like this idea of a virtual meeting place for
sharing experiences and getting support, I think this
might prove to be one of the most helpful areas of the
site.

Discussion

Principal Findings

The aim of this study was to develop an accessible Web-based
intervention to support the informational and emotional needs
of relatives of people experiencing psychosis or BD. We used
a user-centered design approach to better understand the needs
and values of relatives. Our findings showed that relatives
preferred technologies that (1) they can place their trust in,
particularly when discussing a highly sensitive topic, (2) enable
learning from the lived experiences of others while retaining
confidentiality, and (3) they can work through in their own pace
in a personalized manner. These findings have clear implications
for the design of our Web-based version of REACT and for
others developing similar Web-based interventions for people
affected by mental health conditions. Our discussion is organized
into the following design considerations: (1) designing to
engender trust and (2) designing for relatives with many roles.

Designing to Engender Trust

As Briggs et al [62] note, our findings show that it is not simply
the provision of health-related information that is important, it
is the establishment of trust and credibility. There was much
discussion about the need for trust in information sources in the
sense that they are reliable and legitimate. The guideline for
designing trust into online experiences [63] suggests making it
easier for users to access the enforced privacy policies to
establish trust. As noted in the study by Sillence et al [64], trust
is closely associated with risk, and in the context of designing
a toolkit for relatives, this goes beyond the risks surrounding
self-disclosure and is more concerned about revealing
information about someone else’s experiences. Relatives
discussing their experiences of caring for someone with a mental
health condition could be seen to give away personal

information, including the identity of the person with a mental
health problem. Although health is perceived as a high-risk
domain for seeking support online [65], mental health faces
additional challenges establishing trust with online users because
of the stigma related to mental health conditions. As such,
factors affecting trust in mental health need to be understood if
the online support is to be valued in long-term use.

It was apparent that our participants spent a number of years
reaching a point in which they understood the mental health
condition enough to reach out to face-to-face support groups
and to gain an understanding of the care system infrastructure.
Reaching this point is a lengthy and tiresome journey, and
although it feels as if they need to be part of a group to know
their rights, peer support groups are small and almost invisible
to relatives who are new in their caring role and may be feeling
overwhelmed adapting into this role. Our findings highlighted
that although relatives had difficulties finding and accessing
support, privacy and security concerns may inhibit them from
accessing this support online. Although they valued being
connected to others with similar experiences, they raised
concerns about the misuse of discussion forums and emphasized
the need for moderators. Our participants wanted to know that
their personal information and discussions will be kept
confidential, particularly when discussing highly stigmatizing
topics such as mental health. For the majority of participants,
finding a way to share lived experiences while maintaining the
confidentiality of oneself and the person they care for was an
important value, and they would like to access tools that would
support them. As such, we encourage future researchers wishing
to work within this space to make it clear what happens to
individuals’ data, explain what safeguarding measures are in
place to protect the privacy of individuals, and clarify how the
provision of a safe environment for interacting with others has
been embedded within the core of the design (eg, providing
moderators and setting ground rules for interaction).

In addition, our participants wanted to know that the information
provided in the toolkit was credible and that real people with
clinical expertise and lived experiences of mental health
problems had been engaged in its development. Aesthetics,
branding, quality of information, and relevancy of the
information to each individual user were all seen to influence
credibility. This is consistent with findings in the broader
literature around trust in health information [64,66,67] and
highlights the necessity of engaging multiple members of health
community in the design of tools aimed at targeting information
provision and support needs.

Designing for Relatives With Many Roles

One of the continuing concerns participants expressed was the
need for retaining a sense of ownership during care, particularly
when they feel that the caring role has overtaken other life roles
(eg, being a partner, parent, or sibling). We suggest that we do
not just focus on designing for the relative as a user but also
explore designing for relatives with other roles and
responsibilities (eg, relatives managing a career and relatives
with young children). We need to make sure that we develop
online support that allows relatives to retain their identity rather
than just focusing on caring. This is reflective of previous work,

JMIR Ment Health 2018 | vol. 5 | iss. 4 | e11473 | p.10

which has explored the design of technologies that fit into the
messy daily lives of relatives [68,69]. Similarly, online support
tools should be designed in such a way to let relatives work at
own pace while being able to carry on with other aspects of
their life. It was apparent in our study that relatives are not
homogenous in their experiences and, thus, their priorities and
their engagement with online support, therefore, having space
to tailor and personalize engagement is essential.

Monk et al addressed the need to move from designing for
usability to enjoyment [70], which is also echoed in feedback
from our participants. Our findings indicate that relatives require
technologies that take away the pressure and stress resulting
from caring duties, and they preferred informational support
that provides a positive, although realistic, representation of
mental health problems. Our participants wanted to ensure that
we provided a message that recovery is possible, that relatives
will eventually identify their own coping strategies, and that
the future can be bright. We tried to convey these positive
messages throughout the intervention as well as the video stories
of lived experiences of relatives. The assumption is that with
mental health, we deal with very serious challenges, and when
it comes to design of software systems, we only focus on
usefulness rather than a system that can be both useful and
motivating. Hence, from a design perspective, we still need to
investigate positive approaches and how to promote positive
emotion in this very complex and challenging domain of mental
health.

Strengths and Limitations

The main strength of this study is the employment of
user-centered design methodology where in-depth perspectives
of relatives of people with psychosis or BD were collected. This
early involvement in the design and heuristic evaluation process
of the REACT Web-based intervention can increase the
likelihood of developing a useful and trusted supportive toolkit.
The main weakness of the study is the use of a convenience
sample that was skewed toward older females aged over 65
years, with limited computer literacy. The sample was recruited

through existing links and local carer groups and is, therefore,
not representative of relatives supporting people with mental
health problems or those likely to engage with Web-based
interventions.

Despite not intending to recruit an older sample of participants,
this proved beneficial. First, we consulted experienced relatives
who had been providing support for their family member for a
number of years and, therefore, had expert knowledge in the
challenges, solutions, and support that families of people with
newly diagnosed mental health problems might need. In
addition, our participants had less familiarity with online
support, which resulted in them sharing important concerns
related to privacy, confidentiality, and trust, which may not
have been shared by younger and more tech-savvy participants
who are used to modern social media. Although initially we
considered our largely older sample as a limitation to our study,
we found it particularly helpful to hear the concerns of these
relatives as it made us think about how to address these in our
design. This resulted in more inclusive design decisions and
opened up our toolkit to be accessible for a wider range of users.

Conclusions

Through this study, we have offered a deepened understanding
of the specific needs and values of relatives of people with
experiences of BD or psychosis to inform the design of a
Web-based intervention to support them in their caring role.
Although it is challenging to meet the needs of all end users,
engaging them in the development of resources to support them
is valuable and necessary. Our study has highlighted the
challenges relatives face during the process of becoming
caregivers and the need for providing a trustworthy, supportive
tool where they can gain informational and emotional support
and gain access to others with similar experiences. Our heuristic
evaluation of the REACT Web-based intervention showed
promise in terms of perceived usability by a small number of
participants. An RCT is currently underway to evaluate its
clinical effectiveness.