Original Paper

An Evaluation Service for Digital Public Health Interventions:
User-Centered Design Approach

Kassandra Karpathakis1, BSc; Gene Libow2, BA; Henry W W Potts3, PhD; Simon Dixon4, BA; Felix Greaves5,6*,
PhD; Elizabeth Murray7*, FRCGP, FRCP (Edin), PhD

1NHS Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, NHSX, London, United Kingdom
2Independent Service Design Consultant, London, United Kingdom
3Institute of Health Informatics, University College London, London, United Kingdom
4NHSX, London, United Kingdom
5Department of Primary Care and Public Health, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom
6Science, Evidence and Analysis, National Institute of Health and Care Excellence, London, United Kingdom
7Research Department of Primary Care and Population Health, University College London, London, United Kingdom
*these authors contributed equally

Henry W W Potts, PhD
Institute of Health Informatics
University College London
222 Euston Road
London, NW1 2DA
United Kingdom
Phone: 44 20 3549 5303

Abstract

Background: Digital health interventions (DHIs) have the potential to improve public health by combining effective interventions
and population reach. However, what biomedical researchers and digital developers consider an effective intervention differs,
thereby creating an ongoing challenge to integrating their respective approaches when evaluating DHIs.
Objective: This study aims to report on the Public Health England (PHE) initiative set out to operationalize an evaluation
framework that combines biomedical and digital approaches and demonstrates the impact, cost-effectiveness, and benefit of DHIs
on public health.
Methods: We comprised a multidisciplinary project team including service designers, academics, and public health professionals
and used user-centered design methods, such as qualitative research, engagement with end users and stakeholders, and iterative
learning. The iterative approach enabled the team to sequentially define the problem, understand user needs, identify opportunity
areas, develop concepts, test prototypes, and plan service implementation. Stakeholders, senior leaders from PHE, and a working
group critiqued the outputs.
Results: We identified 26 themes and 82 user needs from semistructured interviews (N=15), expressed as 46 Jobs To Be Done,
which were then validated across the journey of evaluation design for a DHI. We identified seven essential concepts for evaluating
DHIs: evaluation thinking, evaluation canvas, contract assistant, testing toolkit, development history, data hub, and publish health
outcomes. Of these, three concepts were prioritized for further testing and development, and subsequently refined into the proposed
PHE Evaluation Service for public health DHIs. Testing with PHE’s Couch-to-5K app digital team confirmed the viability,
desirability, and feasibility of both the evaluation approach and the Evaluation Service.
Conclusions: An iterative, user-centered design approach enabled PHE to combine the strengths of academic and biomedical
disciplines with the expertise of nonacademic and digital developers for evaluating DHIs. Design-led methodologies can add
value to public health settings. The subsequent service, now known as Evaluating Digital Health Products, is currently in use by
health bodies in the United Kingdom and is available to others for tackling the problem of evaluating DHIs pragmatically and
responsively.

(J Med Internet Res 2021;23(9):e28356) doi: 10.2196/28356

J Med Internet Res 2021 | vol. 23 | iss. 9 | e28356 | p. 1

KEYWORDS
digital health; internet-based interventions; mHealth; evaluation studies; public health; human-centered design; service design;
mobile phone

Introduction

For public health interventions to significantly impact healthy
life expectancy in a population, reach has to be combined with
efficacy [1]. Reach is the proportion of the target population
affected by an intervention, and efficacy is the effect of an
intervention on the individuals it reaches. There is considerable
interest in the potential of digital health interventions (DHIs)
to improve public health. DHIs are delivered on digital
platforms, such as the web or smartphone apps intended to
deliver health care or health promotion [2]. Such DHIs are
expected to combine the reach of large-scale population
initiatives, such as media advertising, with the efficacy of
individual treatments. Furthermore, DHIs are intended to
increase both capacity and access to public health initiatives by
providing services in areas where face-to-face options are
unavailable or unable to meet demand.

Although there is evidence for the efficacy of many DHIs in
public health [3-10], few studies indicate that their public health
potential is being realized in practice. What constitutes success
is viewed differently by biomedical researchers and digital
product developers. Biomedical research on digital health is
heavily influenced by the pharmaceutical model with a focus
on trials and effectiveness, whereas digital developers often
focus on usability and acceptability [11]. However, both
perspectives are required [11]. A digital product cannot be
successful at scale without satisfactory usability. However, user
ratings can be insufficient, sometimes bearing either no relation
or even an inverse relation to the effectiveness of DHIs [12-14].

As a public health body with a finite budget and responsibility
for improving population health, Public Health England (PHE)
was at the forefront of considering how best to use DHIs to
improve health outcomes and evaluate their value (measured
as an improvement to public health). Multiple biomedical and
digital approaches to the evaluation of DHIs exist and are
described and critiqued elsewhere [2,11,15-18]. This paper
reports on a project by PHE to develop and operationalize an
evaluation framework that combines these approaches with the
goal of demonstrating the impact, cost-effectiveness, and benefit
of DHIs on public health.

Methods

Design

User-centered design (UCD), applied by a multidisciplinary
team, was used to synthesize the strengths of digital evaluation
approaches with those of the biomedical approach. The project
objectives were as follows:

1.
Identify core audiences and stakeholders for evaluation of
DHIs (user groups)
2.
Identify the needs of users for evaluating DHIs, including
barriers and facilitators

3.
Identify the key performance indicators (KPIs) and
outcomes that different audiences and stakeholders consider
important in evaluating DHIs
4.
Identify evaluation methods (ways of conducting an
evaluation study), tools (resources that can aid in carrying
out an evaluation), and metrics (standard quantitative
measures that can be used in an evaluation) applicable to
DHIs
5.
Prototype and test an evaluation approach for DHIs used
in a public health context

User-Centered Design

A modified UCD approach, known as service design, was
adopted. The UCD approach bases the design, testing, and
development of a product or service on the needs of the users
affected by it [13]. This approach, which began as a focus on
the end user’s interaction with products, has evolved into
designing both products and services. It considers the needs of
a broad range of users, including organizational users providing
the service, users responsible for the finances and direction of
the service, and other users in the service ecosystem. This
holistic evolution is reflected in service design [19,20], a
choreography of the processes, technologies, and interactions
needed to set up and drive a service through a UCD perspective
[21].

Service design helps reduce risk by investing upfront in
validating a service proposition with end users before physically
building the product or service (desirability and usability),
clarifying what is required of the organization to deliver the
service (feasibility), clarifying the potential business impact of
the service (viability), having a strong focus on outcomes, and
embedding the host organization’s team that will eventually run
the service in research and design activities [22]. By designing
to meet the needs of users, service design methods are intended
to ensure that the resultant service is more likely to be desirable,
usable, feasible, and viable. Throughout this study, the term
UCD refers to the service design variation.

The project team followed the English Government Digital
Service’s agile approach, comprising discovery, alpha, beta,
and live phases [23]. This approach has subsequently been
adopted by governments worldwide. This paper reports the
discovery and alpha phases.

Setting and Project Team

At the time of the project, PHE was the national public health
agency in England responsible for protecting and improving
the nation’s health and well-being and reducing health
inequalities. The discovery phase was delivered from May to
June 2018 and the alpha phase was delivered from August 2018
to March 2019. The beta phase commenced in July 2019 and
was completed in 2021.

The project team was established using a competitive tender
[19], where applicants read a seminal paper [2] about evaluating
DHIs and presented an example of how they would integrate

J Med Internet Res 2021 | vol. 23 | iss. 9 | e28356 | p. 2

evaluation into the design and development of a DHI. The
successful applicant, Livework Studio Ltd, a service design
agency, worked alongside the internal PHE team to form the
overall project team (the project team).

In response to this challenge, Livework created a visual model
showing how different evaluation approaches and metrics could
be integrated into the design and experience of a DHI. The
model or design object (Figure S1 in Multimedia Appendix 1)
tangibly represents the problem of evaluating DHIs for various
stakeholders. The model was iterated as the project progressed.

PHE formed a working group with representatives across the
English health system, including the Department of Health and
Social Care, National Institute of Health and Care Excellence
(NICE), University College London (UCL), and the World
Health Organization. The working group provided knowledge
on the wider digital health landscape and sense-checked research
and deliverables.

The project team conducted 14 show and tells in the discovery
and alpha phases, wherein the project’s progress was shared
with a wider group of stakeholders (Show and tells are
opportunities for team members to showcase their work to their
team and wider stakeholders; it is a project management and
engagement technique commonly used by digital professionals).
This included sharing project plans, early research findings, and
design outputs from different research sessions. Stakeholder
feedback helped validate or raise concerns with the findings
and linked the project team to initiatives in the wider digital
health ecosystem.

Ethics

This project complied with the code of conduct of the Market
Research Society as required by PHE’s Research Ethics and
Governance Group, and informed consent was obtained from
the interview participants. The project’s methodology and results
were presented at two government-mandated service
assessments [23] at the end of the discovery and alpha phases

to ensure adherence to the government Service Standard [24]
for digital projects.

Recruitment

Three categories of professionals involved in the design,
development, and commissioning of public health DHIs were
identified: academics, digital product developers (hereafter
referred to as digital developers), and public health
professionals. Research participants (N=15) for the interviews
were selected to reflect these user groups. Additional participants
were recruited in the following stages.

Academics were recruited for their expertise in developing and
evaluating DHIs, as reflected in their publications and national
reputation. Digital professionals with a track record of successful
development and wide-scale deployment of DHIs were selected,
including those working for PHE, National Health Service
England and Improvement (NHSE/I), and the private sector.
Public health professionals were selected for their experience
of commissioning or delivering public health services via digital
means and their strategic overview of the challenges involved.
Within digital and public health professionals, those with and
without experience of evaluating DHIs were sampled.

Results

Iterative Data Collection Methods Presented With
Results

We used seven data collection methods: (1) review of the
literature and internal documents, (2) semistructured interviews,
(3) co-design workshops, (4) concept development, (5)
assumption mapping and experiment design, (6) paper
prototyping, and (7) proof of concept. The outputs of each stage
were the inputs for the next stage (Figure 1). Through a series
of iterative developments, the project team progressively
evolved its understanding of the problem, user needs, and
potential solutions. The seven data collection and analysis
methods, along with the results of each stage are presented in
the following sections.

Figure 1. The seven data collection methods with the output of each stage becoming the input for the next stage.

J Med Internet Res 2021 | vol. 23 | iss. 9 | e28356 | p. 3

Review of the Literature and Internal Documents

Methodology

Internal PHE documents and sample publications on the
evaluation of DHIs provided by PHE staff, including the paper
by Murray et al [2] used in the supplier challenge, were
reviewed. The aims of the review were to (1) develop an
understanding of the problem space, (2) identify themes
pertaining to evaluating DHIs—including barriers and
facilitators—for exploration in semistructured interviews
(project objective 2), and (3) identify evaluation methods, tools,
and metrics applicable to DHIs (project objective 4). The
evaluation methods identified were categorized into academic,
health, economic, and digital methods. For each method, a
simple description, scenarios of use, pros and cons, cost, time,
and existing tools and guidance were captured.

The output of stage 1 formed the basis of a discussion guide
(Multimedia Appendix 2) for the semistructured interviews
(stage 2). Additional publications were collected and synthesized
throughout the study.

Corresponding Results

The barriers identified were organizational and disciplinary
silos associated with public health commissioning, design and
development of digital services, and academic evaluation;
unclear expectations and roles; different disciplinary

expectations on what tools and methods to use for evaluation
and how to measure success or failure; limited time, capacity,
and funding; lack of evaluation experience; and rapidly evolving
DHIs (inherent tension with resource- and time-intensive
evaluations).

The facilitators identified were clear organizational goals
(outcomes) and decision-making processes, prioritizing
evaluation from the outset, ring-fenced funding, team capacity
and resources, guidance and case studies, communities of
practice, interdisciplinary collaboration, data standards, and
constructive feedback.

The resultant discussion guide (Multimedia Appendix 2) was
structured around the process of conducting an evaluation of a
DHI, as identified from the review of the literature and internal
PHE documents. Discussion guide sections included
unawareness and initiation of an evaluation; setup, information,
guidance, and tools; data, decisions, and outputs; and wrap up,
outputs, and outcomes. Questions within each section were
created to further explore themes pertaining to evaluating DHIs,
including decision-making; intervention mechanisms of action;
organizational obligations (to evaluate); metrics; success criteria;
and feedback loops. For the different user groups, additional
questions exploring the barriers to and facilitators of evaluating
DHIs were added. In total, 46 evaluation methods were
identified and categorized (Textbox 1; additional information
captured is available upon request).

J Med Internet Res 2021 | vol. 23 | iss. 9 | e28356 | p. 4

Textbox 1. Evaluation methods identified from the review of literature and internal documents.

Academic

•
Cluster randomized controlled trial (RCT)

•
Consultative or deliberative methods

•
Documentary analysis

•
Ethnography

•
Factorial RCT

•
Feasibility RCT

•
Focus group

•
Individual and group interviews

•
Interrupted time series

•
Natural experiment

•
Nonrandomized controlled before and after

•
Process evaluation

•
Propensity score-matched control study

•
RCT

•
Sequential multiple assignment randomized trial

•
Stepped-wedge RCT

•
Survey of digital health intervention users

•
Surveys of target population for digital health intervention

•
Uncontrolled before and after

•
Qualitative comparative analysis

•
Qualitative evaluation

•
Quantitative observation studies

Digital

•
A/B testing

•
Advertising data

•
App Store data

•
Cohort analysis

•
Digital uptake

•
Email tracking

•
Funnel analysis

•
Guerrilla user research

•
In app analytics

•
Likes or shares

•
Net promoter score

•
Microrandomized trials

•
Notifications

•
Web-based survey or polling

•
Search traffic

•
Self-reporting

•
Simulation modeling

•
Social media research

J Med Internet Res 2021 | vol. 23 | iss. 9 | e28356 | p. 5

Usability testing (laboratory based)
•

•
Wearable device data

•
Web analytics

Health Economic

•
Cost-benefit analysis

•
Cost consequence

•
Cost-effectiveness analysis

•
Cost utility

Semistructured Interviews

Methodology

Semistructured interviews were conducted to identify user needs
(project objectives 1 and 2). Interviews explored participants’
roles in relation to commissioning, designing, or developing
DHIs; their understanding of evaluation; and their previous
evaluation experience. Subsequent questions focused on the
process of evaluation and its evolution as a DHI are developed,
along with the key themes, barriers, and facilitators identified
in stage 1.

Interviews were conducted by service designers with expertise
in design research, lasted 60-90 minutes, and were
audiorecorded. Detailed field notes were also provided. Both
field notes and transcribed interviews formed a part of the data
set.

An interview capture template was used to highlight and
thematically organize the interview data. After each interview,
the researcher reviewed their field notes and transcripts,
highlighting the points of interest. These points were coded
using a common set of themes based on the stages of the
evaluation process (before, beginning, during, and after) and
known areas of interest, such as collaboration, clinical risk,
support and guidance, technology, and data, as identified in
stage 1. If an observation did not obviously fit within an existing
theme, a new theme was created to code it, or it was highlighted
for further review by the wider project team.

Key user statements and interview observations generated the
first iteration of user needs [18], including needs being met by
current means of evaluating DHIs and needs that remained
unmet or were causing difficulty and frustration in evaluation
efforts. Identified user needs were articulated using an accepted
UCD template called Jobs To Be Done (JTBD), which identifies
the type of user, their need, when the need arises, and the
outcome they are trying to achieve [25]. This structured
articulation clearly communicates the user’s needs to
stakeholders and the project team.

After the initial round of analysis, the project team collectively
reviewed all interviews; shared points of interest, observations,

and user needs; and clustered them according to the common
themes. User needs were mapped against a common user
journey—a way of showing a user’s journey through a service
across time [26]. This produced an overview of where and when
user needs occurred throughout the process of designing a DHI
evaluation.

Corresponding Results

A total of 15 semistructured interviews were completed, five
per target user group (Table 1). Some participants were invited
to take part in multiple data collection stages, with 6
interviewees participating in the co-design workshops (stages
3 and 4), 4 co-design workshop attendees participating in paper
prototyping (stage 7), and 1 interviewee participating in the
proof of concept (stage 8).

In total, 26 themes about evaluating DHIs were identified and
validated (Textbox S1, Multimedia Appendix 1). These themes
were organized by a user group (academic, digital, and public
health) and an evaluation stage (overview; unawareness and
initiating an evaluation; setup, information, guidance, and tools;
data, decisions, and outputs; outcomes, feedback, and decisions;
and incidents and changes).

A total of 82 JTBD were generated (18/82, 21% academic;
37/82, 45% digital; and 27/82, 32% public health), derived from
the outputs of stages 1 and 2. Table 2 shows an example of the
semistructured interview analysis and the resulting JTBD.

The initial set of JTBDs was refined and augmented through
feedback from stakeholders at the show and tells. The project
team then reviewed the outputs and distilled the superset of
research findings and user needs into a smaller subset of user
needs or JTBD: (1) representing the essential stages of the
journey, (2) most essential stages (ie, if the need was not met
then subsequent needs could not be met), and (3) those stages
most strongly indicated by research stages 1 and 2
(semistructured interviews and publications). The refined 46
JTBDs (13/46, 28% academic; 20/46, 43% digital; and 13/46,
28% public health) and the outputs of stage 1 formed the input
for the first co-design workshop.

J Med Internet Res 2021 | vol. 23 | iss. 9 | e28356 | p. 6

Table 1. Overview of participant characteristics at data collection stages 2, 3, 4, 7, and 8.

Proof of concept
(stage 8; n=6)
Paper prototypes
(stage 7; n=11)
Co-design workshop
2 (stage 4; n=10)
Co-design workshop
1 (stage 3; n=10)
Semistructured inter-
views (stage 2; n=15)
Participants

User type, n (%)

N/Aa
2 (18)
3 (30)
1 (10)
5 (33)
Academic

6 (100)
6 (55)
4 (40)
5 (50)
5 (33)
Digital

N/A
3 (27)
3 (30)
4 (40)
5 (33)
Public health

Organizations
•
•
•
•
•
PHE
DHSC
DHSCf
Mindwave
Be Mindful
•
•
•
Fresh Egg
PHE
PHE
•
King’s College
London
•
•
SH:24
Lancashire
County Council
•
UCL
•
NICEg
•
Mindtech
•
PHE
•
NHSE/Ib
•
Unboxed
•
PHEc
•
WHO
•
SH:24
•
The University
of Edinburgh
•
UCLd

•
WHOe

aN/A: not applicable.
bNHS E/I: National Health Service England and Improvement.
cPHE: Public Health England.
dUCL: University College London.
eWHO: World Health Organization.
fDHSC: Department of Health and Social Care.
gNICE: National Institute of Health and Care Excellence.

Table 2. For each user group, we provide an example aligned theme, illustrative quote, and Jobs To Be Done mapped to the relevant evaluation stage.

Jobs To Be Done
Illustrative quote
Theme
Evaluation
stage
User
group

“You have a set of tools and paradigms that are going to be suit-
able for different types of problems. When you’re investigating
different types of problems, for particular types of stakeholders,
which particular types of objectives, or even particular types of
technology, or particular stages of innovation, you have to be
careful about finding the right thing and not trying to squeeze a
round peg into a square hole.”

Evaluation
methods
Stage 2: setup,
information,
guidance, and
tools

Academic
•
As an evaluator
•
When I design/set up an evalua-
tion
•
I need access to a range of evalua-
tion tools and paradigms
•
So that I can choose the one fit for
the problem

“It’s fundamental to my role in a non-academic non-traditional
sense, as far as a non-empirical sense, because I'm the one who
manages [metric company name] and given what it takes to insure
and also the research we conduct with users to define and validate
services prior to committing resources developing them. But also
to maximize them later, so we use informal or design led evalua-
tion means to validate, to research, to prove assumptions prior
to designing things.”

Design pro-
cess
Stage 4: out-
comes, feed-
back, and deci-
sions

Digital
•
As a digital professional
•
When deciding what to design and
how to design it
•
I need to validate service proposi-
tions by proving assumptions
•
So that I can be confident in com-
mitting resources developing them

“First, we’re using it to channel shift. So, if we can get people to
use digital interventions rather than face-to-face interventions
which are much more expensive, then we’re developing a range
of products and services around that. On sexual health, we have
a new program on contraceptive access for women to help them
to make choices online and to get their contraceptive online rather

than going in through GPa services.”

Funding and
costs
Stage 0:
overview
Public
health
•
As a Director of Public Health and
Well-being
•
When I am planning service
changes
•
I need to know if people will use
a digital approach
•
So that we can save money by
shifting service from more expen-
sive face-to face-services

aGP: general practitioner.

J Med Internet Res 2021 | vol. 23 | iss. 9 | e28356 | p. 7

Co-design Workshop 1

Overview

Two co-design workshops were held to (1) validate the findings
from semistructured interviews (project objectives 1 and 2), (2)
help create a user journey that reflected the user requirements
for all three user groups (project objective 2), (3) identify
evaluation methods, tools, and metrics applicable to DHIs
(project objectives 2, 3, and 4), and (4) consider the structure
of DHIs (ie, intervention component and delivery component;
project objectives 4 and 5).

Methodology

Findings from stages 1 and 2 were articulated as JTBDs or user
needs for each of the three user groups. These were mapped
onto a user journey reflecting all stages for meeting the goal of
evaluating a DHI (Figure S2; Multimedia Appendix 1). This
mapping was used to reflect the timings and interdependencies
of each step and the user needs preceding the evaluation of a
DHI.

Workshop participants were divided into groups of three: one
person from each profession (digital, public health, and
academic). These trios worked through the draft user journey
from the perspective of a specified user group, discussing
reactions, validating the user needs that they recognized, editing
where necessary, and adding missing user needs. The exercise
was repeated twice until each trio reviewed the draft journey
from the perspective of all three user groups. Reviewing all
three sets of user needs promoted the understanding of other
perspectives among the workshop participants and the project
team.

Participants then reviewed and edited a catalog of 46 evaluation
methods and tools collated by the project team in stages 1 and
2. Participants considered different ways of categorizing them
according to the timing in the journey of planning and
conducting an evaluation.

Corresponding Results

Workshop participants validated, refined, or rearticulated the
46 JTBDs (13/46, 28% academic; 20/46, 43% digital; and 13/46,
28% public health) across the stages of the evaluation journey.
A further 27 JTBDs (8/27, 29% academic; 1/27, 3% digital; and
18/27, 66% public health) were added by workshop participants.
The project team had a total of 73 JTBDs (21/73, 28% academic;

21/73, 28% digital; and 31/73, 42% public health) at the end of
the first workshop.

The first co-design workshop structure also exposed participants
representing the three user groups to the aims, perspectives, and
corresponding needs of the other user groups. Participants were
observed sharing points of view, articulating their needs that
were not self-evident to other user groups, and learning where
their respective needs coincided. Furthermore, the different user
groups learned about the scope and responsibilities of each
other’s roles and where interdependencies between their needs
and evaluation activities were.

Workshop participants reviewed, validated, and differentiated
the evaluation catalog into evaluation methods, tools, or metrics.
Of the initial 46 evaluation methods, tools, and metrics, six were
amended, and the participants added three methods, three tools,
and 14 metrics.

Participants were observed learning about evaluation methods,
tools, and metrics they had not previously used, including their
benefits and potential scenarios of use. Participants from
different user groups shared with each other how they used the
evaluation methods, tools, and metrics in their own role and
how they chose the appropriate one, for example, based on the
potential health risk of a DHI.

After the first co-design workshop, the project team collectively
reviewed the outputs and distilled the 73 JTBDs (21/73, 28%
academic; 21/73, 28% digital; and 31/73, 42% public health)
into a smaller subset to be used as design stimulus for the second
co-design workshop. Following the same process for selecting
a subset of user needs as performed in stage 2, the subset of
JTBDs was selected by (1) representing the essential stages of
the journey, (2) most essential need (ie, if the need was not met
then subsequent needs could not be met), (3) those needs most
strongly indicated by research stages 1-3, and (4) those needs
that were actionable and useful as stimuli for a design workshop.

The project team prioritized 9 JTBDs (3/9, 33% academic; 3/9,
33% digital; and 3/9, 33% public health; Table 3) for input into
the second co-design workshop. The resultant catalog of
evaluation methods, tools, and metrics from the first co-design
workshop formed the basis of an evaluation method catalog
(project objective 4) used in stage 8 (proof of concept: prototype
of full-service experience).

J Med Internet Res 2021 | vol. 23 | iss. 9 | e28356 | p. 8

Table 3. The nine Jobs To Be Done prioritized for co-design workshop 2, with three prioritized per user group.

JTBD 3
JTBD 2
JTBDa 1
User group

Public health
•
•
•
As a commissioner
As a public health professional
As a public health professional
•
•
•
When reviewing the outcomes of an
evaluation
When writing a brief
When evaluating a service
•
•
I need to set expectations around met-
rics, methods, and implementation as
well as provider skills and capabilities

I need to know if the service is having
an impact on key metrics
•
I need the flexibility within the project
and team to make decisions that
change the direction of the project
•
So that I can make an investment case
for rolling the service out at scale
•
So that providers can build these into
their solution design and implementa-
tion plan
•
So that learnings can be used to change
the service for the better

Academic
•
•
•
As an academic evaluator
As an evaluator
As an evaluator
•
•
•
When evaluating a health product or
service
When doing evaluation
When designing or setting up an eval-
uation
•
I need an in-depth understanding of
the intervention and the pathway of
action
•
•
I need access to a range of evaluation
tools and paradigms
I need access to clean, accessible and
linked data from across the health sys-
tem
•
So that I can choose the one fit for the
problem
•
So that I can properly evaluate it
•
So that I can do my evaluation

Digital
•
•
•
As a digital professional
As a digital professional
As a digital professional
•
•
•
When evaluating a service qualitative-
ly
When deciding what to design and
how to design it
When planning a DHIb

•
I need to know what sort of evaluations
might need to take place
•
•
I need to be able to observe users
I need to validate service propositions
by testing assumptions
•
So that I can understand why they are
having difficulties
•
So that I can be prepared to participate
•
So that I can be confident in commit-
ting resources to develop them

aJTBD: Jobs To Be Done.
bDHI: digital health intervention.

Co-design Workshop 2

Methodology

The second co-design workshop was built on the first and aimed
at designing concepts for an evaluation framework for DHIs in
a public health context (project objective 5). Attendees worked
in groups of three, as before. Using a DHI case study, the
attendees created a concept for an Evaluation Service by
imagining how a user would conduct an evaluation in each case.
Stimulus materials, comprising interactive design artifacts and
JTBD from stages 1 to 3 and those specifically created for the

workshop (Figure S3 in Multimedia Appendix 1), provided
some structure for creating the concept. Attendees synthesized
these inputs into a service concept that they named, described,
and visualized using a concept template (Figure S3 in
Multimedia Appendix 1). Each concept was shared with all
workshop attendees for feedback.

Workshop outputs included a series of eight conceptual drawings
and descriptions. Using the outputs from stages 1 to 4, the
project team further articulated the different user groups as user
typologies [27] based on key dimensions of difference (Figure
2).

Figure 2. User typology for public health professionals evaluating a digital health intervention (black circles indicate the distribution of participants
in stage 2 semistructured interviews).

J Med Internet Res 2021 | vol. 23 | iss. 9 | e28356 | p. 9

Corresponding Results

The workshop produced eight raw concepts considered essential
by the participants for the DHI evaluation framework:

1.
Integrated evaluation: builds in evaluation thinking, skills,
and tools at the beginning of the DHI development process.
2.
Parallel playbook: a series of experiments to validate DHI
propositions and iterate these to validate the impact.
3.
Contract guidance: a person to help write contract terms,
thereby ensuring providers build evaluation into the design
and agree to cease or change course if the desired outcomes
are not indicated.
4.
Measurements aggregator: a way to discover and integrate
health outcome measures into one place. This would enable
digital teams to explore health outcome data and make
informed decisions when developing their DHI.
5.
Standardized way of collecting or structuring data: a visible,
accessible history of the development process for a DHI
and how it was evaluated.
6.
Conventional medical model: linking user data from a DHI
to how it affects end users’ health outcomes.
7.
Access shortcuts: an NHS data owner who has an agreement
with the local authority and clinical commissioning group
for sharing and accessing data to inform DHI development
and evaluation.

8.
Innovation framework: a PHE open-source innovation
framework for understanding the DHI context and sharing
data.

Figure 2 shows the user group typologies designed using the
dimensions of activity in evaluation (commissioning or
delivering) and confidence in evaluation (low or high).

Concept Development and Prioritization

Methodology

Stages 1 to 4 outputs formed the basis of the concepts the project
team further developed, prioritized, and carried forward. We
synthesized seven distinct concepts for evaluating DHIs with
clear propositions to support prioritization by the project team
and working group (Table 4; Multimedia Appendix 3, containing
the image of project team member synthesizing stages 1-4
outputs into the seven distinct concepts for evaluating DHIs).
How each concept was linked to meet user needs via three key
interconnected scenarios of use was visualized (Figure 3).

The concepts were scored and prioritized according to the
following criteria: meeting user needs, delivering on project
objectives, and feasibility for implementation within the PHE.
The highest scoring concepts were taken forward into the alpha
phase of the project.

J Med Internet Res 2021 | vol. 23 | iss. 9 | e28356 | p. 10

Table 4. Final seven concepts for evaluating digital health interventions and underlying Jobs To Be Done.

Sample user quoteb
Example underlying JTBDa
Concept proposition
Concept

“You have to get them at the beginning.
And it’s really hard when you don’t get
Evaluation thinking
•
•
As a Director of Public
Health
When doing a digital health project at

PHEc, evaluation thinking, skills, and
them at the beginning, ‘cause then you’ve
•
When commissioning
services
tools should be integrated into the
project from the start.
got to try and do a retrospective evaluation.
You never have the right data. It’s never as
good of quality.”
•
I need evaluation to be
aligned closely with
service delivery

•
Evaluation needs to be a central part
of the design process and iterative de-
livery of any PHE service or product.
•
So that it is formative
and not a separate
piece of work

“You have a set of tools and paradigms that
are going to be suitable for different types
Evaluation canvas
•
•
As an evaluator
The evaluation canvas is PHE’s vali-
dated and accepted portfolio of met-
•
When designing or set-
ting up an evaluation
of problems. When you’re investigating
different types of problems, for particular
rics, tools, and methods for evaluating

DHIsd.
•
I need access to a range
of evaluation tools and
types of stakeholders, which particular types
of objectives, or even particular types of
•
This canvas is the first step to creating
a knowledge base on the effectiveness
paradigms
technology, or particular stages of innova-
•
So that I can choose
the one fit for the prob-
of digital health in meeting health out-
comes and will support decisions on
tion, you have to be careful about finding
the right thing and not trying to squeeze a
round peg into a square hole.”
lem
policy, practice, and research.

“It’s setting a level of expectation...as part
of their bids, they need to articulate how
Contract assistant
•
•
As a public health pro-
fessional
A way for PHE teams to create strate-
gic relationships with suppliers, sup-
they’re going to capture data and how
ported by forward-thinking contracts.
•
When setting up evalu-
ations
they’re going to evaluate. And we needed
•
A core requirement when working for
PHE will be embedding evaluation into
some commonality so that if we have three
•
I need to get the data-
sharing agreements in
sites, we can compare across the three
sites... aggregate all our data together.”
the design and development of the DHI
and allowing for flexibility in contract-
ed deliverables as the DHI progresses.
place as simply as pos-
sible
•
So that I can collect,
collate, and evaluate
the data

“It’s fundamental to my role...I’m the one
who manages [metric company name]
Testing toolkit
•
•
As a digital profession-
al
Simple tools and methods to enable
PHE teams delivering a DHI to test all
and...also the research we conduct with
aspects of the service or product
•
When deciding what to
design and how to de-
throughout the development journey.
users to define and validate services prior
to committing resources developing them.
sign it
•
The toolkit could include a guide for
face-to-face research, approaches to
But also to maximize them later, so to use
•
I need to validate ser-
vice propositions by
informal or design-led evaluation means to
and models for planning and prototyp-
ing, functionality for randomizing
validate, to research, to prove assumptions
prior to designing things.”
testing assumptions
users, and digital solutions for validat-
ing propositions in the market and/or
•
So that I can be confi-
dent in committing re-
sources to develop
against existing services.
them

“You need a really good understanding of
how and why these things are working and
Development history
•
•
As an academic evalua-
tor
A tool for PHE to record the full devel-
opment history of their DHI project.
what you're changing...which is often much
more complex than people gather.”
This will support decision-making, fa-
cilitate process evaluation, and enable
successful assurance in line with the

•
When doing evaluation
•
I need an in-depth un-
derstanding of the inter-
Government Digital Service pipeline
vention and the path-
approach.
way of action
•
This record would include user needs,
decisions and rationale, testing meth-
•
So that I can properly
evaluate it
ods and results, information about the
underlying technology, and stakehold-
er mapping.

J Med Internet Res 2021 | vol. 23 | iss. 9 | e28356 | p. 11

Sample user quoteb
Example underlying JTBDa
Concept proposition
Concept

“A lot of their datasets are in silos, they're
maybe not using data the most effectively.”
•
As an evaluator
•
When evaluating a
health product or ser-
vice
•
I need access to clean,
accessible and linked
data from across the
health system
•
So that I can do my
evaluation

•
PHE’s data hub provides access to
high-quality, accessible, and under-
standable public health data for
providers, academia, and the wider
market.
•
Similar to Transport for London’s
Open Data, PHE will encourage devel-
opers to use PHE’s data feed to solve
public health problems in innovative
ways.
•
By setting the standard for the metrics
in the data hub and promoting collabo-
ration, this data hub may, in the future,
allow for longitudinal analysis of
DHIs.

Data hub

“We moved away from a lot of input and
process measures, and balanced it with
output and outcome measures, so we know
now what impact they're having with indi-
viduals that they're working on, particularly
their mental well-being, the escalation of
demand into adult social care, and how
they're embedding into a neighbourhood
context more than they used to before.”

•
As a digital profession-
al
•
When working with
PHE
•
I need to understand
clearly what clinical
data is required
•
So that I can be clear
what success or impact
looks like and can pro-
vide clinical impact

•
A place for stakeholders to publish and
share how DHIs have met or not met
desired health outcomes. This pro-
motes collaboration among teams
working in similar areas and enables
sharing of best practices.
•
Collaboration among PHE, public
health professionals, academia, and
suppliers working in digital public
health aligns with the Government’s

Industrial Strategy and the NHSe Inno-
vation Strategy.

Publish health outcomes

aJTBD: Jobs To Be Done.
bData from initial semistructured interviews with representatives of target user groups (academic, digital, and public health).
cPHE: Public Health England.
dDHI: digital health intervention.
eNHS: National Health Service.

Figure 3. Scenario of use illustrating how the final concepts fit together to facilitate setting up digital health intervention evaluations from conception
(project setup) through collection of data and evidence to planning testing of minimum viable products (evaluation planning).

Corresponding Results

See Table 4 for the final seven concepts created to evaluate the
DHIs. The concepts integrated perspectives and approaches

from all three user groups and were combined into a scenario
of use for PHE stakeholders. Figure 3 illustrates how the
concepts fit together into a proposed Evaluation Service for
helping teams evaluate their public health DHIs. Three concepts

J Med Internet Res 2021 | vol. 23 | iss. 9 | e28356 | p. 12

were prioritized to take forward to the next phase of work:
evaluation thinking, evaluation canvas, and testing toolkit. The
evaluation thinking concept was taken forward in a separate
work stream and is, therefore, not discussed in this paper.
Textbox 2 illustrates how one of the final concepts, evaluation

canvas, was derived and iterated through the methodology
outlined in stages 1 to 5. This is an iterative process with
multiple feedback loops rather than a linear one. See Tables S1
and S2 in Multimedia Appendix 1 for how the prioritized
concepts, testing toolkit, and evaluating thinking were derived.

Textbox 2. Sample Jobs To Be Done life cycle from primary research (stages 1 and 2) to co-design workshops (stages 3 and 4) to refined concepts
prioritized by Public Health England for further development (stage 5) in evaluating digital health interventions.

Evaluation Stage

•
Stage 2: setup, information, guidance, and tools

Theme

•
Evaluation methods

User Quote

•
“You have a set of tools and paradigms that are going to be suitable for different types of problems. When you're investigating different types
of problems, for particular types of stakeholders, which particular types of objectives, or even particular types of technology, or particular stages
of innovation, you have to be careful about finding the right thing and not trying to squeeze a round peg into a square hole.”

Jobs To Be Done

•
As an evaluator

•
When I design/set up an evaluation

•
I need access to a range of evaluation tools and paradigms

•
So that I can choose the one fit for the problem

Raw Concept From the Co-design Workshop 2

•
Parallel playbook:

a series of experiments to validate digital health intervention propositions and iterate these to validate impact

Refined Concept for Further Development

•
Evaluation canvas:

the evaluation canvas is Public Health England’s validated and accepted portfolio of metrics, tools and methods for evaluating digital health
interventions. This canvas is the first step to creating a knowledge base on the effectiveness of digital health in meeting health outcomes and will
support decisions on policy, practice, and research.

Assumption Mapping and Experiment Design

Methodology

Assumption mapping and experiment design were performed
to understand what needed to be true for each of the prioritized
concepts to work in practice within PHE (project objective 5).
This means, for example, that end users find the concept
understandable, usable, desirable, and feasible within their
workflow (project objectives 2 and 3).

For each concept, the project team identified assumptions and
articulated a hypothesis in the form of “We believe [insert user]
will [action].” This activity helped identify the circumstances
in which a hypothesis would be considered true or false and
therefore whether the assumptions were correct or erroneous.
Experiments were conducted to test each hypothesis, including
design artifacts for stimulating feedback. These experiments
were a combination of thought experiments and practical tasks.

The outputs (prioritized concepts) from stages 1 to 5 and the
subsequently articulated assumptions, hypotheses, and potential

experiments (stage 6) formed the input for the paper prototypes
(stage 7), which made the experiments tangible for the
participants and project team.

Corresponding Results

The underlying assumptions and associated hypotheses were
mapped for two concepts, evaluation canvas and testing toolkit,
and for the proposed Evaluation Service overall. Ten
assumptions were mapped with ten hypotheses (Table S3,
Multimedia Appendix 1).

Paper Prototypes

Methodology

Testing sessions were held with both individual users and teams
(Table 1) running a live DHI. These sessions differed from the
semistructured interviews as they tested whole or partial
solutions for the service using paper prototypes (project
objective 5). These sessions were used to understand (1) all of
the requisite steps, (2) the depth of each individual step, and (3)
how the steps should be ordered and interrelated. They enabled
the project team to iteratively test their understanding and clarify

J Med Internet Res 2021 | vol. 23 | iss. 9 | e28356 | p. 13

the evaluation approach. For example, to build a project team’s
high-level understanding of the potential service (project
objective 5), paper cards representing the stages of the emerging
Evaluation Service journey were created (see Multimedia
Appendix 3, item 2A showing the image of paper cards
representing the stages of the emerging Evaluation Service
journey used in stage 7, paper prototyping). Teams put these
cards in the order that made the most sense to them and added
any missing steps (see Multimedia Appendix 3, showing the
image of paper cards representing the stages of the emerging
Evaluation Service placed in order by user research participant
in stage 7, paper prototyping).

Interactive design artifacts were also used to learn more about
the individual steps of the Evaluation Service journey. This
included testing logic models (conceptual models representing
how a product is expected to work) and service blueprints [28]
(diagrammatic representations of how the front- and backstage
of a service function and dependencies) to learn how DHI teams
align on the desired health outcomes and how they assess
whether their DHI meets user needs.

The project team turned each of the aforementioned steps into
interactive workshop activities to participate in DHI teams.
First, they printed the logic model template and put it on the
wall, with descriptions for each step (see Multimedia Appendix
3 showing the image of interactive workshop testing the logic
model with a DHI team in Stage 7, paper prototyping). The DHI
team then went through each step together. The project team
observed the DHI team’s conversations and interactions, noting
whether the activity made sense to them, the questions they
asked, and the group discussion.

The project team conducted a similar interactive workshop with
the service blueprint (see Multimedia Appendix 3 showing the
image of interactive workshop testing the service blueprint with
a DHI team in stage 7, paper prototyping). In addition to
describing the user’s needs and actions, the service blueprint
can include layers reflecting the service touchpoints and features,
as well as the organizational delivery point of view, such as the
people, processes, policies, and systems [29] required to bring
each stage of the user experience to life.

The service experience tested had both analog (eg, in-person
workshops) and digital components (eg, a digital platform). The
proposed digital platform, which includes evaluation guidance
and printable workshop materials, is referred to as the Evaluation
Service. The Evaluation Service idea was tested with users using
wireframes to represent the digital experience of a landing page
and web pages for each step of the Evaluation Service. This
enabled the project team to learn what users expect from a digital
platform, as well as their feedback on content and design. The
project team turned the outputs of stage 7 into a prototype of a
full Evaluation Service, which was the input for stage 8 (proof
of concept).

Corresponding Results

Seven partial service experience paper prototype sessions were
conducted with a range of participants (Table 1). The project
team collated insights from each session, presented below, which

corresponded to the concepts and hypotheses tested (Table S3,
Multimedia Appendix 1).

The outputs of the paper card sorting exercise resulted in ordered
steps for evaluating a DHI: building an interdisciplinary team,
creating a conceptual model (logic model), creating a detailed
service blueprint, selecting relevant indicators against health
outcomes, selecting relevant evaluation methods (testing toolkit),
and learning how to use selected methods and indicators to
evaluate a DHI (testing toolkit and evaluation canvas).

By testing different paper versions of conceptual models (logic
models and/or theory of change), the project team learned that
the logic model was the simplest tool. Participants expressed
the benefits of a logic model: looking at the bigger picture,
choosing KPIs, prioritizing important outcomes to aid
decision-making, capturing and updating project elements such
as objectives, explaining how a DHI worked, and cocreating
DHI project value with stakeholders. These sessions also
revealed that the more a DHI team presents the bigger picture
of what they are trying to achieve, the better the resultant
understanding of the team and stakeholders.

These testing sessions demonstrated that participants focused
more on measuring the uptake of a DHI than the impact on
health outcomes. Teams did not know about national resources,
such as PHE’s Public Health Profiles (Fingertips), and so did
not link their DHI to nationally recognized health measures.
The project team observed that participants would benefit from
signposting and guidance in the proposed Evaluation Service
to link nationally recognized and validated measures.

Participants preferred the printed workshop format of the logic
model rather than a web-based version, as it was easier to
collaborate. Participants requested more accessible language
and the use of arrows to indicate causality. Participants liked
referring to previous or example logic models to see whether
their version made sense by comparison. It was suggested that
example logic models and guidance should be part of the
proposed Evaluation Service offering.

The result of testing the evaluation canvas was breaking it down
into its constituent parts and merging it into the Evaluation
Service. For example, the program elements were absorbed into
the context section of a logic model.

From testing paper and digital versions of the service blueprint,
the project team learned that participants responded well to the
dimension of time it introduced and the ability to reflect on user
experience throughout time as a result of a DHI (not) meeting
a user’s needs. By mapping a DHI to its place or impact on a
user’s journey (via the service blueprint), participants articulated
that they could see the gaps in their understanding of user needs
and the features of their DHI. Adding the backstage detail (ie,
organizational elements: people, processes, policies, and
systems) to the service blueprint also gave participants a better
understanding of what their DHI did well and where it could
be improved.

Overall, the paper prototype testing revealed that the proposed
Evaluation Service should contain information about (refer to
Table S3, Multimedia Appendix 1 for details on each
hypothesis) the following aspects:

J Med Internet Res 2021 | vol. 23 | iss. 9 | e28356 | p. 14

•
How to determine the aim of a DHI evaluation with health
and service outcomes as core elements of building an
evaluation strategy (hypotheses G1, G3, T1, C1, C2, and
C3).
•
Set up an evaluation at the beginning of DHI development
(hypotheses G2.1, G2.2, and T2).
•
Process and steps for DHI evaluation (hypothesis T2).
•
Constant revision and integration of evaluation strategy
into DHI development (hypotheses T1, T2, and C1).
•
Who is involved in DHI evaluation (hypotheses T3, C1,
and C3).
•
Different types of evaluation (impact, process, and health
economics; hypothesis C1).
•
Selection of evaluation methods and tools (hypotheses T1,
T3, C1, and C2).
•
Required capabilities and resources (hypotheses G2.1, T1,
T3, and C3).
•
Barriers that may be encountered during an evaluation
(hypotheses C1, C2, and T1).
•
External policy and stakeholder factors influencing an
evaluation (hypotheses G1).
•
Creating a common language and understanding among
different disciplines involved in DHI evaluation (hypotheses
G3, T1, T3, C1, and C3).

Proof of Concept: Prototype of the Full-Service
Experience

Methodology

Stages 1 to 7 culminated in the project team conducting a
proof-of-concept test in which a digital team followed the
proposed Evaluation Service to build an evaluation approach
for their DHI (project objective 5). The proof of concept was a
series of workshops run with PHE’s Couch-to-5K app in-house
digital team (see Multimedia Appendix 3 showing the
illustration of stage 8 proof of concept: prototype of the
full-service experience conducted with PHE’s Couch-to-5K app
in-house team showing the paper prototyping interactive
workshops and associated digital materials). For example, the
Couch-to-5K team used the logic model workshop template to
define the problem they were addressing and clarify the desired
health and service outcomes. They used a service blueprint
template to describe users’ needs, experiences, and actions
concerning service touchpoints and features, organizational and
operational capabilities, and actions, as well as the desired health
outcomes.

In addition to testing these sequential design artifacts, an
evaluation facilitator role was tested in each workshop with the
Couch-to-5K team. The Couch-to-5K team was provided with
relevant materials and a brief introduction to the workshop aim
and then invited to move through the activity as independently
as possible. The Couch-to-5K team was observed to see what
made sense to them and what they understood correctly. When
the Couch-to-5K team needed help, the evaluation facilitator
provided guidance; this helped identify when the guidance or
materials were unclear and when a DHI team would need and
value facilitator support.

Corresponding Results

The logic model workshop brought the Couch-to-5K team
together around a shared view of the health outcomes they were
trying to deliver for Couch-to-5K app users. By mapping user
needs to the service blueprint and aligning them with service
features, the Couch-to-5K team obtained a shared view of the
user needs and their relation to the desired health outcomes.
The Couch-to-5K team identified unmet basic needs (eg,
incidents) and areas for improvement in the evaluation journey.
The Couch-to-5K digital team was alerted to different evaluation
methods and tools relevant to their product and its context
(including maturity, budget, time constraints, and risk profile).
Spending time reflecting on KPIs highlighted to the
Couch-to-5K team additional pertinent indicators worth beyond
what they already collected (eg, KPIs related to the broader
physical activity market). The Evaluation Service experience
subsequently informed the design of the Couch-to-5K behavioral
database (incorporating newly identified KPIs aligned to desired
health outcomes).

Discussion

Principal Findings

PHE collaboratively developed an Evaluation Service with
digital developers, academics, and public health professionals
involved in the commissioning, design and development, and
evaluation of DHIs. Following an iterative UCD approach,
which was novel for PHE, the project team worked across and
synthesized each discipline’s areas of importance in relation to
evaluating DHIs. An in-depth collective understanding of how
biomedical and digital evaluation activities map to and can be
used during the design and development of a DHI resulted.
Testing with PHE’s Couch-to-5K app in-house digital team
demonstrated the desirability, viability, and feasibility of the
Evaluation Service and led to further investment by PHE.

The primary strength of the work was in PHE’s organizational
openness to UCD and service design methodologies that were,
at the time, not commonly used by the national body. Although
this sparked some cultural tensions, doing so led to knowledge
sharing between the external supplier and internal PHE project
team and stakeholders, facilitated the synthesis of biomedical
and digital evaluation approaches, and grew PHE’s
understanding of the benefits of user-centered approaches for
designing and evaluating DHIs. Through extensive user and
stakeholder engagement throughout the project, we demonstrated
to PHE senior leaders and other health system organizations
that design is your friend and there is a place for design
disciplines in public health.

As PHE adapted to the UCD project approach, the project team
unearthed tensions among participants such as discomfort with
the fast pace of the 2-week sprints, divergent expectations on
what was considered good enough evidence for justifying a user
need or concept, and hesitance to try new methods and work in
the open. Although some of the PHE stakeholders were initially
uncomfortable with the pace and roughness of concepts and
prototypes, they appreciated that the quick, iterative UCD
approach enabled more people to interact, provide feedback,
and contribute to the development of the Evaluation Service.

J Med Internet Res 2021 | vol. 23 | iss. 9 | e28356 | p. 15

The Evaluation Service was thereby informed by, and socialized
with, a wider range of professionals involved in DHI
development and evaluation. PHE’s senior stakeholders also
acquired substantial evidence of the user’s need for the
Evaluation Service before requesting further investment from
the organization.

Limitations

We identified three key limitations of this study. First, the
sample size in qualitative design research is often small
compared with traditional academic qualitative research. This
typical design research practice is based on the finding [30,31]
that speaking with a representative sample of 5 to 10 people at
a time is sufficient to uncover common challenges, understand
underlying causes, and inform decisions. In design research and
digital development, as outlined by the Government Digital
Service [32], the limitation of small sample size is usually
overcome by conducting iterative research and increasing the
number of users testing and feeding back on the service as it
progresses through the initial phases (discovery and alpha) to
later phases (beta and live). In this way, the team’s
understanding continues to grow as the sample size becomes
larger and more diverse with time. The sample size of
participants was increased in the later stages of this project;
however, this is not within the scope of this paper. Second,
PHE’s organizational remit and limited financial and human
resources resulted in the underutilization of concepts, with only
three of the final seven concepts (Table 4) prioritized for further
development by PHE. As shown in the scenario of use (Figure
3), the seven concepts complemented each other, and, through
the prioritization exercise, the potential of the scenario was not
fully tested. Third, substantial time and input were drawn down
from members of the working group and relevant PHE senior
leaders to upskill service design project team members in
evaluating DHIs and share tacit knowledge of evaluating DHIs.
This was a strength of the project, as the project team was able
to bring a fresh perspective to drawing insight from experts and

users as they designed the Evaluation Service; however, the
personnel cost must be recognized.

Conclusions

The potential of DHIs to combine the reach of large-scale
population initiatives with the efficacy of individual treatments
is yet to be fully realized. It will continue to be unrealized if
how we evaluate and use evaluations to inform the iterative
design and development of DHIs do not use the perspectives
of both biomedical research and digital development. DHIs are
an interdisciplinary endeavor, bringing together clinical or
population health interventions, digital product development,
product and service design, and communication and health
promotion. Hence, the evaluation of DHIs is best informed by
interdisciplinary approaches to evaluation to understand both
the efficacy of a DHI and its usability and desirability, with
measures of success that reflect the different stakeholders
involved in the commissioning, design, and development of a
DHI and its end users [11].

We have outlined the work undertaken by PHE, a national body,
to ensure that DHIs contribute to the improvement of population
health and that taxpayers receive the most value (improvement
to public health) from investment in digital health. The project
is a worked example of using UCD, particularly service design,
methods to iteratively understand, synthesize, and embed needs
and evaluation approaches of both biomedical researchers and
digital product developers. Public health’s traditional approach
is complemented by the UCD approach, which in turn is made
safer and more robust through its interaction with public health.
The resultant Evaluation Service enables digital developers or
nonacademics to apply evaluation thinking and techniques
during the design, development, and implementation of their
DHI. By doing so, it demystifies evaluation, traditionally the
realm of academia, and harnesses people’s motivations to ensure
that their DHI is as good as it can be and improves end users’
health and well-being. PHE has subsequently built a digital
version of the Evaluation Service (named Evaluating Digital
Health Products), which is openly available on the web [33].