Original Paper

User-Centered Design of a Mobile Health Intervention to Enhance
Exacerbation-Related Self-Management in Patients With Chronic
Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (Copilot): Mixed Methods Study

Yvonne J G Korpershoek1, MSc; Sander Hermsen2, PhD; Lisette Schoonhoven3, Prof Dr; Marieke J Schuurmans4,
Prof Dr; Jaap C A Trappenburg3, PhD

1Research Group Chronic Illnesses, University of Applied Sciences Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands
2OnePlanet Research Center, imec NL, Wageningen, Netherlands
3Julius Center for Health Sciences and Primary Care, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands
4Education Center, UMC Utrecht Academy, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands

Yvonne J G Korpershoek, MSc
Research Group Chronic Illnesses
University of Applied Sciences Utrecht
Heidelberglaan 7
Utrecht, 3584 CS
Netherlands
Phone: 31 6 38763949

Abstract

Background: Adequate self-management skills are of great importance for patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) to reduce the impact of COPD exacerbations. Using mobile health (mHealth) to support exacerbation-related
self-management could be promising in engaging patients in their own health and changing health behaviors. However, there is
limited knowledge on how to design mHealth interventions that are effective, meet the needs of end users, and are perceived as
useful. By following an iterative user-centered design (UCD) process, an evidence-driven and usable mHealth intervention was
developed to enhance exacerbation-related self-management in patients with COPD.
Objective: This study aimed to describe in detail the full UCD and development process of an evidence-driven and usable
mHealth intervention to enhance exacerbation-related self-management in patients with COPD.
Methods: The UCD process consisted of four iterative phases: (1) background analysis and design conceptualization, (2) alpha
usability testing, (3) iterative software development, and (4) field usability testing. Patients with COPD, health care providers,
COPD experts, designers, software developers, and a behavioral scientist were involved throughout the design and development
process. The intervention was developed using the behavior change wheel (BCW), a theoretically based approach for designing
behavior change interventions, and logic modeling was used to map out the potential working mechanism of the intervention.
Furthermore, the principles of design thinking were used for the creative design of the intervention. Qualitative and quantitative
research methods were used throughout the design and development process.
Results: The background analysis and design conceptualization phase resulted in final guiding principles for the intervention,
a logic model to underpin the working mechanism of the intervention, and design requirements. Usability requirements were
obtained from the usability testing phases. The iterative software development resulted in an evidence-driven and usable mHealth
intervention—Copilot, a mobile app consisting of a symptom-monitoring module, and a personalized COPD action plan.
Conclusions: By following a UCD process, an mHealth intervention was developed that meets the needs and preferences of
patients with COPD, is likely to be used by patients with COPD, and has a high potential to be effective in reducing exacerbation
impact. This extensive report of the intervention development process contributes to more transparency in the development of
complex interventions in health care and can be used by researchers and designers as guidance for the development of future
mHealth interventions.

(J Med Internet Res 2020;22(6):e15449) doi: 10.2196/15449

J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 6 | e15449 | p. 1

KEYWORDS
mobile health; mHealth; user-centered design; behavior change; COPD; exacerbation; self-management; self-care; mobile phone

Introduction

Background

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a highly
prevalent chronic disease and is predicted to be the third leading
cause of mortality worldwide in 2030 [1,2]. Exacerbations are
important events in the course of COPD, as they accelerate the
decline in lung function [3], negatively affect the quality of life
[4,5], and lead to increased mortality and high socioeconomic
costs [6,7]. An exacerbation is defined as a sustained worsening
of patients’respiratory symptoms, which are beyond normal
day-to-day variability and may warrant medical treatment [8].
The absence of an adequate imminent exacerbation marker
requires a focus on supporting patients with COPD in developing
self-management skills to reduce the impact of exacerbations
[9]. Self-management is defined as an individual’s ability to
detect and manage symptoms, treatment, physical and
psychosocial consequences, and lifestyle changes inherent in
living with a chronic condition [10].

Recent 
interventions 
focusing 
on 
exacerbation-related
self-management (including the use of action plans) have shown
positive outcomes on quality of life and hospital admissions
[11,12]. However, there is still a substantial proportion of
patients with COPD who barely benefit from these kinds of
interventions [11-13]. This might be explained by the
one-size-fits-all and static approach regarding design, intensity,
and mode of delivery without a focus on individual exacerbation
patterns and actions. Moreover, recent interventions have a strict
focus on exacerbation detection and taking action and the use
is suboptimal [11,14,15]. To further reduce the impact of
exacerbations, 
more 
comprehensive, 
dynamic, 
and
individualized strategies are needed to improve the full spectrum
of exacerbation-related self-management behavior that meet
patients’ needs, perceptions, and capabilities [12,16].

Mobile health (mHealth) is considered promising in engaging
patients in their own health and changing health behaviors
[17,18]. The rapidly evolving nature and increased uptake of
mHealth are bound to influence the accessibility and the way
self-management support will be provided in the future, also in
patients with COPD [19-21]. Recent studies suggest that
mHealth interventions focusing on COPD self-management
lead to positive outcomes, although no firm conclusions could
be drawn because of poor quality and heterogeneity among the
studies [19,20]. Nonetheless, the use of mHealth creates
opportunities to strongly individualize interventions and to
provide more dynamic and intensive therapeutic stimuli that fit
with real-time health status and individual exacerbation patterns.
As a result, mHealth can reach patients at the right moment and
can provide tailored support anytime and anywhere, which could
stimulate the development of effective self-management skills
and change health behaviors.

To date, there is limited knowledge on how to design mHealth
interventions that are effective, meet the needs of intended end
users, and are perceived as useful [17,22]. Designing mHealth

interventions to change health behaviors is complex and needs
theoretical grounding to increase the design’s efficacy. In current
thinking about the development of behavior change
interventions, the importance of theory is clear [23-26], but the
way in which theory should be incorporated in the design
process is not [24,27,28]. Furthermore, specific steps in the
development of evidence- and theory-driven interventions that
involve the end users are rarely described transparently in
literature [22,29].

Objectives

During a 4-year period, our research team has developed an
evidence-driven and usable mHealth intervention to enhance
exacerbation-related self-management in patients with COPD.
By following an iterative user-centered design (UCD) process,
several studies were performed to increase the likelihood of
developing an mHealth intervention that is effective, fits with
patients’ needs and preferences, and can be successfully
implemented in routine COPD care. Some of these studies have
recently been published [15,30,31]. This paper underpins the
design and working mechanism of this COPD-specific mHealth
intervention and offers a novel and potentially effective method
to use evidence and theory to inform the design of mHealth
interventions in general.

The aim of this paper was to describe in detail the full UCD
and development process of an evidence-driven and usable
mHealth 
intervention 
to 
enhance 
exacerbation-related
self-management in patients with COPD, including the design,
iterative software development, and usability testing.

Methods

User-Centered Design Process

Guiding principles for the mHealth intervention were formulated
by the research team at an early stage to provide a framework
for making decisions during intervention development (Textbox
1) [32]. The guiding principles were based on recent evidence
regarding COPD self-management and were progressively
refined as the intervention development proceeded based on
outcomes of specific development steps that we described in
this paper. The mHealth intervention was developed by
following a UCD process involving patients with COPD, health
care providers (HCPs), COPD experts, designers, software
developers, and a behavioral scientist. The UCD was based on
the methodology as described by Johnston et al [33] consisting
of four iterative phases: (1) background analysis and design
conceptualization, (2) alpha usability testing, (3) iterative
software development, and (4) field usability testing (Figure 1)
[33]. Johnston et al [33] provide limited guidance on the specific
steps needed to develop an effective mHealth intervention that
meets patients’ needs and preferences and fits with current
COPD care. Therefore, we extended the first phase of the UCD
with subphases based on a comprehensive approach that
combines elements of the Medical Research Council (MRC)
framework development phase with elements of existing

J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 6 | e15449 | p. 2

development models (Figure 1) [34]. The MRC framework is
a well-known and often used framework for the development
and evaluation of complex interventions in health care with a
specific focus on developing theory- and evidence-driven

interventions. The whole design and development process was
carried out between 2015 and 2019. The methods of each phase
are chronologically described in the following paragraphs. The
results of each phase are detailed in the Results section.

Textbox 1. Guiding principles for a mobile health intervention to enhance exacerbation-related self-management in patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

The mobile health intervention should:

•
meet individual patient needs, perceptions, and preferences regarding exacerbation-related self-management;

•
synchronize with current health status and anticipate on the heterogeneity of exacerbations in and between patients;

•
focus on target behaviors in the full spectrum of exacerbation-related self-management;

•
include a chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) action plan along with ongoing self-management support;

•
focus on the continuous development of self-management skills and behavior change;

•
stimulate proactive self-monitoring;

•
be safe, literacy-sensitive, and patient-friendly;

•
be feasible in current Dutch COPD care; and

•
meet the conceptual definition of a COPD self-management intervention: A COPD self-management intervention should be structured but
personalized and often multicomponent, with goals of motivating, engaging and supporting the patients to positively adapt their health behavior(s)
and develop skills to better manage their disease [16].

Figure 1. User-centered design for the development of the mobile health intervention. HCP: health care provider.

Phase 1: Background Analysis and Design
Conceptualization

The aim of the first phase was to identify the evidence base and
to achieve a theoretical understanding of the underlying process
of change for the intervention [35].

1A: Identify the Evidence Base
In phase 1A, a scoping literature review was performed in
Medical Literature Analysis and Retrieval System Online
(MEDLINE) to explore current systematic reviews on

interventions that focus on enhancing exacerbation-related
self-management in patients with COPD, including mHealth
interventions, and to identify potential effective intervention
components (Figure 1; phase 1A). Literature review on
interventions was an ongoing process during the whole
intervention development process, to stay up to date on
developments about (mHealth) interventions focusing on
exacerbation-related self-management.

J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 6 | e15449 | p. 3

1B: Identify Key Behaviors and Concept Mapping
In phase 1B, a scoping literature review was performed in
MEDLINE to specify symptom fluctuation phases during the
course of COPD and to identify relevant self-management
behaviors that can reduce exacerbation impact (Figure 1; phase
1B). Two researchers (YK and JT) developed a conceptual
model of patients’ fluctuations in symptoms during the course
of COPD. Then, an initial set of relevant self-management
behaviors was generated and added to the conceptual model.
The methods of the scoping review and stepwise development
of the conceptual model are published elsewhere [15].

1C: Problem Analysis
A problem analysis was included to provide insight into the
problems experienced by patients and identified by experts to
determine the intervention targets and to set boundaries of the
intervention (Figure 1; phase 1C). A two-round Delphi study
with 19 international respiratory experts (medical doctors and
key researchers in the field of COPD) was performed. In this
study, insight into expert opinion was provided on the most
relevant set of self-management behaviors that have the potential
to maximally reduce the impact of exacerbations and is feasible
to target and influence before, during, and after an exacerbation.
The methodology is described in depth in the publication of this
study [15]. Furthermore, a grounded theory study using
individual in-depth interviews with patients with COPD (n=15)
was performed [36]. In this study, patient perceptions,
capabilities, and needs with regard to exacerbation-related
self-management were explored to identify and explain the
underlying process of exacerbation-related self-management
behavior in patients with COPD. The methodology is described
in depth elsewhere [30].

1D: Needs Analysis
Patients' needs regarding exacerbation-related self-management
were partially identified in phase 1C because these needs flowed
naturally from the problems perceived by patients [37]. An
additional needs analysis was performed to further investigate
specific needs and explicit requests for care with regard to using
mHealth for self-management (Figure 1; phase 1D) [37]. To
develop an mHealth intervention with optimal usability and
feasibility, a deep and early understanding of both patients’and
HCPs’ perspectives was considered to be important [38].
Therefore, a qualitative study using focus group interviews with
both patients with COPD (n=13) and HCPs (n=6) was performed
to (1) explore their willingness to use mHealth for
self-management of exacerbations, (2) identify potential benefits
and barriers of using mHealth, and (3) explore needs and
preferences regarding the content of an mHealth intervention
[39]. The methods of this step are further described in the paper
of this study [31].

1E: Current Practice Analysis
An analysis of COPD guidelines and current practice was
performed to gain insight into current exacerbation-related
self-management support and to explore the added value of the
intended intervention compared with regular care (Figure 1;
phase 1E). Individual semistructured interviews with HCPs
(n=10) were performed to identify HCPs’ perspectives with
regard to care provided and their role in providing

self-management support. Purposive sampling was performed
in primary and secondary care settings. The following topics
were 
discussed: 
current 
interventions 
to 
support
exacerbation-related self-management, HCP experiences with
providing self-management support, perceptions toward HCPs’
roles and responsibilities, barriers in providing self-management
support, and the potential to use mHealth for self-management
support. All interviews were audiotaped, transcribed verbatim,
and analyzed by open, axial, and selective coding [40].

1F: Intervention Design
The aim of the intervention design phase (Figure 1; phase 1F)
was twofold: (1) to map out the potential working mechanisms
triggered by the intervention and (2) to develop the flow and
content of the intervention. During this phase, a decision was
made on the target behaviors of the intervention. The behavior
change wheel (BCW) method was used to analyze the target
behaviors and to design intervention components [41]. First,
based on the literature, behavioral analysis was performed by
two researchers (YK and SH) to identify what needs to change
in patients’ capability, opportunity, and motivation to improve
each target behavior (capability, opportunity, and motivation
model of behavior [COM-B] analysis) [41]. Second, the
theoretical domains framework (TDF) was used to elaborate on
the behavioral analysis by mapping the 14 domains of the
framework onto the capability, opportunity, and motivation
components of COM-B [41]. Third, potentially relevant
intervention functions and behavior change techniques (BCTs),
matching users and context, were selected using criteria provided
by the BCW [41] (see Multimedia Appendix 1). Logic modeling
was used to map out the potential working mechanism of the
intervention by detailing all evidence and assumptions
underpinning the pathway from the intervention to the long-term
impact on outcomes [42,43]. The logic model starts with the
target behaviors and details what needs to change in behavior
(TDF), by which intervention functions and BCTs, and through
which specific intervention components, including factors that
could influence the working mechanism, and results in short-
and long-term outcomes. The logic model components were
based on the evidence gained from all previous phases, and
consensus on the components was reached during research group
meetings. On the basis of this model, design requirements were
formulated.

Furthermore, creative ideas with regard to the intervention
design were explored using methods derived from design
thinking [44]. In a pressure cooker session with three
independent creative designers, initial ideas on the design were
presented by focusing on potential techniques to change health
behaviors and to enhance engagement with mHealth. After this
session, collaboration with a creative design agency (Panton
BV, Deventer, the Netherlands) specifically focusing on health
care solutions was initiated. By following an iterative design
process, the flow and content of the intervention were designed,
and various design styles were developed using low-fidelity
prototypes—paper prototypes that visualize design solutions.
In the early stages of digital user interface design, such
low-fidelity paper prototypes are often used to determine
requirements for the architecture and functionalities of the

J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 6 | e15449 | p. 4

specific intervention to be designed [45]. The paper prototypes
were tested in phase 2 of the UCD.

Moreover, the content of a symptom-monitoring module was
developed during this stage. The module aimed to determine
the individual COPD patient’s normal day-to-day variability in
symptoms to be able to set the patient’s normal symptom pattern.
The content validity of the module was evaluated by experts in
the field of COPD (n=8) according to the Lynn method [46].
Each symptom was rated on relevance and linguistics by
answering four questions. All questions about relevance were
rated on a 4-point Likert scale (1=not relevant, 4=relevant).
Linguistics was determined by if the interpretation was clear
(yes or no). The item-content validity index (I-CVI) was
calculated for each relevance question to determine the number
of experts judging the content as valid (I-CVI>0.78=relevant).
Subsequently, the scale-content validity index (S-CVI) was
calculated to determine the relevance of the whole
symptom-monitoring module (S-CVI>0.90=excellent) [46].
Linguistics was considered to be clear when at least 75% of the
expert panel rated clearness of interpretation as a yes. A more
in-depth description of the development and content validity
assessment of the symptom-monitoring module is given in
Multimedia Appendix 2.

Phase 2: Alpha Usability Testing

In the second phase, alpha usability tests were performed by
investigating patient and HCP responses to low-fidelity paper
prototypes of the intervention in two steps: (1) evaluating the
intervention flow and content and (2) evaluating intervention
design styles [33]. At each phase of usability testing, we only
included patients who had not evaluated an earlier prototype.

2A: Evaluate Intervention Flow and Content
Perceptions, needs, and preferences regarding the intervention
flow and structure were evaluated with both patients with COPD
(n=6) and HCPs (n=6) to identify usability requirements (Figure
1; phase 2A). Individual semistructured interviews were held
using low-fidelity paper prototypes. The following topics were
discussed: experience with mHealth and written action plans,
the overall flow of the intervention, symptom-monitoring/action
plan scenarios, and the added value of the intervention.
Purposive sampling of participants was performed in primary,
secondary, and tertiary care settings. In total, 6 patients and 6
HCPs were included based on the general rule of thumb that
approximately 80% of all potential usability problems could be
identified by including 5 to 10 end users [47]. The inclusion
and exclusion criteria of the participants during usability testing
are detailed in Textboxes 2 and 3, respectively. Data were
thematically analyzed by two researchers independently [48].
Data analysis was supported by NVivo 10.0 software (2012;
QSR International Pty Ltd.).

Textbox 2. Inclusion criteria of participants during usability testing.

Inclusion criteria for patients with a clinical diagnosis [2] of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)

•
Age >40 years

•
Spirometry forced expiratory volume in 1 second/forced vital capacity ratio <70%

•
≥1 exacerbation in the last 12 months before entering the study (defined as a period of symptom deterioration in which the use of a course of
corticosteroids and/or antibiotics was required, or hospitalization was necessary)

•
Adequate communication skills

•
Willing and able to comply with study procedures and give written informed consent

•
Patients who are judged by their health care provider to have suitable hearing and vision

Inclusion criteria for health care providers

•
Having a patient–health care provider relationship with patients with COPD

•
Supporting patients with COPD in self-management

•
At least one year of experience with COPD care

Textbox 3. Exclusion criteria of participants during usability testing.

Exclusion criteria for patients with a clinical diagnosis of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease

•
Diagnosed with cognitive impairments

•
Life expectancy ≤3 months

•
Primary diagnosis of asthma, cardiac disease, or other major functionally limiting diseases

Exclusion criteria for health care providers

•
Not applicable

J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 6 | e15449 | p. 5

2B: Evaluate Intervention Design Style
Next, the preferences of patients with COPD regarding
intervention design style were explored by individual
semistructured interviews (n=11; Figure 1; phase 2B) [33].
Low-fidelity paper prototypes were used to present variations
in design style and tone of voice. Purposive sampling of
participants was performed in a physiotherapy practice and a
rehabilitation center according to the inclusion and exclusion
criteria for patients in Textboxes 2 and 3. Data were analyzed
by 2 researchers independently through summarizing the
advantages and disadvantages of each design style and the
overall preferences regarding design style. On the basis of the
results of both alpha usability steps, the intervention design was
finalized for further software development.

Phase 3: Iterative Software Development

The software of the mHealth intervention was developed during
a 12-week period according to a scrum-based design method
consisting of five development sprints (Figure 1; phase 3) [49].
During biweekly stakeholder meetings, the research team,
designers, and software developers met in person to evaluate
the current stage of development and to make decisions on the
further development of the first version of the mHealth
intervention (minimum viable product; MVP). The mHealth
intervention was built in React Native (Massachusetts Institute
of Technology licenses), a software structure that is easy to
adapt and suitable for both iOS and Android. This saves time
and money during the initial and future development of the
intervention and fits within the agile development process of
the intervention.

Phase 4: Field Usability Testing

In the fourth phase, field usability tests of the MVP (ie, tests
with a high-fidelity prototype within the context in which the
intervention will actually be used) were performed with patients
with COPD (n=7) and HCPs (n=3) using cognitive task analysis
[47,50]. This mixed methods study focused on three quality
components: task success, user errors/problems, and satisfaction,
based on Nielsen’s heuristics and the International Organization
for Standardization’s usability standard 9241-11 [51]. Purposive
sampling of participants was performed in primary, secondary,
and tertiary care settings until data saturation was reached. In
line with the procedure of phase 2, a minimum of 5 patients
were included according to the inclusion and exclusion criteria
of Textboxes 2 and 3. Participants were observed while
performing tasks with the MVP and asked to think aloud to
clarify their decision-making process and express experienced
user problems and errors [51]. After the task analysis, the
validated 10-item system usability scale (SUS) was filled out
by patients to get a global view of usability [52]. Each item was
scored on a 5-point Likert scale, and all items were converted
to a total score (range 0-100, a score>70 is considered to be
acceptable) [52,53]. Furthermore, semistructured interviews
were conducted. On the basis of previous research and the
technology acceptance model [54,55], the following topics were
formulated: the first impression of the app, ease of use,
satisfaction, perceived usefulness, applicability, attitude toward
using the app, and the content of the app. The whole procedure
with patients was video recorded without the faces of

participants being visible. The procedure with HCPs was more
pragmatic in nature because the MVP did not include a specific
HCP interface. However, the relevant functions for HCPs could
be tested within the MVP. Therefore, only 3 HCPs were
included, and the procedure was only observed by 1 researcher
who simultaneously made notes.

The performance of tasks by patients was observed by two
researchers independently. An observation list was used to note
task success, users’
errors/problems, and participants’
expressions for each task. The performance of tasks was scored
as successful (1 point), partially successful (0.5 points), or
unsuccessful (0 points) [56]. The observation lists were
discussed by the researchers to reach a consensus on the
performance of tasks and the identified problems and errors.
The data from the think-aloud method were used to derive a
better understanding of task performance. A severity score
ranging from 0 (no usability problem) to 4 (usability catastrophe)
was given to each problem based on the impact and frequency
of the problem [57]. Data from the semistructured interviews
were analyzed by 2 researchers independently using thematic
analysis [48]. The data analysis of HCPs observations was
performed by only 1 researcher, and the semistructured
interviews were only summarized.

The usability studies were approved by the Medical Ethics
Research Committee of the University Medical Center Utrecht
(17–887), and all participants gave written informed consent.

Business Modeling

Business modeling, based on the principles of the lean startup
methodology [58], was performed parallel to phase 1F until
phase 4 to ensure valorization and sustainable implementation
of the mHealth intervention in its intended care practice (Figure
1) [59]. Business modeling included contextual inquiry and
continuous investigation of relevant stakeholder needs (patients
with COPD, HCPs, policy makers, and health care insurers) to
better understand what should be accomplished with our
mHealth intervention and to obtain value drivers to underpin
choices in what to design [59]. The needs of patients with COPD
and HCPs were investigated in phases 1C, 1D, and 1E, and
individual conversations with policy makers and health care
insurers were held to identify their perspectives toward the
mHealth intervention. Furthermore, the best innovation and
distribution routes and market opportunities were explored in
conversations with stakeholders to investigate their interests
and financial incentives to support self-management with
mHealth. Competition analysis was performed to explore the
value of our intervention with respect to existing mHealth
technologies. Finally, conversations with vendors in the field
were held to explore business opportunities.

Results

Phase 1: Background Analysis and Design
Conceptualization

1A: Identify the Evidence Base

A 
total 
of 
four 
relevant 
systematic 
reviews 
on
exacerbation-related self-management interventions and two

J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 6 | e15449 | p. 6

systematic reviews specifically focusing on mHealth
interventions to improve exacerbation-related outcomes were
identified. 
Self-management 
interventions, 
including
exacerbation action plans along with ongoing self-management
support, were associated with positive outcomes on quality of
life, hospital admissions, and health care use [11,12,60]. A
review of self-management interventions delivered immediately
following an acute exacerbation showed no significant effect
on quality of life nor hospital admissions [61]. All reviews
showed large heterogeneity in interventions making it hard to
draw conclusions on effective components of these
interventions. Furthermore, mHealth interventions facilitating,
supporting, and sustaining self-management among people with
COPD significantly improved quality of life, and levels of
activity [19]. Smartphone interventions in patients with COPD
with 
exacerbations, 
without 
a 
specific 
focus 
on
self-management, were found to be useful in reducing the
number of patients having a COPD exacerbation [20]. These
results should also be interpreted with caution because of the
heterogeneity among studies.

On the basis of these findings, it seemed promising to use
mHealth strategies that specifically aim at enhancing
self-management behavior. It was considered important that the
mHealth intervention includes a COPD action plan along with
ongoing self-management support, which confirmed our guiding
principle to include an action plan. Furthermore, a conceptual
definition of a COPD self-management intervention was
published in 2016 [16]. Given the need for consensus on what
defines a COPD self-management intervention, this definition
was added to the guiding principles (Textbox 1).

1B: Identify Key Behaviors and Concept Mapping

A conceptual model picturing the event of an exacerbation was
developed by distinguishing five phases before, during, and
after an index event. Specific aims regarding the reduction of
exacerbation impact were formulated for each phase of the
conceptual model. The conceptual model is published elsewhere
[15]. On the basis of the knowledge generated from the
literature, an initial set of 27 relevant self-management behaviors
aiming to reduce exacerbation impact was identified and
assigned to the relevant phases of the conceptual model. This
initial set of self-management behaviors was introduced to
experts in the first round of the Delphi study (Figure 1; phase
1C) to reach a consensus on the most relevant behaviors [15].

1C: Problem Analysis

A Delphi panel of 19 international experts reached a consensus
on 17 self-management behaviors that can be targeted and
influenced before, during, and after an exacerbation (Figure 1;
phase 1C). This set of behaviors has the potential to maximally
reduce the impact of exacerbations. The self-management
behaviors were related to the following broader categories:
adherence to pharmacotherapy, influenza vaccination, physical
activity/exercise, avoiding stimuli, smoking cessation, early
detection of symptom deterioration, medical treatment of
exacerbations, managing stress and anxiety, and awareness of
recurrent exacerbations [15]. The 17 self-management behaviors
were considered as potential target behaviors for the mHealth
intervention. Our grounded theory study (Figure 1; phase 1C)

has resulted in a conceptual model explaining factors that
influence exacerbation-related self-management from the
patients’ perspective. The conceptual model is published
elsewhere 
[30]. 
The 
conceptual 
model 
shows 
that
exacerbation-related self-management is influenced by five
generic factors: acceptance of COPD, perceived severity of
symptoms, knowledge of exacerbations, former experiences
with exacerbations, and social support. Furthermore,
heterogeneity of exacerbations and habituation to symptoms
were identified as specific factors influencing the capability to
recognize an exacerbation. Performance of self-management
actions was specifically influenced by perceived influence on
exacerbation course, feelings of fear, self-empowerment, trust
in health care provider, patient beliefs, and ambivalence toward
treatment [30]. These factors were included as moderating and
mediating factors in the working mechanism of the intervention
(see also 1F: Intervention Design section).

1D: Needs Analysis

Our needs analysis (Figure 1; phase 1D) resulted in an overview
of potential benefits and barriers regarding the use of mHealth
to support self-management and early ideas on the content of
the intervention [31]. Both patients and HCPs emphasized the
need for a multicomponent and tailored mHealth intervention
that focuses on improving patient self-management skills by
determining health status and providing adequate information,
decision support, and feedback on self-management behavior
in an advisory manner. Important findings were that patients
and HCPs emphasized that an mHealth intervention should
never replace patients’ own feelings nor undermine their own
decisions. The intervention should be complementary to regular
(personal) contact with HCPs and should facilitate adequate
self-management support by HCPs. Discussing self-management
skills with HCPs in personal consultations was believed to be
essential to improve these skills. Both patients and HCPs
expressed doubts regarding (real-time) the monitoring of
symptoms by HCPs because of safety reasons and time
constraints, although early detection of exacerbations was
considered to be an important benefit. Moreover, the
intervention should be attractive, straightforward, rewarding,
and safe. Finally, patients emphasized that using mHealth should
be their own choice and should never be enforced. On the basis
of these findings, the design requirements for the intervention
were formulated. Further results of the focus group interviews
are published elsewhere [31].

1E: Current Practice Analysis

On the basis of three Dutch health care standards focusing on
COPD [62-64] and 10 interviews with HCPs, insight into current
exacerbation-related self-management support was provided.
Two pulmonologists, 2 nurse specialists, 2 pulmonary nurses,
2 general practitioners, and 1 primary care nurse (4 males/6
females, work experience range 3-20 years) were interviewed.
An important finding was the lack of standardized
self-management support and limited use of evidence-based
interventions by HCPs. There was a large variation in providing
information about exacerbation-related self-management with
regard to timing, topics discussed, and mode of delivery. Only
a few HCPs used a COPD action plan and prescribed

J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 6 | e15449 | p. 7

self-treatment with prednisolone and/or antibiotics to stimulate
self-management. More than half of the HCPs (n=6) expressed
that patients had no specific case manager. Providing
self-management support was mostly perceived as a shared
responsibility 
between 
HCPs, 
although 
individual
responsibilities of the HCPs involved were unclear. Most HCPs
felt that there is large room for improvement in self-management
support by HCPs. Barriers in providing self-management support
were the lack of standardized self-management support and
clarity in responsibilities between HCPs, limited availability of
HCPs, limited case management, limited time during
consultations, limited financial resources, and suboptimal
interdisciplinary communication in COPD care. The findings
from the current practice analysis were included as moderating
and mediating factors in the working mechanism of the
intervention (see also 1F: Intervention Design section).

1F: Intervention Design

During the intervention design phase, the research team decided
to initially focus on the three target behaviors: (1)

self-monitoring of symptoms and early detection of an
exacerbation, (2) taking prompt individualized self-management
actions, and (3) prompt contact with an HCP. On the basis of
insights from phase 1C, these behaviors were expected to
contribute most to the reduction of exacerbation impact, had
the potential for large improvement, and were considered most
feasible to influence. The choice for these three behaviors was
made, given the importance of aggregating the target behaviors
that fit together and are considered to have the largest impact
on exacerbations [65]. On the basis of behavioral analysis of
these behaviors, potential intervention functions and BCTs were
selected for the intervention [41]. The behavioral analysis of
the target behaviors, including the final intervention functions
and BCTs is described in detail in Multimedia Appendix 1.
Figure 2 shows the logic model of the intervention that
synthesizes all the evidence gained in the previous phases (phase
1A until 1E), including the selection of final intervention
functions and BCTs.

Figure 2. Logic model of a mobile health intervention to enhance exacerbation-related self-management in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease. BCTs: behavior change techniques; COPD: chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; HCP: health care provider; TDF: theoretical domains
framework.

On the basis of the results of all previous phases, design
requirements for the mHealth intervention were formulated (see
Textbox 4). At this stage, the research team and design agency
decided to develop a mobile app to enhance exacerbation-related

self-management in patients with COPD. On the basis of design
requirements, a concept of the flow and content of the app and
various design styles were developed using low-fidelity paper
prototypes.

J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 6 | e15449 | p. 8

Textbox 4. Design requirements for the mobile health intervention.

The mobile health (mHealth) intervention should:

•
at least focus on self-monitoring of symptoms and early detection of exacerbations and taking prompt self-management actions including prompt
contact with a health care provider (HCP);

•
support patients in developing self-management skills over time (learning by doing) and changing behaviors;

•
focus on (aggregated) self-management behaviors before, during, and after an exacerbation;

•
include a chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) action plan with an educational component along with ongoing support;

•
be comprehensive/multicomponent and tailored to individual patients;

•
provide adequate information, decision support, and feedback on self-management behavior (in an advisory manner);

•
take into account the factors influencing exacerbation-related self-management;

•
fit with current COPD care and be accessible for HCPs;

•
facilitate adequate self-management support by HCPs;

•
be complementary to regular (personal) contact with HCPs;

•
be attractive, straightforward, rewarding, and safe;

•
never replace patients’ own feelings nor undermine their own decisions; and

•
not be enforced to patients. Using mHealth should be the patient’s own choice.

Furthermore, the symptom-monitoring module was developed
during this stage. Content validity of the symptom-monitoring
module was determined after two expert rounds. In total, these
eight symptoms were rated as relevant (I-CVI>0.78) and clear
(≥75% of the expert panel): Dyspnea, wheezing, nighttime
symptoms, coughing, sputum volume, sputum purulence, sputum
color, 
and 
fatigue. 
The 
relevance 
of 
the 
final
symptom-monitoring module, determined by three questions,
was considered to be high with S-CVIs of 0.93 or greater. More
detailed results and the final symptom-monitoring module are
shown in Multimedia Appendix 2.

Phase 2: Alpha Usability Testing

2A: Evaluate Intervention Flow and Content

Evaluation of the flow and content of the intervention with both
patients with COPD and HCPs resulted in overarching themes
related to the intervention flow and an overview of usability
requirements. The baseline characteristics of the participants
are shown in Multimedia Appendix 3. The patients recruited
from tertiary care all had a written action plan, whereas the other
patients only had verbal agreements with their HCPs.

The Intervention Flow and Content
Overall, all patients and HCPs were positive about the
intervention flow that consisted of four steps: (1) personalization
of an action plan, (2) intensive monitoring of symptoms, (3)
adjusting initial action plan based on monitoring period, and
(4) regular use (filling out symptoms on a regular basis and
receiving support on individualized actions). However, the
patients who believed that they were well aware of their
symptoms did not directly perceive that they could benefit from
the intensive monitoring period. Overall, patients preferred
personalization of the duration of intensive monitoring and the
timing of notifications. HCPs felt that they should have
autonomy in determining how, and at which moment, the action
plan should be reviewed and adjusted. On the basis of specific
mockups used to explore preferences regarding symptom
registration and determining symptoms status, the most intuitive
and straightforward scenarios were identified. For example,
mockup 1 was considered to be the best solution to determine
symptom status by all patients (Figure 3).

Figure 3. Low-fidelity paper prototypes of 3 scenarios to determine symptoms status.

The Added Value of the Intervention
Patients expressed that the app could create awareness into their
own situation and could support early detection of symptom

deterioration and taking prompt actions. The adjustability and
accessibility of the app were perceived as benefits compared
with using a written action plan. Furthermore, both patients and

J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 6 | e15449 | p. 9

HCPs were positive about the overview of registered symptoms
and undertaken actions as a tool to start the dialog about
patients’self-management behavior. Moreover, personalization
and tailoring of the app were considered to be an important
benefit:

Finally an app that is not for COPD but for me
personally. [Patient 2]

Needs With Regard to the Intervention
Patients expressed a clear need for an accessible and reliable
app that provides insight into their own situation and eliminates
their doubts by including reflective questions. Patients stressed
the importance of an app that is straightforward, for example,
by providing simple and effortless instructions in case of serious
dyspnea that causes panic, such as:

breathe slowly or call the doctor: It has to be simple,
because energy is air. [Patient 3]

They would like to use the app to inform relatives about their
situation. Both patients and HCPs emphasized that the app
should stimulate prompt contact with an HCP:

Patients experience feelings of fear you know, like:
when I am raising an alarm, I might have to take
prednisolone or I might be admitted to the hospital,
so therefore I won’t make the call...Will that be
included in the app as well? [HCP 1]
Furthermore, HCPs explained that the app should provide insight
into patient symptoms over time and realize more proactive
care instead of reactive care. Most HCPs felt that a separate
HCP interface to personalize the app would increase the usability
of the app in daily practice.

Usability Requirements
On the basis of the results of phase 2A, usability requirements
were formulated for the software development phase (see Table
1).

Table 1. Usability requirements for the mobile health intervention.

Patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (n=6) and HCPsa (n=6)
Topics of importance to users

Content
•
App should be reliable and accessible
•
Information should be straightforward and individualized
•
App should provide insight into symptoms over time
•
App should support prompt contact with an HCP
•
App should be a tool that can be used to get into dialog with HCPs about self-management behavior

Tailoring of the app
•
Intensive monitoring period and timing of notifications should be personalized
•
HCPs should have autonomy in determining how, and at which moment in the care process, the action plan
should be reviewed and adjusted

Interface
•
The action plan should preferably be personalized in a separate HCP interface

Design style
•
The design style should be restrained and clear without too much text.

aHCP: health care provider.

2B: Evaluate Intervention Design Style

In total, three potential design styles of the intervention were
explored with patients with COPD (see Baseline characteristics
in Multimedia Appendix 3. Mockups of the action plan,
symptom registration, action registration, and the overview of
symptoms and actions over time were used (see example in
Figure 4). There was no consensus on a preferred design style.
In general, patients preferred a restrained and clear design style
without too much text. A few patients were positive about a

more numerical design, whereas other patients found it hard to
express their symptoms in numbers. There was a wide variety
in preference regarding the tone of voice (distant vs personal
tone of voice). Overall, patients were positive about using
symbols. Most patients were negative about using an avatar in
the app as it has no added value, and some patients considered
an avatar to be childish. On the basis of these results, a restrained
and clear design style without too much text was included as a
usability requirement (see Table 1).

J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 6 | e15449 | p. 10

Figure 4. Low-fidelity paper prototypes of three symptom monitoring design styles.

Phase 3: Iterative Software Development

Iterative software development resulted in a functional mobile
app for patients (Copilot app) that can be used to (1) compose
an action plan together with an HCP (based on a COPD action
plan using color zones that is included in Dutch care
standards)[66], (2) monitor symptoms and undertaken actions,
(3) review symptoms and undertaken actions, and (4) read
information about COPD and exacerbations. At this stage, the
final integrated list of BCTs needed to ensure this MVP adhered
to both the guiding principles (Textbox 1) and the design
requirements (Textbox 4) was constructed by two researchers
(YK and SH) using the BCW framework. In total, 6 intervention
functions and 11 BCTs were selected for the MVP (see Figure
2 and Multimedia Appendix 1). During the iterative software

development process, the research team made decisions to add
steps to the flow of the app that were not thought of beforehand,
such as including an onboarding program to register and
personalize the patient’s action plan. At the same time, owing
to time and financial constraints, some steps were disregarded
and moved to later versions of the intervention, such as including
assistance in cases where patients are in doubt about contacting
their HCP.

Phase 4: Field Usability Testing

All functionalities of the MVP were tested by patients with
COPD, and all functionalities that belong to the HCP role were
evaluated with HCPs (see baseline characteristics in Multimedia
Appendix 3). Examples of the MVP are shown in Figure 5.

J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 6 | e15449 | p. 11

Figure 5. High-fidelity prototype of the Copilot app (minimum viable product).

Usability Assessment

According to patients with COPD, the general usability of the
MVP was considered to be good based on the average rating of
90.7 (SD 6.7) on the SUS.

Task Success

Key tasks within the app were performed by all patients, and
some tasks were performed only by a few patients because of
time constraints (see Multimedia Appendix 4). Almost all
patients were successful in consulting the app for HCP contact
details and immediate help as well as to check self-management
actions in the specific color zones. Furthermore, reviewing
symptoms and undertaken actions was performed successfully
overall, except for 2 participants who did not know where to
find this overview. The information module was easily found
by most of the patients. Most difficulties in the performance of
tasks were observed during the symptom and action registration.
Most patients were able to fill out their symptoms, but some
patients overlooked the save button. One patient experienced
difficulty with selecting the right color zone because of difficulty
with scenario thinking. The support option for selecting a color
zone (gray zone) appeared not to be intuitive, and navigation
problems in the gray zone were observed. Overall, the HCPs
were able to personalize the action plan and to evaluate the
symptom-monitoring period. The performance of tasks by both
patients and HCPs is further specified in Multimedia Appendix
4.

User Errors and Problems

On the basis of task analysis and observations during random
navigation in the app, 23 user errors and problems were
identified by patients with COPD. In total, seven problems were
rated with the highest severity score of 4. These problems were
related to saving registered symptoms, accidentally deleting
symptoms and navigation in the gray zone. Moreover, five
problems had a severity score of 3 and were related to the action
plan overview, understanding of buttons on the home screen,
and changing HCP contact details. The lowest severity scores
(1 and 2) were assigned to 11 problems. Furthermore, 11 user

errors and problems were observed during the use of the app
by HCPs. The HCPs experienced problems with saving
registered symptoms as well. Another severe problem was
related to changing contact details (severity score 4). Two less
severe problems were related to personalizing and changing the
yellow zone of the action plan (severity score 3). The lowest
severity scores (0-2) were assigned to seven problems. A more
detailed overview of all user problems and errors is provided
in Multimedia Appendix 4.

Patients’ and Health Care Providers’ Perceptions
Toward Using the App

Overall, patients were positive about the app, as they found the
app supportive with regard to monitoring and evaluating
symptoms and taking prompt actions. On a scale from 1 to 10,
patients’ satisfaction rates ranged from 8 to 10 because of the
ease of use and the interface being intuitive. The patients who
frequently experienced exacerbations expressed an important
need for the app. Two patients who rarely experienced
exacerbations explained that the app will only have an added
value if additional support would be provided during the stable
phase (green zone). The interviews resulted in 13 themes that
were categorized into feelings about the app, the added value
of the app, the content of the app, and facilitators and barriers
to use the app. A description of these themes and illustrative
quotes is provided in Multimedia Appendix 4.

Field usability testing showed that a usable mHealth intervention
has been developed. On the basis of these results, improvements
for future versions of the app were revealed. The improvements
were determined in collaboration with the designers and focus
on the user errors and problems that were rated as most severe
(severity ratings 3 and 4), problems that were observed in both
patients and HCPs, or additional problems that were mentioned
in the interviews. An overview of these improvements is shown
in Multimedia Appendix 4.

Business Modeling

Business modeling resulted in a preliminary business plan that
provided important design input during the development steps
and will direct future development and implementation steps.

J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 6 | e15449 | p. 12

The business plan guided the direction to actively involve HCPs
in providing the intervention to patients and the specific focus
on developing self-management skills over time (learning by
doing) to be distinctive from other Dutch mHealth solutions.
These outcomes were added to the design requirements (Textbox
4). During business modeling, market volume, and segmentation,
different innovation and distribution routes and revenue models
were systematically evaluated. Given current positive
developments with regard to funding of apps in the Netherlands,
especially those that are evidence-driven, a distribution strategy
will be chosen that includes health care insurers to ensure
implementation and continued use in Dutch COPD care.

Discussion

Principal Findings

This paper provides insight into a systematic and thorough way
of developing an evidence-driven and usable mHealth
intervention (Copilot) for patients with COPD to enhance
exacerbation-related self-management. Following an iterative
UCD process, a mobile app consisting of a personalized action
plan and symptom-monitoring module has been developed. The
intervention was developed by following a thorough and
well-underpinned process consisting of a background analysis
and design conceptualization phase leading to final guiding
principles, a logic model and design requirements, usability
testing phases leading to usability requirements, and iterative
software development of an MVP that adheres to these guiding
principles and design and usability requirements. This unique
approach of scientific engineering has resulted in an mHealth
intervention that meets the needs and preferences of patients
with COPD, is likely to be used by patients with COPD, and
has a high potential to be effective in reducing exacerbation
impact. Involving patients with COPD, HCPs, COPD experts,
and experts from design and behavioral science throughout the
development process increased the likelihood that the mHealth
intervention can be successfully implemented into Dutch COPD
care.

Copilot requires an active case manager role, as previous studies
have shown the need for ongoing case manager support
alongside the use of an action plan to achieve effective and safe
self-management [11,67]. The mHealth intervention was
developed as a tool to enhance patient self-management skills
that is complementary to personal interaction with an HCP. This
is in line with recent research underlining that a good
patient-HCP relationship is important for patients to engage and
take responsibility for their own health care [68,69]. The specific
focus on developing self-management skills over time is
distinctive from other mHealth initiatives, as research in the
past decade has focused increasingly on telemonitoring strategies
to decrease the impact of exacerbations [21,70,71]. The impact
of telemonitoring in the COPD population is, however, still
equivocal because of trial designs, unstandardized interventions,
and limited follow-up [21,70]. With telemonitoring, the
decision-making process is profession based. The working
mechanism of Copilot focuses on enhancing patients’
self-management skills over time. Therefore, no telemonitoring
strategies were included in our mHealth intervention.

Although our Delphi study has shown the need for a
comprehensive strategy to improve the full spectrum of
exacerbation-related self-management behavior [15], the first
version of our mHealth intervention focuses specifically on
self-monitoring of symptoms and taking prompt individualized
self-management actions. A less is more approach consisting
of only a few strong target behaviors that fit together was
considered to be imperative in creating impact [41,65]. When
changing these target behaviors is proven effective, we could
build upon these behaviors incrementally [41]. It is important
to note that not all relevant self-management behaviors have to
be addressed through mHealth, as HCPs should continue to
have an essential role in providing self-management support as
well [31].

Strengths and Limitations

A major strength was the systematic and thorough way of
developing Copilot according to a UCD that was based on
existing development models and diminished the chance of
missing important steps [33,34]. We have systematically
investigated and incorporated the views of end users,
continuously evaluated prototypes, and involved persuasive
design techniques to match user profiles and motivate patients
to engage in self-management, which is in line with the
person-based approach and the holistic framework for the
development of electronic health (eHealth) technologies [32,72].
Furthermore, we used guiding principles to easily recall the
principal and distinctive features of the intervention during the
extensive, iterative intervention development process [32].
Another important strength was the detailed analysis of
behaviors of patients with COPD using the BCW method and
selection of BCTs to underpin the pathway toward behavior
change [41]. Using the BCW method along with a UCD is
comparable with the methodology used by Curtis et al [22] to
develop a theory-driven and user-centered healthy eating app.
Their work also focused on a thorough analysis of target
behaviors, selection of BCTs, and exploration of user
preferences to underpin the design of the app with relevant
theory and evidence and ensure engagement among the target
population. However, Curtis et al [22] performed no specific
activities with regard to valorization and implementation of
their app during their development process [22]. To make both
the design and the implementation of our app value driven, we
performed valorization activities throughout the development
process of our app [59,72]. Business modeling helped us to
identify critical success factors that will influence the
sustainability and effectiveness of the app, which is often
overlooked during the development process of eHealth and
mHealth technologies [59].

From a health care and behavior change perspective, we chose
to use the MRC framework for the development of complex
interventions as a basis for our UCD, instead of a more general
software development approach. The four iterative phases were
inspired by the user-centered methodology used by Johnston et
al [33] for the development of a Web-based interface for patients
with COPD. The use of a more general software development
approach as a basis for the development process might have
provided more specific guidance to the software development
and usability phases beforehand. However, such approaches

J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 6 | e15449 | p. 13

pay less attention to the activities needed to design a theory-
and evidence-driven intervention, which was an important focus
in our design process.

Furthermore, it should be noted that the extensive and thorough
development process increased the likelihood of developing an
effective intervention, although it is questionable if this process
is feasible in daily practice. The whole intervention development
process took place over a 4-year period, which is quite time
consuming and could increase the risk of a misfit with current
market developments or that technology has moved on by the
time of implementation [22,73,74]. The time-consuming
development was partly because of the inclusion of all the
development phases but was also related to developing an
mHealth intervention from a scientific environment. Developing
an intervention from science involves completing an empirical
cycle at each development phase and often includes an extensive
review of a study protocol by a medical ethics research
committee. Pursuing the rules of science during the development
process of an mHealth intervention has slowed down the process
at certain points in time. Furthermore, development from a
scientific environment generally means less focus on business
modeling and entrepreneurship, which could delay the process
of bringing the app to the market. Finally, a limitation in this
study was the restricted budget available for the creative design
and development of the mHealth intervention, which required
us to make a selection in the development of intervention
components.

Implications for Practice and Future Research

The findings of this study are important for both patients with
COPD and HCPs supporting patients with COPD in
self-management as well as for researchers and designers
focusing on the development of mHealth interventions. For
patients with COPD, an evidence-driven and usable mobile app
has 
been 
developed 
to 
assist 
them 
in 
developing
exacerbation-related self-management skills. It needs to be
emphasized that, at least for the coming years, not all patients
with COPD will be eligible for the mHealth intervention,
especially for those with a more negative attitude toward
mHealth and low digital literacy [19,31]. However, a positive
change in attitudes toward mHealth and digital skills can be
expected in the future, given the current trends in internet access
and smartphone use [18]. For HCPs, the mHealth intervention
can be used to provide more evidence-based, structured, and
tailored self-management support. The mHealth intervention
can be embedded in primary, secondary, and tertiary care
settings, which could contribute to improving integrated care.
To increase the likelihood of successful implementation in Dutch
COPD care, the intervention can easily be adapted to a specific
setting and context. Hereby, the intervention would be available
for a wide range of health care settings in which patients with
COPD are currently treated. For future practice, it is important
that more intervention components will be added to the mHealth
intervention to optimally address the selected target behaviors,
such as adding self-treatment with prednisolone and/or
antibiotics and providing assistance in case patients are in doubt
about if they should contact their HCP. Furthermore, a separate
dashboard for HCPs should be developed to be able to
individualize the mHealth intervention and to review registered

symptoms and actions during consultations without having to
use the patient’s own device. An essential step would then be
to establish cooperation with external vendors in the field and
health care insurers to ensure implementation in COPD care.
In the next phase, it is important that the mHealth intervention
takes into account patient comorbidities to make the intervention
available for a wider population and to ensure patient safety
[12]. Future steps should focus on adding target behaviors that
are relevant before, during, and after an exacerbation to
maximize the reduction of exacerbation impact.

For researchers and designers, the UCD in this study can be
used as guidance for the development of mHealth interventions
that meet end user needs and preferences, have high potential
to be effective, and are likely to be used by the target population.
Essential in the development is that interventions are grounded
in theory and evidence and that user needs and preferences are
thoroughly 
investigated. 
Moreover, 
valorization 
and
implementation activities should be regarded as continuous
activities throughout the development process to ensure
sustainable use in its intended practice. This extensive reporting
of the intervention development process enhances the
reproducibility of the intervention and contributes to more
transparency in the development of complex interventions in
health care, which is needed to strengthen the internal and
external validity of interventions and to add value to health care
research [34]. All in all, it is helpful to have multiple examples
and variants on how to develop evidence- and theory-driven
mHealth interventions. It should be considered if the
thoroughness of this UCD is needed for all mHealth
interventions that will be developed in the future. Depending
on the topic, decisions should be made about which phases and
steps are relevant to the topic and should be included in the
development process. In addition, taking time aspects into
consideration, it should be questioned how thoroughly an
individual step should be executed. The need for efficiency in
the development of mHealth interventions is currently a highly
discussed topic [75]. Our work contributes to this discussion
by mapping out a state-of-the-art design and development
process and showing how time consuming this is.

Future research should focus on evaluating the feasibility of the
mHealth intervention in the daily practice of HCPs, as they have
a key role in personalizing the mHealth intervention before
patient use. In a second phase, the feasibility of the mHealth
intervention should be evaluated with patients with COPD to
investigate the delivery and acceptability of the intervention,
compliance with the intervention, and recruitment and retention
of patients. In the next phase, the effect of the mHealth
intervention on the relevant patient outcomes and health care
use should be evaluated. Recent studies on mHealth
interventions in patients with COPD suggest the use of
randomized controlled trials (RCTs) with adequately powered
sample sizes and a 1-year follow-up period to be sufficient to
comment on behavioral change and impact of treatment [19,20].
However, this time-consuming design may not be ideal for
rapidly evolving mHealth technologies [73,76]. Using an RCT
implies two or more years of research in which this mHealth
intervention with high potential for effectiveness, and no
expected harm will not be available for patients with COPD.

J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 6 | e15449 | p. 14

Furthermore, an RCT only enables identifying if this complex
mHealth intervention as a whole work and the cost-effectiveness
of it, without identifying which intervention components work
in whom. Alternatively, more rapid study designs such as n-of-1
trials or observational designs could be used to understand the
working mechanism of the intervention and simultaneously
focus on bringing the mHealth intervention to the market as
soon as possible [73,75-77]. Within these designs, it is important
to evaluate self-management skills and behavior change as
outcomes, and the way this is assessed should be clearly reported
[19,77,78].

Conclusions

This paper described in detail the full UCD and development
process of an evidence-driven and usable mHealth intervention

to enhance exacerbation-related self-management in patients
with COPD. By following a UCD process, an mHealth
intervention was developed that meets the needs and preferences
of patients with COPD, is likely to be used by patients with
COPD, and has a high potential to be effective in reducing
exacerbation impact. This extensive reporting of the intervention
development process contributes to more transparency in the
development of complex interventions in health care. The UCD
process in this study can be used by researchers and designers
as guidance for the development of mHealth interventions.
However, taking time aspects into consideration, decisions have
to be made about the thoroughness of executing individual
phases.