UD Co-Spaces: A Table-Centred Multi-Display Environment
for Public Engagement in Urban Design Charrettes

Narges Mahyar, Kelly J. Burke, Jialiang (Ernest) Xiang, Siyi (Cathy) Meng,
Kellogg S. Booth, Cynthia L. Girling, and Ronald W. Kellett
The University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z4, CANADA
{nmayhar, jlxiang, mengxixi, ksbooth}@cs.ubc.ca,

ABSTRACT
UD Co-Spaces (Urban Design Collaborative Spaces) is an in-
tegrated, tabletop-centered multi-display environment for en-
gaging the public in the complex process of collaborative ur-
ban design. We describe the iterative user-centered process
that we followed over six years through a close interdisci-
plinary collaboration involving experts in urban design and
neighbourhood planning. Versions of UD Co-Spaces were
deployed in ﬁve real-world charrettes (planning workshops)
with 83 participants, a heuristic evaluation with three domain
experts, and a qualitative laboratory study with 37 partici-
pants. We reﬂect on our design decisions and how multi-
display environments can engage a broad range of stake-
holders in decision making and foster collaboration and co-
creation within urban design. We examine the parallel use
of different displays, each with tailored interactive visualiza-
tions, and whether this affects what people can learn about the
consequences of their choices for sustainable neighborhoods.
We assess UD Co-Spaces using seven principles for collabo-
rative urban design tools that we identiﬁed based on literature
in urban design, CSCW, and public engagement.

Author Keywords
Charrette, collaboration, interaction design, interdisciplinary
design, public engagement, sustainability, urban design,
user-centered design, visualization

ACM Classiﬁcation Keywords
H.5.2-3. Information Interfaces and Presentation: User Inter-
faces, Group and Organization Interfaces

INTRODUCTION
This application paper describes UD Co-Spaces (Urban De-
sign Collaborative Spaces), an interactive multi-display col-
laborative environment to support complex urban design ex-
ercises. Urban design is the process of designing neighbour-
hoods and larger urban areas. It typically focuses on the re-

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full cita-
tion on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or re-
publish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ISS ’16, November 06-09, 2016, Niagara Falls, ON, Canada
Copyright c⃝2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-4248-3/16/11...$15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2992154.2992163

lationships of buildings, streets and public spaces to make
urban areas functional, livable and sustainable.

UD Co-Spaces is centered on a multi-user tabletop display
that enables stakeholders to collaboratively design the fu-
ture of a neighbourhood through direct multi-touch manipu-
lation of planning options, interactively explore design alter-
natives, and cross-check with sustainability indicators in real
time during a session. It includes auxiliary wall displays and
hand-held individual displays that extend the functionality of
the tabletop to better support Arnstein’s notion of engagement
for users [2]. The interdisciplinary project is a long-term col-
laboration involving a team of human-computer interaction
(HCI), computer-supported cooperative work (CSCW), urban
design, and public engagement researchers.

Deﬁnitions and terms. Our target application is urban de-
sign charrettes (or simply charrettes), one common method
for engaging the public in complex planning for urban design.
Charrettes are intensive multi-day processes during which a
team of professionals and a diverse set of community stake-
holders create a holistic development plan through a series
of iterative feedback loops [7, 9, 15]. Charrettes often utilise
direct manipulation of physical representations of urban de-
sign precedents or cases, such as buildings, streets, or parks.
A case has information such as its footprint (for a building
and its associated surroundings), height, volume, energy us-
age, and other attributes. A pattern is a spatial layout of cases
that constitutes a possible urban design. Increasingly, urban
design considers sustainability and uses indicators such as
building occupancy levels, commercial and residential capac-
ities, density, dwelling types, energy usage, land use, jobs,
transportation utilisation, walkability indices for neighbor-
hoods, and other measures related to sustainability that help
estimate the environmental and social consequences of a pro-
posed urban design pattern. Indicators are calculated based
on the spatial layout and attributes of an urban design pattern,
often using heuristics derived from urban design models.

In this paper, the term “design” is overloaded. It could mean
designing urban environments or it could mean designing en-
vironments to support urban design. We try to make clear
which is meant each time we use the term, but usually we
mean designing urban environments.

Real-world application: the urban design charrette. Char-
rettes have been characterised as “an impossible problem in
an absurdly short time” where the constraints are an essential

109

characteristic of the process [7]. Charrette participants in-
clude facilitators, design professionals (architects, urban de-
signers), experts (planners, engineers, scientists), and public
stakeholders who have a vested interest in the project. These
are our users. In this process, participants explore multiple
variables and possible solutions. Charrettes still rely heav-
ily on “hand” drawings completed by design professionals.
They often lack rigorous evaluation, particularly in real time.
Where digital tools such as GIS mapping have been intro-
duced, they remain expert driven so that non-expert partic-
ipants remain passive consumers of information [5, 7, 15].
A bottleneck in the adoption of these tools is that software
developers are too far removed from the planning environ-
ment [17], so they lack important contextual knowledge con-
cerning the diverse interests that steer the interactions of
growing numbers of stakeholders.
We spent considerable
time learning about existing charrette processes and work-
ﬂows, and the shortcomings of current practice. Our research
examines how surface interaction techniques on multiple in-
terconnected displays can better support user engagement in
complex processes of urban design during charrettes.

Value hypothesis: surfaces promote engagement. Stake-
holders with different knowledge, expertise, and objectives
participate in public consultation phases of urban design. Our
main goals are: (a) engaging different groups of stakehold-
ers to actively interact with design options, (b) fostering col-
laboration and co-creation of urban design through the use
of touch-based interaction and surface technology, and (c)
enabling stakeholders to understand consequences of their
choices using simple visual encodings that connect sustain-
ability indicators to urban form.

Design process and principles: domain and user centered.
System design choices for UD Co-Spaces were informed by
various literature in CSCW, planning support systems, and
public engagement. We followed an iterative user-centered
process to identify appropriate surface-based interaction tools
that promote common ground among stakeholders with vari-
ous backgrounds and objectives. We examined how different
display form factors might increase engagement with both the
process and the group. Through our observations of the sys-
tem in use, we considered which collaboration and visualiza-
tion technologies enable stakeholders to interactively design
solutions and better understand the consequences of their de-
signs. Three major system iterations each added a new dis-
play type to UD Co-Spaces to support collaboration and vi-
sualization activities identiﬁed in formative evaluations.

One challenge we faced was lack of design guidelines for
charrettes that address engagement, collaboration, and other
domain-speciﬁc requirements. Although our system design
choices were informed by collocated collaborative visualiza-
tion guidelines on tabletops [12, 20], we also reviewed lit-
erature in urban design and public engagement and adopted
principles from Arnstein [2], and Snyder [22] to the narrower
challenge of building engaging Collaborative Planning Sup-
port Systems (CPSS) for the urban design charrette process.

Based on these principles and our own observations of UD
Co-Spaces in use, we synthesised a set of seven principles for

Figure 1. The third iteration of UD Co-Spaces, a multi-display collab-
orative environment where multiple users can simultaneously interact
with 2D maps on a tabletop, with 3D views on the wall, and with two
applications on hand-held iPads.

urban design charrettes: (1) engagement, (2) collaboration,
(3) interactive visualization, (4) accessibility, (5) iteration,
(6) understanding consequences, and (7) transparency. In
our discussion we describe the principles and explain how
the features in UD Co-Spaces work together to address them.

Next best alternative: traditional planning systems. Col-
laborative and visualization technology can play an impor-
tant role in increasing public engagement in urban design, but
few systems support the complexity and interactivity required
for a truly collaborative decision-making process. Many cur-
rent tools use powerful GIS-based visualizations, however,
they are expert-intensive, non-collaborative, and rarely pro-
vide real-time feedback because they require signiﬁcant effort
to produce visual encodings of indicators.

Contributions and overview of the paper. We describe UD
Co-Spaces (Fig. 1) and the iterative user-centered design pro-
cess we followed over six years in close collaboration with
experts in urban design and neighbourhood planning. We re-
ﬂect on system design decisions and how multi-display envi-
ronments can engage a broad range of stakeholders in deci-
sion making and foster collaboration and co-creation for ur-
ban design. We examine the parallel use of different displays,
each with tailored interactive visualizations, and whether this
affects what people learn about the consequences of their
choices for sustainable neighborhoods. Finally, we assess UD
Co-Spaces using the seven design principles that we identi-
ﬁed for collaborative urban design tools that target charrette-
style processes.

After summarizing prior research on the charrette process in
urban design, planning support system software, interactive
visualization and collaboration tools, multi-display environ-
ments, and guidelines for assessing urban design tools and
processes, we describe the iterative development of UD Co-
Spaces and its deployment and evaluation through three pro-
totypes. We conclude with a discussion of lessons learned
and suggestions for future work to support the charrette pro-
cess using the framework adapted from the literature.

110

RELATED WORK
There is a rich body of research in CSCW and tabletop ap-
plications for collocated collaboration, visual analytics, and
decision making. We focus only on urban design tabletop ap-
plications and charrette-style processes where the goals are
to provide tools that help users understand the consequences
of design choices and promote a sense of empowerment that
encourages broad-based public engagement.

Planning support systems. There are many digital Planning
Support Systems (PSS) under development that are used to
engage the public with long-range decision-making around
climate change [6,8]. Built primarily upon GIS and decision-
support tools, PSS are digital systems that integrate spatial
and non-spatial analysis with simulation and visualization
capacity speciﬁcally tailored to the needs and processes of
planning-analysis, prediction and prescription [14]. Our goal
is to address the challenge of public engagement identiﬁed by
researchers [11] by providing comparative data about spatial
scenarios that is accessible and understandable by the general
public.

Interactive visualization. Computers can provide visualiza-
tion methods to increase understanding, actively engage with
lay people, and expand the reach of public engagement pro-
cesses. The Planning and Urban Design Standards [3] de-
ﬁne visualization in this context as “the process of taking
abstract ideas or data and translating them into easily under-
stood or interpreted images to enhance planning, urban design
and decision-making processes.” Visualization tools can dis-
play urban forms in two and three dimensions with associated
data: computerised versions of traditional maps, perspective
drawings, and data plots [1].

Most similar to our work are PSS tools that link and visu-
alize complex information so non-professional stakeholders
can better engage and understand long-range consequences
of decisions.1 These PSS support 3D scenario development
linked to preset planning parameters, source data customised
to location and application, integration of spatial and non-
spatial data, trial and error scenario testing, and plan revi-
sion. However, many of these tools are suited only to a nar-
row range of scale (spatial extent) and do not adjust well to
other scales. For example, MetroQuest is well suited to study
policy questions at the city or metropolitan scale, whereas
CommunityViz is better suited to urban form scenarios at
only the district scale [8].
The level of expertise needed
to use each system varies widely. Some are relatively user
friendly, whereas others require signiﬁcant expertise [8]. For
planners to engage and use PSS in their day-to-day work, the
systems must be more ﬂexible and adaptable to different cir-
cumstances, easier to learn, and better at providing interfaces
for the public [14].

Tabletop systems. There has been previous work on collab-
orative tabletop systems for urban planning [4,10,13,17,23].
Perhaps best known is URP, from the MIT Media Lab [23]. It
is a workbench environment with a tangible user interface that

1Examples of commercial tools include: Community Viz (place-
ways.com/communityviz), INDEX (www.crit.com/sparc), Metro-
Quest (metroquest.com), and UrbanSim (www.urbansim.org)

allows urban planners to study how architectural structures
will affect light, wind, and other factors that have an impact
on urban design. The same group developed Luminous Ta-
ble [13] to address limitations in URP. Luminous Table is an
augmented or mixed reality system that blends digital table-
top objects with physical objects integrating 2D drawings, 3D
models, and computational simulations. Physical models of
buildings can be placed on the table and they will be recog-
nised by the system and then simulations calculate shadows
and wind ﬂows that can be rendered on the table. A 2D draw-
ing can be provided as a background image for the study area.

Multi-display environments.
Some research has utilised
multiple displays used in conjunction with collaborative
tabletops.
For example, Wagner et al. [25] developed a
mixed-reality system for urban planning using both tabletop
and wall displays with physical objects on the table. The ob-
jects are only used as tokens instead of being actual scale
models of buildings as in Luminous Table [13]. However,
the application is more a presentation tool for previously de-
veloped urban designs, with little support for interactive de-
sign. ETH’s ValueLab [10] is a collaborative environment
that brings together large interactive displays and visualiza-
tions to facilitate public participation in the planning of mega-
cities (what ETH researchers refer to as “Future Cities”).
GIS data and visualization software is used to simulate de-
sign choices. ColorTable [17] is an interactive round table
designed to facilitate communication between diverse stake-
holders. It utilises a tangible user interface and tokens placed
on the table to represent design elements, such as buildings
or streets. It uses a physical map augmented with 2D images
and 3D objects to lend the design area more realism. A per-
spective view of the design is provided by a projected image
on a wall display.

Tangible vs. digital. Our goal is different from other systems.
We target urban design activities and explicitly focus on user
engagement, collaboration, and awareness of design conse-
quences. The collaborative and interactive environments of
ColorTable and Value Lab are the most similar to UD Co-
Spaces in terms of their goals, which are focused on collab-
oration and public participation. However, the system archi-
tecture of each is quite different from that of UD Co-Spaces:
Value Lab relies on GIS data and 3D animations for its vi-
sualization needs, while ColorTable’s tangible user interface
relies on physical tokens to represent design features. Evalua-
tion of the ColorTable revealed “that participants had troubles
following long workﬂows, organizing the number of objects,
and interpreting which physical object is linked to which dig-
ital counterpart in the case of large differences in size” [17].

The obvious advantages of tangibility are, in our opinion, out-
weighed by the overhead of providing physical artifacts ap-
propriate to a range of urban settings. Our research provides
a totally digital solution, with the possibility of supporting
tangible objects in the future. UD Co-Spaces uses external
systems as components to provide ﬂexibility and extensibility
of geographic areas and building types for planning exercises.
Neither Value Lab nor ColorTable incorporates hand-held de-
vices; UD Co-Spaces is unique in this respect.

111

Principles for engagement in collaborative urban design.
Planning support tools have a diverse range of objectives that
have their own guidelines. Design charrettes are a speciﬁc
type of collaboration with unique characteristics such as lim-
ited time, multivariate data, multiple users with different lev-
els of expertise, etc. These characteristics pose new chal-
lenges for designing support tools for this domain space.

While guidelines from collaborative visualization [12,20] ad-
dress the use of collaborative technology and design of visu-
alizations for multiple users, CPSS requires additional guide-
lines speciﬁc to the domain and to the challenge of engaging
various stakeholders in the design process. Engaging stake-
holders with different backgrounds, expertise, and expecta-
tions is a prominent challenge for design charrettes. Arn-
stein’s widely adopted Ladder of Public Engagement [2]
proposes an eight-level hierarchy of manipulation, therapy,
informing, consultation, placation, partnership, delegated
power, and citizen control to assess the degree of engagement
in general settings.

In the context of urban planning, Snyder [22] proposes a
13-point “wish list” for urban design tools including inter-
active and usable at multiple levels of expertise, accessible
and affordable, adaptable and maintainable, having an open
architecture, utilising high quality data, operating at local
and regional scale, providing comprehensive coverage and
integration of issues, supporting impact analysis including
short-, medium- and long-term effects, engaging citizens and
supporting face-to-face interactions, visual imagery, values,
causes, and effects,
promoting identiﬁcation of design op-
tions, and regular monitoring and reporting. However, there
are no speciﬁc guidelines in urban design that target all of the
requirements for CPSS speciﬁc to design charrettes. Based on
these principles, and our own observations of UD Co-Spaces
in use, we synthesised a set of principles for urban design
charrettes that we describe in the Discussion.

ITERATIVE DEVELOPMENT OF UD Co-Spaces
There were three major iterations of UD Co-Spaces, each
adding a new display type to support collaboration and vi-
sualization activities identiﬁed in formative evaluations. For
each iteration we discuss key lessons learned during ﬁeld de-
ployments that affect the ﬁnal system, including challenges
and design rationale.

Iteration 1: A multi-user, multi-touch tabletop. A proof-
of-concept prototype on a SMART Technology Digital Vision
Touch (DViT) tabletop (91.5cm x 74cm top surface, 65.4cm
height, 57.2cm x 42.9cm screen with 1024x768 pixels) ran
custom software developed entirely in C# using SMART’s
Table SDK. The code base had 15 classes, 135 methods, and
4795 lines of code.

Cases and patterns. The tabletop’s horizontal form factor
provides a natural collaborative platform where individuals
can explore options in parallel by dragging cases from a side
bar (Fig. 2A) along the edge of the display to locations on a
2D map at the center of the display. The side bar has a full set
of cases that are colour-coded according to building type and
usage. Cases can be moved and rotated at any time. Tapping

Figure 2. The ﬁrst iteration of UD Co-Spaces, where the center of the
tabletop is a map view of the current pattern, with (A) a side bar dis-
playing a list of available cases that can be dragged onto the map, (B) a
bottom bar showing a list of saved patterns, and (C) a comparison of the
current and saved patterns based on a ﬁxed set of indicators.

on a case opens a pop-up window with detailed information
(ﬂoor area, number of bedrooms, alternate views, etc.). The
shared map in the center of the tabletop is the only place to
create urban design solutions. This was done to encourage
collaborative co-creation of urban designs.

Understanding design consequences. Four summary charts
provide quantitative visuals for key sustainability indicators
in a reserved display area (Fig. 2C). These show target values
(thresholds) so users can track how close they are to reach-
ing their goals. Charts update automatically any time cases
are added or removed. Users cannot interact with charts di-
rectly, they only make changes and then see how the charts
respond. Previous patterns can be recalled from the bottom
bar (Fig. 2B) that serves as a primitive history mechanism.

Challenges and lessons learned. The biggest problem with
the initial prototype was limited screen real estate. Display
size was not enough for robust design exercises. A lot of
space was occupied by visualizations showing sustainability
indicators that were considered too sophisticated for novice
users. There was no 3D view in this version. The software
was speciﬁc to a particular tabletop manufacturer. The back-
ground map had to be provided as an image ﬁle. The need
to manually prepare maps put constraints on how much they
could be scaled and thus limited the areas for which urban
design could be explored using the prototype.

Iteration 2: Adding a wall display. We added an auxiliary
wall display with a 3D aerial view and a custom-designed
indicator dashboard (Fig. 3). Based on advice from domain
experts, a simpler visual encoding using bar and donut charts
(with simple infographics in the middle) to help users better
understand the indicators was developed [24]. The natural
up-down orientation of the 3D view and indicators was more
appropriate for a vertical display. This freed up valuable real
estate on the horizontal tabletop display, so it could be de-
voted to the 2D map and case bar for interaction (Fig. 4). 3D
viewing parameters such as viewing angle, zoom level, and

112

Figure 3. The auxiliary wall display in the second iteration of UD Co-
Spaces, with a 3D view (top) and new visual encodings for sustainability
indicators (bottom).

elevation were dynamically controlled using a custom widget
on the tabletop.

Revised architecture with federated services. UD Co-Spaces
integrates three independent applications: a 2D map server
to replace manually loaded map images, live access to a
database where cases can be obtained, and a third-party ren-
derer to display urban design patterns in 3D with cases at their
correct locations. Dashboards were implemented so they up-
date their views when callbacks notify them that the pattern
on the tabletop has changed. To provide compatibility with
future technology, the software uses a layered approach that
introduces abstractions for the 2D and 3D displays and for
the case database. RabbitMQ provides a bulletin-board-style
messaging layer in which requests are broadcast and listen-
ers associated with each federated component provide asyn-
chronous responses. The federated architecture proved fortu-
itous when personal displays were added in the third iteration.

Device and service abstractions. Bindings were written to
support SMART Technologies, Microsoft Surface, and PQ
Labs multi-touch surfaces for the 2D tabletop (each device
has about four times the area of the initial prototype), Google
Earth for 3D rendering, Google Map and Microsoft Bing for
2D map content, and elementsDB, a database of cases devel-
oped previously by the researchers. Trimble’s Sketchup was
used to convert elementsDB case geometry into 2D images for
the tabletop and 3D models that Google Earth’s API “inserts”
at the appropriate locations and orientations for rendering by
an Apache web server and display in a full-screen browser
window on the wall.

Indicators. A new custom-designed dashboard provides vi-
sual encodings of key indicators that can have target values
speciﬁed for “are we there yet?” interaction. These indicators
can be used to determine near-optimal designs for a particular
urban area.

Deployment. The second iteration was tested in a series of 26
workshop sessions with 44 citizens and planners in the British
Columbia city of Revelstoke and 18 professionals in Vancou-
ver. Sessions were video taped and data gathered through
questionnaires and focus groups, yielding insights about the
system design, collaborative interaction, engagement, and the
value of immediate live feedback during the urban design pro-

Figure 4. The touch-table interface in the second iteration of UD Co-
Spaces, with a map of the study area in the center and a case bar along
each edge of the display to allow individual exploration of options.

cess. We received positive responses from stakeholders that
UD Co-Spaces was fun, easy to understand and interact with,
encouraging, and instructive about the consequences of deci-
sions: participants’ feedback indicated that the system helped
them see the impact of their designs, understand city planning
and its complexity, and learn from each other. Those in the
Revelstoke workshop remarked that the “tools were helpful
in understanding some impacts of choices,” “I learned a lot
from [a developer] and [a planner] about how developers and
planners think,” it was “interesting to see everyone’s views,”
“there are a lot of details to consider when doing urban plan-
ning!” and the process helped “understand city planning and
its ramiﬁcations.”

Features that both professionals and the public liked were fast
and early feedback, number and variety of alternatives, and
visualization linked to the indicators. The system was well re-
ceived by professional planners, even though we had thought
it would be mainly of interest only to non-experts. The Van-
couver ﬁeld trials involved six city planners and 12 other mu-
nicipal staff in half-day design workshops. In follow-up inter-
views, they reported that seeing 2D and 3D concurrently with
“live” indicators, enabled them to effectively engage with
non-planner colleagues to generate and evaluate numerous al-
ternatives. All of them reported that it raised their conﬁdence
about proposed solutions and they subsequently requested to
use the tool set for additional work sessions.

Challenges and lessons learned. Analysis of videos, ques-
tionnaires and focus groups indicated some important limita-
tions: lack of personal work spaces on the displays, difﬁculty
interacting in parallel with the 3D view on the wall display,
and low user engagement with sustainability indicators now
that they were shown on the wall rather than at the center of
attention on the tabletop. Adding indicators at the bottom of
the wall display also created a display real estate problem: in-
dicators took space on the wall that was supposed to be used
for 3D. The set of indicators and target values were statically
chosen; there was no opportunity to customise them for in-
dividual use. Some participants commented that the tabletop
was so engaging that they did not pay much attention to the
indicators on the wall. We addressed these issues in the third
iteration of the system by adding personal hand-held devices
to control the 3D view and for viewing indicators, thus free-

113

Figure 5. A dashboard on the iPad shows visual feedback about sus-
tainability indicators for the current design. The left side is a toolbox of
colour-coded indicator categories, the right side is a canvas showing the
selected indicators. Users drag indicators from the toolbar to the canvas
and can select target thresholds for each indicator.

ing up the wall display for 3D while also encouraging more
interaction with the sustainability indicators.

Iteration 3: Adding personal hand-held displays. Our cur-
rent version of UD Co-Spaces is an integrated multi-display
environment (Fig. 1) whose activities are anchored in a multi-
touch tabletop workspace augmented with both large-screen
wall displays for shared viewing and smaller hand-held dis-
plays for individual access and customization.
The feder-
ated use of services abstracted into layers and the message
paradigm to support asynchronous communication continues.
We improved interaction with the 3D wall display and added
new functionality for interacting with indicators by introduc-
ing Apple iPad tablets that remotely manipulate the 3D view
and conﬁgure and display personal indicator dashboards for
parallel investigation of sustainability indicators. iPad appli-
cations use WiFi to communicate with the server that man-
ages the tabletop and 3D display through agents resident on
the server that respond to task-speciﬁc RabbitMQ messages.

iPad 3D view control. As in the second iteration, a direct
manipulation multi-touch view controller on the tabletop ini-
tially sets the location of a virtual camera and its direction of
view and elevation relative to a “look-at” point in the urban
design. A new custom remote control iPad app then allows
pan and scroll of the look-at point by one-ﬁnger movement,
camera distance and orientation by two-ﬁnger pinch-expand
and twist gestures, and camera elevation by two-ﬁnger vir-
tual sliding. Our assumption that ubiquitous experience with
personal computers, hand-held smart phones, and tablets has
created a level of sophistication in the general public that im-
plies that gestures such as zoom and pinch will be familiar to
many people was deﬁnitely borne out in our testing.

iPad sustainability indicators. Dashboard indicators give vi-
sual feedback about sustainability indicators for the current
design. Indicators can be grouped to display related informa-
tion. A dashboard is a collection of indicators. Dashboards
can be displayed on the tabletop or on the wall or on the iPads.

On iPads, indicators can be dragged from a toolbox (Fig. 5) to
build custom dashboards that display the indicators that mat-
ter most to users. We added a ﬁxed bar on the top of the iPad
using one-ﬁfth of the display space to show default indicators
that were most relevant to the design task. This was done for
the lay people who were not necessarily familiar enough with
the context of urban design to select the relevant indicators.
The bar can be hidden if users need more space.

As in the second iteration, indicators are updated automati-
cally whenever a change takes place on the tabletop, so they
always show current data to everyone. Indicators are drawn
from computational models in the elementsDB urban design
database. To encourage more interactivity and transparency
about how indicators are set, users can select target thresholds
for indicators using the iPad. This also allows facilitators to
interactively guide sessions if they want to explore a variety
of scenarios with different thresholds.

Challenges and lessons learned. After deploying the third
iteration we conducted formal and informal evaluations that
we describe in the next section.

EVALUATION
UD Co-Spaces is intended to serve a large range of stake-
holders. A primary concern is usability of UD Co-Spaces for
different groups of stakeholders and to observe and analyze
its effects on collaboration and engagement. All of our sys-
tem design decisions and development processes were based
on close collaboration with both academic and professional
domain experts: urban planners in both Revelstoke and Van-
couver, who used UD Co-Spaces in actual planning charrettes
in the two cities, which served as ﬁeld trials for our system.

An example of a low-level system design decision is when
users control the 3D viewer from the tabletop. They need to
hold a ﬁnger down on the table for 4 seconds to activate the
3D viewer camera controller. When using an iPad to con-
trol the 3D, they got confused about where the 3D camera is
looking. We added an “eye” icon displayed at the center of
the 2D tabletop to indicate that the camera for the 3D viewer
is always looking at that point no matter how the viewing pa-
rameters change. When users let go of their ﬁngers, the eye
icon disappears automatically.

We also took the opportunity during a demo of our system to
28 high school students (two groups each of 14 girls) to test
whether multiple users could smoothly use the iPads to con-
trol the 3D view. Each demo took 45 minutes. During the
demos we provided 10 minutes of introduction, then we ob-
served the students working freely with ﬁve iPads to control
the 3D view on the wall display. Most of the students quickly
learned how to perform rudimentary actions, conﬁrming that
(at least for younger stakeholders) almost-ubiquitous expo-
sure to personal surface interaction can be assumed. In addi-
tion to this and many other informal evaluations that are part
of normal iterative system design, we conducted two formal
evaluations.

Heuristic Evaluation. A heuristic evaluation for both of the
iPad applications was conducted with three experts in urban
design and public engagement. We had one task for each

114

application (3D viewer and indicator dashboard), and gave
each expert 20 minutes to try each feature. After each task, an
expert provided verbal comments about each application and
provided us with suggestions to improve them. Each expert
was tested separately for about 60 minutes. All three experts
said hand-held devices were valuable. After comparing 3D
navigation on the tabletop to navigation using iPad, Expert 1
stated that “iPad is easier to use for posture, it gives you better
opportunity to ﬁnd the 3D view, and it is more comfortable
because of the posture (standing up and looking at the wall
display on the wall).” Expert 2 said “controlling 3D is more
intuitive on the iPad than controlling the 3D from the table”
but that while he was comfortable with both “as facilitator [I]
would be more comfortable on the table where everyone can
see the interactions, but iPad is easier to get into than the table
itself.” Expert 1 said “gestures feel better on the iPad than the
table, it takes some getting used to navigate on the table while
looking up at the wall.” Expert 3 made similar comments.

All three experts were also positive about how easy the in-
dicators were to navigate and operate. Expert 1 mentioned
“being able to modify the key/value pairs in the design task
... to react to people’s interest is very important, being able to
customise indicators for each group based on what they care
[about] most is important.” Similarly, Expert 2 liked “the abil-
ity to modify the indicators in accordance with the priorities
of a group or a workshop.” Expert 3 said “the combination of
numbers and visuals [and] infographics is great” to visually
encode indicators.

Formal user study. To evaluate the effect of UD Co-Spaces
on engagement and collaboration, we conducted a user study
comparing our current tool to the traditional paper map-based
approach still widely in use. We recruited eight groups of 4-5
participants, most of whom were students at our university.
Each group had a mix of people from different backgrounds.
In each group there was at least one person who was famil-
iar with urban design. Due to space limitations, we focus on
results related to the use of UD Co-Spaces. Our qualitative re-
sults suggest that UD Co-Spaces promotes engagement, fos-
ters collaboration, and helps users better learn about the con-
sequences of their design choices compared to a traditional
paper-based approach.

In general, UD Co-Spaces provided a highly collaborative
environment for participants. Participants often worked in
parallel, breaking off into smaller groups of 2-3 to discuss
design issues and options. While the paper condition had a
lower learning threshold, overall the interaction style of UD
Co-Spaces was not a deterrent; participants quickly learned
how to manipulate the table and the iPads. Our observations
of many interactions with the wall display in UD Co-Spaces
suggest that the 3D view is integral for engagement with the
design process because it allows participants to see an ap-
proximate visualization of the neighbourhood as they design.
We believe that UD Co-Spaces allowed participants to bet-
ter understand how cases impacted the design by linking the
information attached to each case to visual encodings of key
sustainability indicators. Feedback from participants has cor-
roborated the positive value of adding individual displays to

engage people and allowing them to explore and customise
data based on personal needs.

DISCUSSION
We adapted Arnstein’s ladder and Snyder’s principles to the
narrower challenge of designing a CPSS targeted to the char-
rette process. Based on these principles, urban design ex-
perts’ feedback, and our own observations of UD Co-Spaces
in use, we synthesised a set of seven principles for urban de-
sign charrettes. We examine how UD Co-Spaces supports
these principles using comments obtained from informants in
our user studies.

1.
Engagement.
Based on our observations, we believe
support systems for charrettes need to engage users on an
individual and a group level in order to capitalize on the
diversity of stakeholders.
Engagement primarily refers to
users engaging with one another, but it can also refer to how
users engage with the system as well. Therefore, the sys-
tem should act as a common space that engages participants
with each other while also engaging individuals in the design
task through features that are innovative and easy to use and
learn. Our study results show that using diverse displays, in-
cluding the tabletop, the 3D wall display, and the hand-held
devices, contributed to a highly engaging environment. Users
interacted with various displays, which in turn resulted in in-
creased interaction among the group members. As one par-
ticipant stated, “The visual aspect of it is really engaging.
You become kind of engrossed in it.
I thought it worked
really well in terms of getting people engaged in the actual
process” (Revelstoke workshop). The collaborative tabletop
was a space where multiple users could interact with the sys-
tem simultaneously, allowing users to work individually or in
groups, supporting engagement at both of these levels. Addi-
tionally, the 2D and 3D visualizations with familiar, easy-to-
use interaction techniques made the system relatively easy to
learn in a short amount of time, which makes engaging with
the system more likely.

2. Collaboration. A main goal of design charrettes and our
system is to foster collaboration through co-creation of de-
signs [7,9]. In order to achieve this goal we deployed a multi-
display, multi-user system that has a single solution space.
Evaluation of previous iterations of our system indicated that
the size of the design space mattered, and that limited space
hampered collaboration by making the information difﬁcult
to access and manage. Subsequent iterations of the system
included a large wall-display and hand-held devices in order
to mitigate the issue of limited real estate. Indicators were
moved from the wall display to the hand-held devices to save
space, which had the added beneﬁt of allowing individuals to
customise indicators in which they were most interested.

Tabletop. In line with previous research, we chose a table-
top to provide a collaborative platform to encourage collab-
oration [16,20]. There are other collaborative PSS tools that
achieve collaboration through the use of tabletops [10,13,17].
While we provided access to cases (building types) on each
edge of the table to enable individual exploration, we delib-
erately provided only one shared space for the ﬁnal solution

115

in the middle of the table to encourage collaboration and co-
creation of design.

Wall Display. Due to the spatial nature of urban forms, ex-
tra display space is needed to show the 3D view of a neigh-
bourhood. Our studies, as well as other relevant studies, sug-
gest that augmenting the tabletop collaborative platform with
a vertical 3D view is beneﬁcial. Therefore, we chose to dis-
play a 3D rendering of the design on the wall because the ver-
tical nature of urban form suggests that wall displays would
be more appropriate [10, 17]. Our observations suggest that
the 3D view plays an important role in the design process.

Personal Displays.
In the ﬁrst iteration, indicators were
shown on the table. Feedback indicated that the real estate
on the tabletop was needed for interaction with the design. In
the second iteration we moved the indicators to the bottom of
the wall display to free up valuable real-estate on the tabletop.
While professionals actively referenced the real time feed-
back of indicators, we observed that lay people did not inter-
act much with the indicators. Indicators were far from reach,
took up valuable space on the wall, and the choice of indica-
tors was determined by the system. Therefore, we provided
personal space through the addition of hand-held devices in
the third iteration of UD Co-Spaces. This enabled individ-
ual exploration and customization of the indicators dashboard
(indicators can still be displayed on the wall or the tabletop
if desired). We received positive feedback about adding per-
sonal devices to improve interactions both with the wall and
with the indicators. One participant said “I deﬁnitely really
liked how everything was synced, specially with regards to
the projection and the iPad and the table itself. Being able
to rotate it so we could get a better view, and just being able
to see everything unfold in real time” (Revelstoke workshop),
which supports our decision to add hand-held devices to our
system.

3. Interactive visualizations. The use of interactive visual-
izations in our system provided a number of beneﬁts for par-
ticipants, who represented diverse stakeholders in the design
process. In line with previous research [1], our ﬁndings in-
dicate that the interactive visualizations we provided helped
foster participant engagement in the design process. Addi-
tionally, participants better understood the design process be-
cause they could visually see how their design decisions im-
pacted sustainability issues through the use of indicators that
changed in real-time as they explored designs iteratively. Ac-
cording to Salter and Campbell [19], “most true group in-
teractions with the technology have been limited and remain
somewhat reactive, rather than fully interactive.” Despite our
visualizations being little more than a dashboard, with limited
interactivity, user study participant stated that “each interac-
tion, including touch, move cases, [and then] drag, drop, and
manipulate them will make a big difference” and he added
that “the different representations including map, 3D, indi-
cators, and back and forth between those adds a richness to
participants’ understanding.” We observed a lot more atten-
tion being paid to the indicators in the third iteration.

There were at least 1-2 people in each group who interacted
throughout the session with the indicators and communicated

to the rest of the group how indicators were changing as cases
were added or deleted from the design space. In each group,
there were signiﬁcant interactions with the wall display, with
the 3D view providing important contextual information that
helped participants make decisions about their designs. As
one participant stated, “I think I like [the] combination of all
of them together because I could see all the information on
one wall, I could see the 3D view on one, I could manipulate
the view on the table, and I could see all the changes on the
tablet. So for me it was the combination” (Revelstoke work-
shop).

4.
Accessibility.
In order to encourage participation of
stakeholders with different backgrounds, expertise, and of-
ten different expectations, special attention is needed to make
the system accessible and usable for different groups of
users [9,22]. Speciﬁcally, the system should be easy to learn
and use, with effective and efﬁcient work-spaces. It should
provide numerous types of information including 2D maps,
3D views, examples of cases, and data visualizations, as well
as numeric data to reach people with different learning styles.

To address users’ needs, we observed charrette participants
and their various concerns and objectives. A simple cate-
gorization of users in this context divides them into profes-
sionals and the public (or lay people). For professional plan-
ners, the ability to create and compare a diverse range of al-
ternatives against indicators of performance is important. For
public stakeholders the main considerations are increasing the
level of engagement, understanding the process, social learn-
ing, collaboration, and trust. Therefore, we used familiar vi-
sualization and interaction techniques and put a lot of effort
into making access equitable by providing for individual ex-
ploration and input. We iteratively improved visualization
and selected data representations for each display based on
our evaluations. Our results suggest UD Co-Spaces might
have a leveling effect on power and control. Based on ob-
servations during the formal user study, we noticed that the
case bar allowed participants better access to and understand-
ing of the information attached to each case, which impacted
overall design choices made collaboratively. In addition, par-
ticipants seemed more democratic in what they contributed to
the design, whereas in the paper condition we noticed more
“gatekeeper” roles emerge where one participant acted as a
dominant voice, to the point of removing cases without any
discussion or debate.

One participant in the user study said “We all subconsciously
took on different roles in the project based on the areas that
we felt more comfortable with ... [that] will deﬁnitely help in
a real setting ... towards collaboration, ... we also learn from
one another by being able to engage in real time with each
other, with the knowledge that we brought to the table, and
with the data that we were using” (Participant P13). Another
said “Having this tabletop put every stakeholder involved so
they can make changes themselves, see those changes right
away, [which] promotes collaboration” (P15).

5. Iteration. It is well-known that iteration in design is a
valuable exercise that can contribute to a better ﬁnal design
due to exploring many different alternatives [18, 27]. While

116

using traditional paper-based methods limits the chances that
participants in a public workshop will explore lots of alterna-
tives, digital tools provide opportunities to create and evalu-
ate alternatives much faster. UD Co-Spaces supports multi-
ple urban design iterations by providing fast and early feed-
back through 3D views and sustainability indicators. As one
planning student noted, “Having the tabletop in terms of its
usability and our ability to go back and revise and edit ...
was superior to paper in that format. Instead going back and
then erasing and then redrawing it out again, especially if you
need to actually draw it out instead of arranging it by paper
blocks. Deﬁnitely being able to edit on the ﬂy and change on
the ﬂy helped a lot” (P13). This was apparent even in rela-
tively short user study sessions. “We learned everything we
needed to know from the software within the time period, but
... a longer workshop ... given different targets ... would just
give more opportunity for more iterations of designs” (P11).

6. Understanding Consequences. One high-level goal of
design charrettes is helping stakeholders understand and as-
sess the consequences of their designs and therefore make
more informed decisions.
However, in conventional ap-
proaches this is a long and time-consuming process. Usually
planners need to invite participants back for a second work-
shop session after the analysis and visualizations are ready
when they all discuss the consequences and possible changes
necessary.

UD Co-Spaces from the very ﬁrst iteration included a visual-
ization of indicators, although many users did not really un-
derstand the visualizations. In the second iteration we paid
special attention to make them more accessible by different
groups of users. Based on domain experts’ input, we used
only donut charts with simple infographics in the middle and,
when information was more appropriate for bar charts, we
marked the target value on the bar as well as the current value
to help see how close an urban design is to achieving its tar-
get value. These dashboards were added and tested during
the deployments. While professionals really appreciated the
new dashboards, lay people again did not use them much.
The reason was different this time: one participant reported
“the tabletop was so engaging that I did not look up to check
the [indicators]” and another said “I looked up only to check
the 3D but I did not really pay attention to the [indicators]”
(Revelstoke workshop).

In the third iteration we enabled users to customise and get in-
formation about the indicators on iPads, which helped users
improve their urban designs and understand the consequences
of the designs. Multiple features were considered helpful in
understanding consequences. “Having [indicators] and hav-
ing that in real time deﬁnitely helped me understand ... the
role that each decision was having both [in] terms of den-
sity [and] in terms of the lifestyle that was being lead to just
through the indirect stats that we were getting. ... I deﬁnitely
feel like that radically altered how we approached the project”
and “the sync between all the devices [meant we were] able to
make one change and then almost immediately see the impact
that that change had both visually and statistically from the
data ... the immediate interplay between the two” (P13). Sim-

ilarly, each device brought a different understanding. “The
iPad ...
added an additional information source that gave
me more context. [H]aving those different [indicators] that
I could look at was really helpful to see, okay, what is the
larger impact ... it was almost like stepping out and saying,
okay, what did we actually do and what is the impact?” (P35).

7. Transparency. In order to engage the public in urban
design, gaining trust is absolutely necessary [21]. “People
are suspicious of ‘blackbox’ computer-generated answers.
Models and assumptions should be as transparent as pos-
sible” [22]. UD Co-Spaces makes the process much more
transparent by enabling users to customise indicators, set tar-
gets, and directly interact with them. We believe that this
transparency creates better opportunity for understanding the
indicators and trusting the outcome at the end.

“[Indicators] provide an orientation of what you’re trying to
accomplish and making a connection to that. But, not to limit
it just to those [indicators] is another consideration because
you don’t want to go too far in one direction where you’re
only considering active transit and commercial space because
then you lose out on all the other [indicators]” (P36).

There were also misgivings. “I think [the indicators are] a
bunch of data that isn’t necessarily useful to the public if it’s
not translated ... the indicators seemed very arbitrary” (P25).
This suggests that true transparency may require much deeper
explanation of how indicators are calculated and what they
mean. One expert who saw value in our design pointed out
the possible irony that municipal planning departments might
not welcome our system: “one caveat about all of this is that
cities are reluctant to use this tool, because it is very open.”

CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We designed, developed, and iteratively improved UD Co-
Spaces to engage the public in participatory urban design.
Evaluations showed that it strongly impacted engagement by
providing a collaborative platform where multiple users could
interact with 2D, 3D, and indicator visualizations in real time.
We assessed UD Co-Spaces using seven design principles for
supporting design charrettes that offer guidance for develop-
ers of future systems. We suggest three areas for research.

Street view, overlays, and more. UD Co-Spaces currently
lacks a street-view on the wall display, information overlay
layers on the tabletop, detailed information about existing
buildings in the planning area, and rich interactive control
over indicators by facilitators.

More sophisticated interactive visualization.
Visualiza-
tions in UD Co-Spaces are still very basic and need improve-
ment. Cases could give previews of indicator changes using
feed-forward techniques such as “scented widgets” [26].

History. UD Co-Spaces logs key iPad and tabletop events. A
rudimentary history browser on the iPad can be used during
or after a session to review the options that were explored.
The log includes time of day, the tabletop group associated
with an event (if multiple tabletops are in use), an optional
event name, an extensible set of tags, and a snapshot of the
design pattern at the time of the event. There are many ques-

117

tions still to explore, such as how to coordinate views when
loading a pattern from the history to the table, how to inter-
actively compare indicators across patterns, and how to best
support browsing in the history. Our proof-of-concept history
browser uses visual coding to identify events. We have not
yet evaluated the coding. We suspect different history mech-
anisms are needed for facilitators and the public because they
have different mental models of urban design.