Journal of Global Information Technology Management

ISSN: 1097-198X (Print) 2333-6846 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/ugit20

Delivering a Drug Information App to
Underserved Communities: A User-Centered
Design Approach

Vusumuzi Maphosa

To cite this article: Vusumuzi Maphosa (2022) Delivering a Drug Information App to
Underserved Communities: A User-Centered Design Approach, Journal of Global Information
Technology Management, 25:4, 286-301, DOI: 10.1080/1097198X.2022.2132086

To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/1097198X.2022.2132086

Published online: 21 Nov 2022.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 223

View related articles 

View Crossmark data

Citing articles: 2 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=ugit20

Delivering a Drug Information App to Underserved Communities: A 
User-Centered Design Approach

Vusumuzi Maphosa

Department of Information Communication and Technology Services, National University of Science and Technology, 
Bulawayo, Zimbabwe

ABSTRACT
Two-thirds of the Sub-Saharan African population is rural and faces signifi­
cant challenges accessing healthcare facilities and information. The mobile 
phone offers feasible opportunities to improve healthcare access to under­
served communities. The study aims to develop an app for communities with 
limited access to health information. Design Science Research Methodology 
(DSRM) was adopted. A three-cycle DSRM guided the development of 
a mHealth app using a user-centered design process involving potential 
users, from conceptualizing the idea to prototype evaluation. The methodol­
ogy allows the researcher to empathize with the participants, consider their 
contextual and environmental circumstances and understand their needs 
better. The prototype provides access to information about known drugs, 
their known uses, side effects, organs affected, or the human system they 
affect. A total of 206 participants evaluated the app for its usefulness, 
efficiency, error handling, memorability, learnability, and design. 
Participants concluded that the app was usable, easy to learn, error-free, 
and useful through a mean score of 3.95 and Cronbach’s alpha coefficient 
range of 0.75 to 0.85. Policymakers and researchers may find the results 
helpful in improving mHealth adoption. Integrating the app with the broader 
e-health systems will offer more convenience and efficiency, as healthcare 
systems in Africa are largely manual.

KEYWORDS 
Mobile phones; healthcare; 
mHealth; design science 
research; design science 
research methodology; 
usability

Introduction

People in developing countries die from diseases and conditions which can be prevented by improved 
access to health information and medical services. Rural African populations have limited access to 
medical facilities and have the least opportunities to access health information (Maphosa, 2020b). The 
World Bank reports that 60% of Sub-Saharan Africa’s population is rural (Ogunkola et al., 2020). 
Similarly, 67% of the Zimbabwean population is rural, while 33% is urban (Zimstat, 2014). Most 
technological innovations have benefitted urban dwellers, excluding rural communities and widening 
the digital divide. Developing countries should adopt strategies that address digital exclusion related to 
access to health information and services to achieve sustainable development goals. Collaborative 
work is required to address healthcare access challenges in Africa, as Ogunkola et al. (2020) noted that 
the few health facilities are nonfunctional, and the services are inadequate. Digital access in developing 
countries should be prioritized as there is a danger that these communities will lag as most services, 
such as commerce, education, and healthcare, go online (Gann, 2019; Maphosa, 2020b).

Taylor (2015) reported that in most African countries, 15 doctors serve 100 000 inhabitants; in 
Zimbabwe, one doctor serves 250 000 inhabitants, one of the world’s highest ratios (Chronicle, 2016). 
Zimbabwean rural communities are characterized by a poor road network and an unreliable transport 

CONTACT Vusumuzi Maphosa 

National University of Science and Technology, P.O Box AC 
939, Ascot, Bulawayo, Zimbabwe

2022, VOL. 25, NO. 4, 286–301 
https://doi.org/10.1080/1097198X.2022.2132086

© 2022 The Author(s). Published with license by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC.

system, and telemedicine promises to improve healthcare services (Maphosa, 2020b). Mobile phone 
adoption in developing countries has surpassed other ICTs, promising to reach most underserved 
communities with new services and information that can improve the quality of life (Asongu, 
Nwachukwu, & Aziz, 2018; Ray & Prasad, 2014). Once a simple communication device, the mobile 
phone has become a potent ubiquitous computing device enabling populations in developing coun­
tries to access the Internet, perform financial transactions, and access health and agricultural informa­
tion (Maphosa, Dube, & Jita, 2021). Thinnukool, Khuwuthyakorn, and Wientong (2017) reported that 
19% of smartphone users had a health app, and over 52% used their phone to access healthcare 
information over the Internet.

Healthcare professionals can upload medical information such as medical records and drug 
information for access through mobile phones by patients and the public. Smartphones have several 
sensors that can complement health service delivery and provide the public with access to health 
information (Stoyanov et al., 2015). Using mobile phones to deliver healthcare has positively impacted 
healthcare delivery due to lower costs, improved patient experience, and delivery of quality healthcare 
(Chun-Hua & Kai-Yu, 2015; Hitti, Hadid, Melki, Kaddoura, & Alameddine, 2021; Sasan, 2013). 
Thinnukool et al. (2017) argued that mobile phone technology had become a powerful tool that 
allows users to track their health conditions, offer medication suggestions, and monitor patients. Many 
people search for health information on the Internet to check for the effects of drugs, dosages, and 
general disease information (Lapidus & Dryankova-Bond, 2014). There is consensus that the health 
system should adapt by embracing digital technologies to improve physicians’ and patients’ services 
(Lim, Norman, & Robinson, 2020).

Mobile health (mHealth) refers to mobile devices’ access and delivery of health-related services to 
improve the quality of life. mHealth can enhance access to health information by underserved 
populations who face many constraints, such as lack of access to healthcare and dwindling social 
care budgets. Giansanti (2021) noted that mobile apps allow patients to access up-to-date information 
at the touch of a button and present audio-visual content, making it easy for asthma patients to learn 
inhaler procedures. mHealth can easily reach millions across geographic boundaries (Carroll et al.,  
2017) and extend healthcare practices to the general public, such as health information and patient 
observation (Kayyali et al., 2017). Scholars noted that very few studies had been conducted in 
developing countries, and even fewer covered underserved communities (Farao et al., 2020; Hurt, 
Walker, Campbell, & Egede, 2016). mHealth applications have been developed for healthcare profes­
sionals, such as pharmacists, to quickly and efficiently access drug information (Asibey, Agyemang, & 
Dankwah, 2017). COVID-19 has shown that Internet-based technologies can sustain economies, 
provide services, and improve access to healthcare information, which is lacking in Zimbabwe. The 
study aimed to develop and evaluate a mHealth app prototype that can improve access to drug 
information for patients, the general public, and healthcare professionals in underserved and remote 
areas. The app is designed to support second-generation (2 G) slower connections found in most rural 
communities in Zimbabwe. The app will offer offline access, a key functionality in rural areas with 
limited WiFi access and low disposable income to purchase data. The app uses Adobe AIR 
NetworkInterface Application Programming Interface (API) to check Internet availability. Once 
Internet connectivity is lost, offline mode is activated, and information is cached and stored in the 
phone’s internal memory. After network restoration, the phone’s local database is synchronized with 
the online database. The app prototype was evaluated for usability, simplicity, memorability, design, 
and learnability. Currently, there is no local drug information app in Zimbabwe. This research can 
stimulate the development of more utility apps for rural and remote communities.

Literature Review

Although the Sub-Saharan Africa region is one of the least developed regions globally, in the past 
decades, it has witnessed one of the highest increases in mobile phone and mobile Internet penetration 
rates worldwide, offering opportunities to accelerate socio-economic development (ITU, 2020; 

287

Maphosa, 2020b). In the Sub-Saharan African region, the mobile phone penetration rate is over 84%, 
and industry experts estimate that the number of smartphone connections in the bloc will eclipse 66% 
by 2025 (GSMA, 202003). Zimbabwe’s mobile phone penetration rate was 110% in urban areas and 
75% in rural areas (Lancaster, 2016). Rufu and Chitindingu (2018) asserted that mobile phone 
technology has gradually bridged the digital and geographic divides by allowing remote communities 
to access healthcare information and support. Giansanti (2021) also reported that mobile phone 
technology had brought much optimism to governments, medical service providers, and technology 
enthusiasts, promising to improve healthcare delivery, patient engagement, and remote clinical care 
during the COVID-19 outbreak. Jones and Moffitt (2016) noted that mHealth apps facilitate affordable 
healthcare and information access without traveling long distances. de Batlle et al. (2021) agreed that 
mHealth empowers patients and offers cost savings as patients can access healthcare at their fingertips 
whenever needed. Using digital technologies to connect patients and doctors and accessing medical 
information at a lower cost is a profound innovation in healthcare (Alloghani, Hussain, Al-Jumeily, & 
Abuelma’atti, 2015). Eze, Gleasure, and Heavin (2020) noted that some underserved African commu­
nities did not have access to conventional healthcare systems, and mHealth is critical in extending 
healthcare access. Oluocha and de Keizer (2016) noted an increase in the remote exchange of 
information between caregivers and patients in developing countries due to mobile phones that 
support video conferencing. Thus, more local initiatives that apply current technologies to increase 
access to healthcare and improve people’s day-to-day living should be pursued.

Access to health information is critical for individuals with limited access to trained healthcare 
professionals and facilities, and it helps educate citizens in managing their health (Hurt et al., 2016). Of 
the 38 million deaths from noncommunicable diseases, about 16 million deaths could have been 
avoided by behavioral change interventions brought about by improved access to information through 
mobile apps (World Health Organization, 2014). Rural communities lack access to health information 
resulting in ill-informed decisions, which may result in deaths; thus, Africa needs to invest in 
telemedicine (Ogunkola et al., 2020). In many rural communities, Short Message Services (SMS) 
support healthcare interventions to improve access to health services (Tickell, Diakhate, & K.D et al.,  
2020). A study in Sierra Leone revealed that patients who accessed Ebola information from SMS and 
mobile apps early increased their knowledge and protective behaviors, saving lives (Winters et al.,  
2018). Dong, Reeves, Ali, Freeman, and Adunlin (2018) observed an increase in asthma drug 
adherence by patients that used daily SMS reminders than those who did not. An SMS system 
improved maternal health outcomes in rural communities in Ghana by providing health information 
to pregnant women and health professionals (Al Dahdah, 2017). The studies show the potential of 
mobile phones in saving lives due to improved access to health information.

Healthcare practitioners in developing countries use printed material such as textbooks to refer to 
drug information, which is not easy to update. Online databases have increased efficiency and 
convenience (Nzabonimana et al., 2019). Digital health enables patients to personalize their healthcare 
through mobile and wearable devices, and these changes have affected the field of pharmacy (Clark, 
Clark, Bhatti, & Aungst, 2017). de Batlle et al. (2021) noted that healthcare providers extensively use 
Internet technologies such as mobile phones to manage people’s health and well-being efficiently. 
Taylor (2015) and Carroll et al. (2017) point out that mHealth apps can be downloaded easily into 
mobile phones allowing the public to access health information and services from hundreds of 
thousands of apps.

A broad range of contexts, such as care delivery enhancement, patient communication, medical 
monitoring, and adherence, is supported by mHealth (Giansanti, 2021). Various mHealth apps cover 
medical education, drug information, disease management, self-diagnostic, fitness, and lifestyle. Abaza 
and Marschollek (2017) classified mHealth apps into patient administration, health record access, 
consulting and communication, information gathering and reference, and medical education. Larson 
(2018) grouped mHealth apps into information, diagnostic, control, and adapter. Information apps 
provide general information to the public, while control apps enable remote management of medical 
devices. Lim and Chin (2019) noted a rising number of patients using apps for diet or prescription, 

288
V. MAPHOSA

engaging in exercises, and making follow-up appointments. In their study, Asibey et al. (2017) found 
that medical students considered access to drug information in their time of need critical in supporting 
their practice. Researchers revealed that the diabetes app led the mHealth app market, followed by 
obesity and depression apps (Research2Guidance, 2017).

Lexicomp and Micromedex are common medical reference apps that support pharmacists’ day-to- 
day work (Sen & Sahin, 2021). Some apps, such as Medscape, offer drug adherence and compliance 
(Medscape, 2022). The Walgreens app allows users and patients to manage their medication and 
prescriptions using their phones (Clark et al., 2017). Su et al. (2018) established that pharmacists used 
clinical reference apps to increase productivity. Drug reference apps provide access to information that 
includes the names of drugs, indications, pharmacology, and dosages, among others (Abidi, Soh, 
Caruso, & Patel et al., 2017). Abaza and Marschollek (2017) concluded that pharmacists made accurate 
decisions whenever they referenced drug information apps. Epocrates is a drug information app that 
offers users information on drug information, cautions, adverse effects, reactions, and pharmacology, 
among others (Becker, 2018). Another drug information app, Medscape, offers healthcare profes­
sionals and users access to drug information, conditions, interactions, and medical news (Kheshti, 
Aalipour, & Namazi, 2016). One popular drug information app is the iPharmacy, which is available for 
Android and Apple-based smartphones (Quant, Altieri, Torres, & Craft, 2016). The app has over 12 
000 dose medications, a medication reminder, and a medical dictionary for health experts and the 
general public. Schnall et al. (2016) developed a drug adherence app in Malaysia for HIV patients. The 
apps reviewed show an app covering almost every area of healthcare.

Several methodologies are used for developing mHealth apps; Wilhide et al. (2016) used the 
waterfall model to design a chronic disease management app. The Argentarius app used the 
Extreme Programming methodology, the Flux app, and the ACMovil app used the SCRUM metho­
dology (Chandi, Silva, Martínez, & Gualotuña, 2017). Design science research (DSR) is one of the 
prominent methodologies oriented toward practically solving societal problems (Vaishnavi & 
Kuechler, 2015). Miah, Gammack, and Hasan (2019) contended that DSR was a contemporary 
methodology with better improvements than traditional methodologies and offered researchers 
more knowledge, grounding, and embedding of practical aspects when designing artifacts. In 
a healthcare study, Hevner and Wickramasinghe (2018) noted that DSRM could be used to design 
healthcare products that enhance the effectiveness and efficiency of services. The scholars revealed that 
the methodology offered a user-centered design and incorporated end-user design preferences; they 
recommended its use for future app design. Schnall et al. (2016) used DSRM to design a mHealth app 
for HIV prevention. Similarly, Adebesin and Kotzé (2017) used DSRM to develop an artifact that 
enables interoperability in healthcare systems. Niemöller, Metzger, Berkemeier, Thomas, and Thomas 
(2016) designed a mHealth app to overcome information access challenges and support the work of 
midwives in Papua New Guinea using the DSR methodology. Maphosa (2022) used DSRM to develop 
a COVID-19 information app in Zimbabwe DSRM. In a South African study aimed at improving 
access to agricultural information, van Rensburg and Vermaak (2017) used DSR; another Nigerian 
study used DSRM to design MobileEdu, a learning app (Oyelere & Suhonen, 2016). Farao et al. (2020) 
used DSRM to develop a mHealth app for preventing and detecting skin induration for TB patients. 
The studies show that DSR is a modern methodology that supports the development of apps and 
services, and therefore, it was adopted for this study.

Hitti et al. (2021) reported that Africa has the lowest mHealth adoption rates, yet the continent 
has the highest healthcare needs. Nzabonimana et al. (2019) contended that mobile apps reduced 
the patient’s waiting times and medical trips and increased access to healthcare and up-to-date 
medical information. From the literature reviewed, there is little evidence of mHealth interven­
tions in Zimbabwe and other African countries; however, the implementation of mHealth 
promises to improve drug adherence and health communication. Several scholars have challenged 
researchers to investigate eHealth interventions in developing countries (Farao et al., 2020; Hurt 
et al., 2016). The researcher learned from the literature, experience, and observation that rural 
communities in Zimbabwe and other African countries struggle to access healthcare information 

289

and facilities. Reviewed literature shows that many health interventions in Africa and Zimbabwe 
are SMS-based; with most apps serving urban communities, there is a need to exploit interven­
tions targeting underserved rural communities. Introducing mHealth solutions is a positive step 
in automating healthcare systems in Africa, which are largely manual. None of the mHealth apps 
evaluated was developed locally, and there is a need to develop homegrown solutions that 
embrace local contexts. The output of the study will spur further research on providing innova­
tive solutions for improving healthcare access in developing countries.

Methodology

The current study adopted DSRM, which uses pragmatism as a research philosophy to evaluate the 
interaction between knowledge and action (Goldkuhl, 2012; Hevner, March, & Park, 2004; Iivari,  
2007; March & Smith, 1995; Vaishnavi & Kuechler, 2015). DSRM is suited for interventionist 
research that provides a solution to address an identified problem. DSRM creates and evaluates 
artifacts to address existing organizational problems (Hevner et al., 2004; Peffers, Tuunanen, 
Rothenberger, & Chatterjee, 2007). The DSRM produces naturalistic and artificial artifacts. In 
naturalistic, the utility of the developed artifact is evaluated in a natural environment, while the 
artificial aims at theory building (Vaishnavi & Kuechler, 2015; Venable, Pries-Heje, & Baskerville,  
2012). The output of a DSRM study can be a model, construct, method, or implementation (March 
& Smith, 1995), and this study adopted a naturalistic implementation. Peffers et al. (2007) submit 
that the research contribution of a DSRM study is embedded in the designed artifact. The 
methodology helps the researcher empathize with and understand the contextual and environmental 
circumstances of the participants.

The study utilized a three-cycle Design Science Research Methodology (DSRM) as the conceptual 
framework (Hevner, 2007), as shown in Figure 1. DSRM was developed for producing and presenting 
DS research (Peffers et al., 2007). DSRM seeks to create artifacts that solve real-world problems and 
evaluate DS research. The artifact can be a socio-technical system, a model, or an instantiation 
(Hevner, 2007). The first stage of the DSRM is problem identification or specification, where the 
artifact’s purpose is defined. The next phase involves building the artifact by transforming the problem 
into a tentative design. The last stage of the DSRM is evaluating the artifact through observations and 
testing to show its functionality, efficacy, and usability. The DSRM process is highly repetitive, time- 
consuming, and costly as several repetitive steps are undertaken to improve the previous steps. The 
artifact was evaluated as a prototype to demonstrate its mutability in this research.

Figure 1. A three-phase DSRM adapted from (Hevner, A Three Cycle View of Design Science Research, 2007).

290
V. MAPHOSA

The Relevance Cycle

This cycle involves identifying the problem and presenting potential solutions for the stated problem 
to improve practice and the application domain (Hevner, 2007; Vaishnavi & Kuechler, 2015). The 
introduction and literature review situated the problem and other solutions in use. Ten participants 
were randomly selected from the community to participate in problem identification and refine the 
artifacts’ requirements based on their needs and perception of the existing problem. The DSRM allows 
the researcher to empathize with the participants, consider their contextual and environmental 
circumstances and better understand their needs. Participants owned a smartphone and had an app 
installed. These included five community members, two community health workers, two nurses, and 
a pharmacist. A focus group discussion (FGD) held in May 2020 gathered the participants’ views. The 
participants agreed that access to healthcare and medical information was challenging in their 
community because of very few healthcare facilities. Participants also highlighted the high doctor-to- 
patient ratio. Ogunkola et al. (2020) and Maphosa (2020b) noted that most communities in Africa 
have poor access to socio-economic information such as healthcare and news. The participants 
highlighted the unavailability of traditional means of information access, such as radio, and television, 
poor roads, unreliable transportation systems, and high data costs. Participants emphasized that the 
solution should be easy to use with no cognitive burden or effort.

Rigor Cycle

The cycle involves identifying different ideas that could address the problem identified in the relevance 
cycle (Peffers et al., 2007). Previous interventions involve the use of radio, SMS, and mobile apps. The 
participants recruited for the relevance cycle selected the mobile app as the most appropriate solution. 
The researcher analyzed some literature for existing artifacts that could meet the requirements 
specified in the relevance cycle. The literature review found no apps developed in Zimbabwe to 
improve vulnerable communities’ access to medical health information. Some SMS-based interven­
tions were found in gray literature. A few drug information apps have been deployed in developing 
countries, as most evaluated apps were deployed in developed countries. The apps offered drug 
information, photos of the drugs, effects, contradictions, and self-care treatment, among other 
functions.

Develop/Build Phase

This phase describes the development and evaluation of the proposed artifact to help the target 
community (Venable et al., 2012). The prototype was developed after considering the functionality 
of related drug information apps. The app’s development was highly iterative and incremental, with 
each following design session incorporating user feedback from the previous session. Hevner (2007) 
highlighted that artifacts should be evaluated through multiple design sessions before being released 
for field testing. Users contributed ideas on the graphics, the layout of the screens, and the content.

Design Iterations

Participants were recruited from the community to design the drug information app prototype. 
Participation was voluntary, the participants’ identities were kept anonymous, and their views were 
only used in this study. The researcher paid for the transport costs and an honorarium of USD10 per 
participant. Kellerman and Jones (2013) argued that if a system is difficult to operate, it is likely to have 
low uptake, and therefore systems being developed should consider the technological capabilities of 
the targeted users. Each design iteration resulted in significant changes recommended by the potential 
users, which improved the prototype’s development (Vaishnavi & Kuechler, 2015). User suggestions 
were vetted to ensure they were feasible and resulted in a better app prototype.

291

First Design Iteration
Participants who did not participate in the relevance and rigor cycles were recruited for the partici­
patory design cycle. The participants included a pharmacist, a nurse, two community health workers, 
and four community members aged 19–45. The FGD session took place during the first week of 
July 2020. This session aimed to elicit information to inform the app’s design to increase its accept­
ability. The recommendations from the relevance cycle formed the basis of the first design iteration. 
Participants were shown some designs of existing apps and their functionality. These helped partici­
pants understand how other apps operated as they proposed the app’s functionality and the content to 
be included. Participants suggested that the app provide a list of drugs by their common and scientific 
names, uses, and dosage levels. The app should also indicate what the drug can cure, adverse effects, 
and the organs affected by the drugs. The participants selected a grid layout in terms of design, where 
objects are displayed in a vertical or horizontal scrollable grid, with the content dynamically inserted 
on the user interface. Participants recommended the inclusion of colorful graphics. The researcher 
then used paper-based low-fidelity prototypes to represent these recommendations for presentation in 
the next iteration phase.

Second Design Iteration
The participants who participated in the first design session were invited to the second design session 
at the end of July 2020. The researcher incorporated the participants’ views from the first design 
iteration and presented the sketches. Low-fidelity paper-based app sketches were presented to the 
group, as shown in Figure 2, and the participants agreed that the prototype depicted their preferred 
app features and functionality. The pharmacist suggested that the app provide more detailed informa­
tion on drug use and side effects for medical personnel. Participants also suggested that the app should 
work in environments with intermittent connectivity as low bandwidth connections characterized 
many rural areas. Participants were presented with the main screens of existing apps to select app 
features such as navigation and color scheme. Participants suggested that the app prototype should 
have a search function and colorful graphics. The views of the participants were taken into considera­
tion in the next design.

Figure 2. The low-fidelity prototypes.

292
V. MAPHOSA

Third Design Iteration
The third design iteration was held at the end of August 2020. The suggestions made in the second 
design iteration were used to develop high-fidelity prototypes, whose screenshots are presented in 
Figure 3. Six participants were recruited for this iteration, a pharmacist, nurse, community health 
worker, and three members of the public. Participants were presented with a high-fidelity prototype 
that resembled the actual app during the design iteration. They were satisfied with the incorporation of 
their feedback into the design. However, some participants suggested that the app should have local 
language translation; this was not feasible as most drug names and terminology were unavailable in the 
local language. Participants suggested that the app should provide images of the drugs; this recom­
mendation was not considered as it would make the app data-intensive, use more bandwidth, and may 
fail to load when the network is erratic.

App Description

The mobile app prototype was developed for the Android app, the most common mobile phone 
operating system in the developing world. The app’s purpose is to improve access to reliable drug 
information. The app provides two interfaces, one for the health expert and the general public, as 
shown in Figure 3. The app allows users to access drug information by browsing through 
a comprehensive list of drugs ordered alphabetically from A-Z. Drugs are ordered by their generic 
and brand names, as partly shown in Figure 4 and Figure 5. Users can search for information by typing 
two or more letters or keywords to locate the drug information. Once the user has located the drug 
they want, the app provides all its known uses. Each drug has corresponding side effects and the organs 
or the human system it affects.

App Evaluation by Community Members

The purpose of evaluating the app is to demonstrate its usability, mutability, and how it meets the 
needs of the targeted users, which is a critical phase of the DSRM that provides a proof-of-concept 
(Peffers et al., 2007). In September 2020, twenty potential users from the community who were not 
part of the design group were recruited to evaluate the prototype to determine how the app met the 
target population’s needs. Most (65%) of the participants were female; 45% were less than 30 years old, 
55% had 3–5 years of experience using apps, and included diverse community members, as shown in 
Table 1. The participants agreed that the app helped bridge challenges with access to drug information. 
All the participants agreed that the app was well-designed and easy to use. The majority (75%) of the 

Figure 3. The app’s home page and other screens.

293

participants found the app memorable as they could remember navigating across the different menus. 
All the participants did not find usability errors during interaction with the app. All the participants 
agreed that the app has good graphics and design and would recommend it to their friends. As part of 
the DSRM, the final evaluation was a field study that targeted university students.

App Evaluation by University Students
University students performed the final evaluation of the app during the first two weeks of their 2022 
academic year. A 21-item electronic questionnaire was created in Google forms and shared with students 
via mailing lists and WhatsApp groups. Only students with an Android smartphone who consented 
qualified for the survey. They downloaded the app and performed simple tasks. After using the app for 
two weeks, 206 participants evaluated the app. The participants’ demographics are presented in Table 2. 
Most (57.28%) participants were female; almost half (45.15%) were aged between 18 and 24. About 
three-quarters were undergraduate students, while 61.65% had over five years of experience using apps.

Procedures

The usability evaluation was based on usefulness, efficiency, error, memorability, learnability, and 
design criteria identified by Preece et al. (2002) and Hussain, Mkpojiogu, Jamaludin, and Moh (2017) 

Figure 4. A list of drugs, amoxicillin uses, side effects, and organs affected.

Figure 5. A list of drugs, Magnesium chloride uses, its side effects, and organs affected.

294
V. MAPHOSA

and in line with the Technology Acceptance Model (Maphosa, 2020a). A recent study by Farao et al. 
(2020) used a usability questionnaire. A five-point Likert scale where “1” represented Strongly 
Disagree, “2” denoted Disagree, “3” represented Neutral, “4” denoted Agree, and “5” represented 
Strongly Agree was used. The first part of the questionnaire included four questions for collecting 
demographic data. The remaining section contains 17 questions to collect usability data, such as 
design, efficiency, learnability, and ease of use, as shown in Table 3. The questionnaire’s internal 
reliability was validated using Cronbach’s alpha, and a value of 0.78 was observed. The value reflects 
that the questionnaire was reliable, as Leech, Barrett, and Morgan (2005) posited that the minimum 
threshold was 0.7. The participants were informed of their rights and that participation was voluntary.

Results and Discussion

Underserved communities experience difficulties accessing health information as health centers are 
sparsely distributed with limited access to traditional sources of information such as radio and 
television. Usability and user experience results show that the app provided a more feasible and 
valuable way to access drug information. Systems designed for communities with low digital skills 
must be easy to learn to ensure high adoption. Using iterative design principles and involving targeted 
users from inception to evaluation can enhance adoption. The study’s objective was to develop 

Table 1. Demographics of the participants.

Demographic variables
Demographic variables values
Frequency
Percentage
Gender
Male
7
35%
Female
13
65%
Age
20–30 years
9
45%
31–40 years
5
25%
41–50 years 
Over 50 years

4 
2

20% 
10%
Qualification
High school
14
70%
Undergraduate
6
30%
Experience in using 

mobile apps

1–2 years 
3–5 years

3 
11

15% 
55%
Over 5 years
6
30%
Occupation
Community Health officer
3
15%
Members of the public 
Farmer 
Pharmacist

6 
3 
2

30% 
15% 
10%
Teacher
3
15%
Nurse
3
15%

Table 2. Demographics of university students.

Demographic variables
Demographic variables values
Frequency
Percentage
Gender
Male
88
42.72%
Female
118
57.28%
Age
18–24 years
93
45.15%
25–30 years
73
35.43%
Over 30 years
40
19.42%
Qualification
Undergraduate
153
74.27%
Postgraduate
53
25.73%
Experience in using 

mobile apps

1–2 years 
3–5 years

17 
62

08.25% 
30.10%
Over 5 years
127
61.65%
Have you used 

a mHealth app 
before?

Yes
31
15%
No
175
85%

295

a mHealth app prototype to improve access to drug information by underserved communities in 
Zimbabwe. All the participants could download the app prototype, install it on their smartphones and 
navigate the app to access drug information. In a similar study, the Med Assist drug app was found 
usable and enhanced drug adherence (Chew, Lai, & Ng, 2020). Over 60% of the participants had more 
than 5 years of experience in using apps; surprisingly, only 15% of the participants had a health 
information app. This shows that using apps is a new phenomenon that must be supported to improve 
access to healthcare.

Eighty per cent of the participants agreed that the app was easy to learn, and Cronbach’s alpha 
coefficient was 0.75, as shown in Table 4. Thus users could easily navigate the prototype without 
assistance. These findings are similar to Alloghani et al. (2015); their mobile app had high adoption 
rates as patients perceived that it was easy to use and learn through a rating of 75%. In a related study, 
Hussain et al. (2017) reported that 90.6% of participants found the Shazam app very easy to use. About 
three-quarters (78%) of the participants believed that the prototype provided an efficient tool for 
accessing drug information quickly, with a Cronbach’s alpha coefficient of 0.85. The results are in line 
with Alturki and Gay’s (2017) work, who observed a score of 75% when they evaluated the efficiency of 
an obesity app. In a usability study of a mHealth app, Nasir and Yurder (2015) concluded that patients 
and the general public had a positive attitude toward the app as they considered it helpful in improving 
their healthcare. Participants reviewed the prototype’s design by evaluating the screen layout and 

Table 3. Usability evaluation responses by university students.

Variables
Alpha
N
Mean
Standard Deviation
Learnability
0.75
4.0
In general, the app was easy to use
206
4.0
0.42
I easily learned how to navigate 

through the app

206
3.9
0.45

It was easy to complete the tasks
206
4.1
0.50
Design
0.77
3.93
I found the app responsive
206
4.3
0.38
The apps’ menus are appropriate 

and easy to follow

206
4.0
0.40

The app design is excellent, with 

appropriate icons

206
3.5
0.55

Efficiency
0.85
3.73
I found the app efficient in 

accessing drug information

206
3.9
0.48

The information provided by the 

app is relevant

206
3.5
0.50

Searching using the first two letters 

and keywords makes it easy to 
locate drugs

206
3.8
0.35

Error
0.78
4.25
I did not encounter bugs/errors 

during usage

4.4
0.42

During my use, the app responded 

quickly and did not crash

4.1
0.39

Usefulness
0.83
4.07
I found the app usable
4.0
0.30
I will strongly recommend the app 

to my friends

4.0
0.52

The app has the potential to 

improve access to drug 
information

4.2
0.35

Memorability
0.78
3.7
I could easily remember how to use 

the app after stopping using it 
for a while.

3.9
0.35

I could recall my last page after 

using the app

3.5
0.45

296
V. MAPHOSA

arrangement of the icons and content with a score of 78.6% and a Cronbach’s alpha coefficient of 0.77; 
thus, participants were satisfied with the design and content provided by the prototype. Thus, in line 
with Farao et al. (2020), whose study established that three-quarters of the participants agreed that the 
design elements of a TB information app developed in Cape Town were flawless.

Regarding the prototype’s memorability, 74% of the participants agreed that the mHealth app was 
easy to remember, with a Cronbach’s alpha coefficient of 0.78. Hussain et al. (2017) had 
a memorability score of 80% during the evaluation of a mobile app called Mudah.my. Schnall et al. 
(2016) concluded that all the participants who viewed their medication adherence app found it very 
usable in transmitting HIV information. Participants found the drug information provided by the 
prototype useful and would recommend it to their friends, as highlighted by a score of 81.4% and 
a Cronbach’s alpha coefficient of 0.83. Another drug information app developed in Malaysia was rated 
useful (Chew et al., 2020). The TB app developed by Farao et al. (2020) was rated highly in terms of 
usability. In terms of being free from errors, the app was highly rated (85%) as it did not crash or have 
apparent bugs and had a Cronbach’s alpha value of 0.78. The results are similar to a study by Maphosa 
and Dube (2021), where 76% of the participants revealed that the learning app was free of errors.

However, 35% of the participants suggested that the Medicine Council of Zimbabwe endorse the 
app before deployment to ensure that the information provided is accurate and trustworthy. The users’ 
high usability rating implies they applied minimal effort to find their way around the app to access 
information. The positive test results show that the prototype can increase healthcare specialists and 
the general public access to drug information. The deployment of this prototype in rural or urban 
areas could provide a rich source of drug information for health professionals, patients, and the 
general public. The results show that the prototype’s visual designs were appealing, and users are most 
likely to use the prototype in the future. The evaluation scores are acceptable as another study 
recommended a system’s minimum usability threshold of 68% (Karahoca, Karahoca, Ozdemir, & 
Karaosmanoğlu, 2017). The app’s evaluation results are similar to reviews of other mHealth apps. The 
ex-ante evaluation and the prototype design process contribute to the knowledge base, providing 
a reference point for future developers.

Recommendation and Limitations

mHealth apps should be integrated with the broader eHealth systems to offer more convenience and 
efficiency to medical staff, patients, and the general public. Participants raised usability concerns 
during iterative development and evaluation, such as providing images of the drugs and having local 
language content; these are worth pursuing. Further collaborative development and maintenance of 
the app with healthcare professionals can minimize exposure to inaccurate information by the public 
and increase the app’s reliability and adoption. Health policies should raise more public awareness of 
the potential of mHealth apps and influence the development of a robust network, lower data tariffs, 
and promote investment in solar power to support digital solutions in underserved communities. 
Furthermore, researchers could also evaluate how knowledge levels of mHealth apps affect the 
adoption of mHealth apps. Mobile app developers should design apps that can serve rural and 
underserved communities in developing countries. The unavailability of specialized laboratories 
limited the evaluation to a field type. For convenience, the final evaluation targeted university students, 
and a more inclusive population should be used in the future to validate the prototype’s utility and 
improve its design by incorporating user feedback. Once deployed on the Google store, future work 
could also analyze usage data and user reviews to further improve functionality and user experience.

Conclusion

The study’s objective was to develop and evaluate a mHealth app that improves access to drug 
information in underserved communities. Overall, the result of this study can assist app developers 
in building better mHealth apps that capture the needs of potential users. The app underwent several 

297

feedback cycles with various individuals during development and testing. The iterative development of 
the app is novel, and the evaluation results contribute to new knowledge. Little evidence and data show 
how digital solutions impact the lives of rural and underserved communities. The study contributes to 
the literature on app development in developing countries and exposes the contextual issues affecting 
underserved communities. Using DSRM facilitated interactions with the target community from 
ideation to testing, and this provides evidence that the app has the potential to improve access to 
drug information. The use of DSRM supported a user-centered design approach that involved targeted 
users, incorporating their feedback through iterative design sessions. Evaluation results revealed that 
the app was usable and could provide a more feasible way for the public can access drug information in 
communities with limited sources of information. The results revealed that the app prototype was 
memorable and easy to use and learn. Participants had a positive disposition and liked the concept of 
improving access to drug information through the app prototype.

Access to reliable drug information minimizes drug abuse and misuse, improving health outcomes 
and reducing the digital divide. The generalizability of the results can be enhanced through a multi- 
university evaluation. The app operates in environments with low Internet connectivity, a huge 
advantage for remote communities. Participants suggested accrediting the app with the Medicines 
Control Authority of Zimbabwe. The app’s successful deployment has a few limitations, such as 
unreliable network infrastructure, high data tariffs, and unavailability of electricity. There is a need to 
raise public knowledge and awareness of the benefits of mHealth apps in supporting weak health 
systems in developing countries. Future studies should focus on integrating mHealth with the 
country’s healthcare delivery system and reviewing the potential threats and privacy breaches. The 
prospects for this app are high, but the Zimbabwean government should improve access to healthcare 
facilities and lower data costs. This prototype’s development provides a baseline for the successful 
development of apps for underserved communities by healthcare providers and app developers. 
Policymakers and researchers may find the results beneficial as they attempt to introduce mHealth 
apps as they grapple with the challenges of limited access to healthcare by underserved communities.

Disclosure Statement

No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).

ORCID

Vusumuzi Maphosa 
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-2595-3890