Original Paper

The Building Healthy Eating and Self-Esteem Together for
University Students Mobile App to Treat Eating Disorders:
User-Centered Research Design and Feasibility Study

Kelsie T Forbush1, PhD; Kara A Christensen Pacella2, PhD; Marianna L Thomeczek1, MS; Sara R Gould3, PhD;
Danielle A N Chapa1, MA; Brianne N Richson1, MA; Victoria L Perko4, PhD; Joseph Ayres1, BA; Yiyang Chen1,
PhD; Sonakshi Negi1, BA

1Department of Psychology, University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS, United States
2Department of Psychology, University of Nevada, Las Vegas, Las Vegas, NV, United States
3Department of Developmental and Behavioral Health, Children's Mercy Kansas City, Kansas City, KS, United States
4ReefPoint Group, LLC, Tysons, VA, United States

Kelsie T Forbush, PhD
Department of Psychology, University of Kansas
Dole Human Development Center
1000 Sunnyside Avenue
Lawrence, KS, 66049
United States
Phone: 1 7858646525

Methods

Overview

This paper describes the development of the 4-phase BEST-U
app iterative user-centered process that involved (1) a needs
assessment based on literature reviews, community treatment,
and provider surveys; (2) prototype development and initial
evaluation in a pilot trial with stakeholder and therapist inputs;
(3) redesign; and (4) further pilot-testing to assess the usability
and acceptability of the final version of the mHealth app.

Ethical Considerations, Informed Consent, and
Participation

This study was approved by the University of Kansas
institutional review board (#STUDY00144380). Participants
provided signed informed consent before engaging in any
study-related procedures. Participants also completed release
of information forms so that their medical evaluation results
could be shared with the study team. All data were kept
confidential, and identifying data were maintained in locked
files or kept in our password-protected dual-authenticated
research drive. Intake and progress notes were maintained within
Healthie, which is a password-protected, Health Insurance
Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA)–compliant
web-based electronic health record platform. The participants
earned US $50 for the initial 2-hour intake assessment and
medical assessment. Next, they received US $5 per week for
completing the modules within the mobile app (US $50). After
the treatment ended, they received US $5 for the end-of-study
survey, US $10 for the 3-month survey, and US $10 for the
6-month survey. Participants received an additional bonus of
US $25 if they completed all modules and the follow-up surveys.

Phase 1: Needs Assessment

Our needs assessment included 2 components. First, we
surveyed the directors of treatment centers on our local campus
(n=3) and the state in which our university was located (n=5)
to assess the availability of ED treatment services and relevant
information, such as waitlist times and whether the provider
took insurance. Our provider survey was administered in 2018
and was used to inform our initial treatment design. Second,
we conducted a needs assessment based on a literature review
to inform our selection of treatment modality.

Phase 2: Prototype Development and Initial Evaluation
in a Pilot Trial

The initial version of BEST-U, which we called BEST-U 1.0,
was developed over a 3-month period based on a collaboration
between 2 clinical psychologists (KTF and SRG), one of whom
worked primarily as an academic researcher and the other as a
clinician with children and adolescents in an academic medical
center. During this 3-month period, the study clinical research
coordinator met once per week with the treatment development
team to discuss content and create a paper-based outline of
session content that was reviewed and revised at subsequent
meetings. The clinical research coordinator also met, as needed,
with the study principal investigator for informal check-ins,
progress reports, and to ask questions. Once an outline was
approved by all team members, the content was programmed
into the PiLR MEI Research platform and pilot-tested by trainees
to ensure an attractive appearance and accurate collection of
data. After the initial creation of BEST-U 1.0, we sent a
large-scale web-based REDCap (Research Electronic Data
Capture; Vanderbilt University) survey to all enrolled students
(approximately 28,500) at a large midwestern university to
screen for EDs and recruit participants in the initial clinical trial.
The enrolled students were eligible to participate in the survey
if they were aged >18 years. Students were encouraged to
participate in the screening survey, regardless of whether they
had eating or body image concerns.

A total of 737 students completed the initial web screening, of
which 215 (29.2%) were potentially eligible based on their web
survey responses. Participants were potentially eligible if they
reported disordered eating symptoms that aligned with a
potential ED diagnosis, had access to a smartphone, and lived
in a state in which psychologists on our team were licensed.
Participants were excluded if they had a BMI <19, reported
uncorrected vision problems that could prevent their use of a
smartphone, or reported a medical circumstance that could
interfere with weight or appetite (eg, pregnancy, diabetes,
neurological condition). Potentially eligible participants were
invited to complete psychological and medical intake
evaluations. A total of 41 individuals completed both intake
evaluations. After the medical and psychological intake
evaluations, 27 participants were deemed eligible and 18 were
enrolled in the trial. Notably, at this stage of the trial, the other
9 participants were enrolled into a separate multiple-baseline
single-case research design protocol, and 8 of these participants
completed the protocol, the intervention for which consisted of
BEST-U 1.0 [21]. Out of all enrolled participants in BEST-U
1.0 and the multiple-baseline single-case study, 15 participants
provided end-of-treatment feedback about treatment satisfaction
and app usability (7 from BEST-U and 8 from the
multiple-baseline study). See Figure 1 for a CONSORT
(Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials) diagram of
recruitment and enrollment flow. Table 1 provides the
demographic information (age, gender, and race and ethnicity)
of all students who responded to the screening survey and
students who enrolled in the BEST-U 1.0 trial.

The participants completed a 17-item ad hoc questionnaire that
measured their opinions on app usability, attractiveness, and
satisfaction with coaching. The questions were rated on a 7-point

Likert scale that ranged from 1 (strongly disagree) to 7 (strongly
agree). The questions assessed the extent to which participants
felt comfortable using the app, enjoyed participating in the
study, felt the amount of time answering questions in the app
was reasonable, felt the amount of time reading the content of
the modules in the app was reasonable, felt the app was
attractive, the length of the overall treatment program,

participant perceptions of the extent to which their eating and
body image changed, and several questions about their
experience with their coach. In addition to the ad hoc
questionnaire, participants responded to 2 open-ended questions
that asked, “What were the best things about the BEST-U
program?” and “What changes do you recommend to the
BEST-U program?”

Figure 1. CONSORT (Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials) diagram of Building Healthy Eating and Self-Esteem Together for University
Students (BEST-U) 1.0. AN: anorexia nervosa; ED: eating disorder; MICE: Multiple Baseline Design for Improving College-Student Eating.

Table 1. Demographic characteristics of Building Healthy Eating and Self-Esteem Together for University Students 1.0’s participants.

Enrolled (n=18)
Screened (n=737)
Characteristics

23.00 (6.92; 18-45)
21.60 (4.99; 18-78)
Age (years), mean (SD; range)

Gender, n (%)

1 (5.6)
159 (21.6)
Cisgender men

16 (88.9)
536 (72.7)
Cisgender women

0 (0)
5 (0.7)
Transgender men

0 (0)
1 (0.1)
Transgender women

0 (0)
6 (0.8)
Gender nonconforming

0 (0)
0 (0)
Another gender identity

1 (6)
30 (4.1)
Prefer not to answer or missing

Race and ethnicity, n (%)

1 (5.6)
64 (8.7)
Asian

1 (5.6)
29 (3.9)
Black

2 (11.1)
69 (9.4)
Hispanic

0 (0)
19 (2.6)
Native American or Pacific Islander

16 (88.9)
624 (84.7)
White

0 (0)
36 (4.9)
Multiracial

0 (0)
39 (5.3)
Other race or not specified

Phase 3: Redesign

After the initial pilot-testing, we evaluated end user feedback
collected in phase 2 and held 2 workshops with trainees (n=4)
who served as BEST-U 1.0 treatment providers and made minor
changes to the app based on their feedback. Trainees were
graduate students enrolled in a Doctor of Philosophy program
or postdoctoral fellows who had completed a graduate-level
course on the treatment of EDs or the University of Oxford’s
web-based training on CBT-Enhanced (CBT-E). We used coach
feedback to redesign the app by removing 1 module, adding a
new module, and refining 1 module to provide more interactive
content. We also used coach feedback to redesign the web
dashboard that coaches used to review their clients’ weekly
data.

Phase 4: Further Pilot-Testing of Usability and
Acceptability

The goal of phase 4 was to test whether the overall treatment
remained acceptable after the implementation of minor changes.
Thus, we conducted an additional pilot study to assess the
usability and acceptability of BEST-U 2.0 in university students
(n=47) with a non–low-weight, binge-spectrum ED using the
same inclusion and exclusion criteria that we used in phase 2.

Overall, 3494 participants completed the initial web screening
survey. On the basis of web survey responses, 1311 participants
were potentially eligible and invited to complete the
psychological and medical intake evaluations. A total of 226
participants were interested in participation and completed the
psychological and medical intake evaluations. Notably,
recruitment for this phase began during the COVID-19
pandemic, which resulted in some participants delaying or
canceling participation because they did not want to complete
the in-person medical examination. After the medical and
psychological intake evaluation, 94 participants were eligible,
and 69 participants were enrolled in the study. Reasons for
ineligibility included the need for a higher level of care, the
presence of a primary substance or alcohol use disorder, and
severe primary co-occurring psychopathology requiring
stabilization or intervention. A total of 47 participants provided
end-of-treatment feedback on treatment satisfaction and the
app. Participants completed the same ad hoc usability and
feasibility questionnaire and open-ended survey items that were
administered in phase 2. Figure 2 provides a CONSORT
diagram of the phase 4 recruitment and enrollment flow. Table
2 shows the demographic information (eg, age, gender, and race
and ethnicity) of students who completed the screening survey
and the sample of participants who enrolled in BEST-U 2.0.

JMIR Form Res 2023 | vol. 7 | e43504 | p. 5

Figure 2. CONSORT (Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials) diagram for Building Healthy Eating and Self-Esteem Together for University
Students (BEST-U) 2.0. AN: anorexia nervosa; ED: eating disorder.

Table 2. Demographic characteristics of Building Healthy Eating and Self-Esteem Together for University Students 2.0’s participants.

Enrolled (n=69)
Screened (n=3494)
Characteristics

25.56 (8.01; 16-55)
22.95 (6.63; 18-76)
Age (years), mean (SD; range)

Gender, n (%)

12 (17.4)
790 (22.6)
Cisgender men

50 (72.5)
2326 (66.6)
Cisgender women

2 (2.9)
26 (0.7)
Transgender men

0 (0)
3 (0.1)
Transgender women

2 (2.9)
89 (2.6)
Gender nonconforming

1 (1.4)
40 (1.1)
Another gender identity

2 (2.9)
220 (6.3)
Prefer not to answer or missing

Race and ethnicity, n (%)

5 (7.2)
416 (11.9)
Asian

6 (8.7)
181 (5.2)
Black

10 (14.5)
367 (10.5)
Hispanic

0 (0)
94 (2.7)
Native American or Pacific Islander

56 (81.2)
2804 (80.3)
White

2 (2.9)
202 (5.8)
Multiracial

4 (5.8)
217 (6.2)
Other race or not specified

JMIR Form Res 2023 | vol. 7 | e43504 | p. 6

Results

Phase 1: Needs Assessment

Provider Survey

We surveyed centers located on our campus (n=3) and in the
state in which our university is located (n=5). The results of the
assessment indicated that 2 campus-based treatment centers did
not treat EDs and reported referring students with EDs to the
local community. The remaining campus-based treatment center
was a graduate training clinic in which Doctor of Philosophy
students treated clients under the supervision of a licensed
faculty. The training clinic accepted student and nonstudent
clients using a sliding-scale fee and did not accept insurance.
The waitlist at the training clinic ranged from 1 to 3 months,
although the waitlist increased substantially with the onset of
the COVID-19 pandemic, with the current therapy waitlist at 3
months and the waitlist for assessments at 12 months.

One state-wide treatment center was a children’s hospital that
did not regularly accept new, young-adult clients. The other 4
treatment centers were outpatient ED specialty treatment centers
located approximately 45 minutes from the campus. These
centers received between 10 and 20 calls per month from new
clients seeking services for the treatment of EDs. Two centers
had waitlists of 2 and 4 months, respectively, whereas the other
2 centers referred clients to other centers and did not maintain
a waitlist. Two centers did not take insurance, whereas the
remaining 2 centers took the Blue Cross Blue Shield or both
Blue Cross Blue Shield and Tri-CARE insurance, respectively.
Only 1 center took Medicaid or Medicare insurance. Two centers
saw people without insurance, one center had <5% of clients
reporting no insurance and the other center had 21% of
uninsured individuals, with some clients opting out of insurance
coverage owing to high deductibles for mental health care, and
6% received pro bono services. Regarding the diversity of ED
admissions, 1 center did not keep track of the specific numbers
of racial, ethnic, or sexual minority clients. However, the
remaining 3 centers reported an average of 5% of clients from
racial or ethnic minority groups (range 1%-9%). The 3
remaining centers reported an average of 2% of clients with a
minoritized sexual orientation (range 0%-5%). None of the
providers offered services to non–English-speaking clients.

Overall, the provider survey indicated substantial gaps in
outpatient services on campus and in the local community for
students with EDs. Two on-campus treatment centers did not
accept clients with an ED, and the only campus center that
treated EDs had long wait times. The lack of on-campus services
was particularly problematic given that nearby treatment centers
were at a distance of 45 minutes from the campus, requiring
students to drive or find transportation to attend in-person
therapy.

The results of the provider survey led our treatment development
team to consider ways to meet the high demand for ED services
at scale. In particular, to address the need for accessible ED
treatment in the general population, research has increasingly
focused on developing easy-to-disseminate interventions that
address barriers to accessing care [22]. For example, CBT-gsh

lowers therapist burden and increases scheduling flexibility by
providing self-help material, including psychoeducation and
cognitive behavioral skills through a textbook with brief
coaching sessions that last 25 to 30 minutes each week. CBT-gsh
has been delivered in a range of doses, from as little as 6 weeks
to as much as 7 months, spread across 4 to 40 sessions. The
training of the Coach or guide varied from graduate or doctoral
students to facilitators with no formal training, with 1 study
using primary care providers [23,24]. Although most coaching
sessions have been delivered via face-to-face sessions, other
delivery modalities, either individually or in a group format,
include the web, telephone, and SMS text messaging. However,
few studies have included telemental health as the primary
modality for CBT-gsh coaching. Thus, we conducted an
additional needs assessment through literature reviews to
evaluate the potential feasibility of creating an mHealth
CBT-gsh treatment for university students, which we describe
in the next section.

Literature Review

A Cochrane review found that CBT-gsh was superior to “pure”
self-help and waitlist control and equivalent to traditional CBT
for improving ED-specific and general psychopathology [25].
Traviss-Turner et al [23] conducted a review and
meta-regression of 30 randomized controlled trials of CBT-gsh
and found a moderate effect on total ED symptoms (-0.46) and
a small effect on binge abstinence (-0.20). Despite the promising
effects of CBT-gsh as a low-intensity efficacious treatment for
EDs, Traviss-Turner et al [23] noted three important limitations
of CBT-gsh:(1) in some studies, attrition rate was as high as
88%, although the reasons for dropout were not explored in
their meta-regression; (2) few studies tested the effectiveness
of CBT-gsh in university students; and (3) most studies provided
guidance through a textbook, and few programs leveraged
advances in technology using eHealth and mHealth as modes
of guidance.

Since the publication of the review by Traviss-Turner et al [23],
there has been increased interest in using mHealth to address
mental health disparities in college students [24,26]. However,
within the field of EDs, there is only 1 CBT-gsh mHealth app
for college students. Specifically, Fitzsimmons-Craft et al [24]
developed and tested an innovative CBT-gsh program, SB-ED,
designed to treat college women with EDs. SB-ED consists of
40 lessons that last for 10 minutes delivered through a
smartphone app. The lessons focused on psychoeducation, meal
planning, tracking and self-monitoring, and strategies from
CBT-E for EDs (eg, body image, shape and weight avoidance,
challenging negative thoughts, and relapse prevention). The
students were matched with a health coach who sent weekly
text messages throughout the program to provide ongoing
feedback, support, and encouragement. Coaches also provided
2 optional 20-minute phone calls; 1 call was scheduled at the
beginning of the program to establish rapport, discuss goals,
and address barriers (session 1), and the other phone call was
provided at the end of the treatment (session 40) to review the
client’s progress and relapse prevention strategies.

Data from a cluster randomized trial of 26 US universities
showed that SB-ED was an effective intervention [16].

JMIR Form Res 2023 | vol. 7 | e43504 | p. 7

Participants randomized to the SB-ED (vs treatment as usual)
had significant reductions in total ED symptoms that were
maintained at follow-up. There were no significant differences
between the groups in abstinence from ED behaviors at
end-of-treatment or follow-up. However, the SB-ED group had
lower frequencies of binge eating and compensatory behavior
at the end of treatment; compensatory behavior (but not binge
eating) frequency remained significantly lower than that of the
control group at follow-up.

Despite the promising data on the usefulness of SB-ED for
college students, there were certain limitations that lowered its
impact and reach. First, the SB-ED was developed for women
with an ED, even though approximately 3% to 5% of people
with an ED are boys or men [3], and the rates of EDs in
transgender people or nonbinary populations appear to be
elevated compared with the general population [27].
Furthermore, randomized controlled trials of SB-ED have been
conducted in all-female samples, with students who identified
as nonfemale not included in the study [16,28]. SB-ED has been
administered among different genders, but neither study has a
randomized controlled design. For example, in 1 open trial, the
authors did not report results broken down by gender [24],
whereas in the other, men or gender-diverse students were
offered the use of SB-ED but were not included in the published
trial results [29]. Thus, there are currently no CBT-gsh mHealth
treatments that have been developed for men or gender-diverse
university students, and there is limited research on their efficacy
in male-identifying populations. Second, SB-ED provides
coaching via SMS text messaging and 40 treatment sessions,
which led to only 31% of the content being accessed by
participants [16]. Newer models of CBT for nonunderweight
EDs indicate that treatment gains can be achieved in as few as
10 sessions, with similar remission rates and improvements in
quality of life compared with standard-length CBT [30].
Short-length CBT was also associated with a 15% less dropout
rate than standard-length CBT [30], suggesting that clients may
have potentially received a higher dose of the intervention in
the shorter-length version because more individuals accessed
the full intervention. Finally, the benefits of short-length CBT
were maintained at the 6-month follow-up, suggesting that
shorter-length CBT is a cost-effective and acceptable
intervention.

In summary, the results of our literature review showed that
although CBT-gsh is a promising treatment for college students,
there is substantial room for new modalities of delivery and
content integration. The limitations of past CBT-gsh studies
included high attrition rates (particularly when there was no or
low therapist involvement), few adaptations designed for use
in university student populations, a lack of gender representation
and inclusivity, and treatment delivery of self-help content being
delivered primarily through textbooks, instead via eHealth and
mHealth platforms, which would provide increased opportunities
for engagement and dissemination. With these considerations
in mind, we chose to develop an mHealth app based on
CBT-gsh, which would be paired with brief coaching sessions
delivered either in person or via telehealth. We viewed the
mHealth treatment delivery method as potentially helpful for
reducing barriers to accessing ED care because students would

not have to carry an additional book or read lengthy text
descriptions and could increase engagement with the material
through the provision of short quizzes and short-answer
questions. Our goal was to create an mHealth app that would
also seamlessly integrate meal logs and tracking tools within 1
digital tool. We chose to have shorter sessions (25-30 minutes)
and a short duration of therapy (11 vs 20 weeks) because this
would reduce waitlist time while likely not adversely affecting
treatment efficacy. Finally, we viewed the overall concept of
guided self-help as attractive to students because Tavolacci et
al [11] found that students reported wanting to “try something
on their own first,” which is compatible with a self-help model.
To better serve a diverse university population, we wanted to
create content that was gender- and size-inclusive and appealed
to a wide range of students, including traditional college students
(eg, students aged 18-24 years), nontraditional college students
(eg, students aged >24 years and students with dependents),
and graduate students. Improving mental health support for
nontraditional students is particularly important, as these
students are already at a higher risk for noncompletion of their
degrees [31] and untreated mental health problems may worsen
such outcomes.

Phase 2: Intervention Development

Treatment Overview

The initial content of the app was decided over a 3-month period
in weekly meetings between KTF and SRG. On the basis of the
literature and our clinical experience, we created 14 brief
modules that were designed to be delivered over an
11-or-12-week period with a built-in “buffer” week to account
for the possibility of a missed or absent week. The modules
covered topics from CBT-E, Cognitive Behavioral Therapy,
and Dialectical Behavior Therapy. We designed modules to
take 5 to 15 minutes to complete and focused on key information
or lessons that were short and interactive. We embedded
evidence-based routine outcome monitoring (ROM) within the
app, given that research has shown that ROM results in increased
end-of-treatment recovery rates, reduces patient deterioration
for patients who show a poor initial response to treatment, and
increases overall positive treatment outcomes at the end of
treatment. Thus, BEST-U leveraged frequent ROM via surveys
administered daily, weekly, and monthly to increase both client
and therapist awareness and the targeting of problem behaviors.
Clients reinforced their learning through weekly 25-to 30-minute
telehealth “coaching” sessions with a trainee or licensed provider
to review module material, solve problems, practice skills, and
plan homework exercises. Trainees were graduate students
currently enrolled in a clinical psychology doctorate program
or postdoctoral fellows. Trainees were required to pass a
graduate-level course focused on the treatment of EDs or the
University of Oxford CBT-E training. All trainees were
supervised by a licensed provider and attended weekly
supervision meetings to review the cases. Throughout the app,
we referred to the user’s trained therapist as a “Coach” because
we found that participants found this term more empowering
and less stigmatizing; therapists reported no concerns with the
term “Coach,” given that it helped reduce barriers for clients
seeking care.

JMIR Form Res 2023 | vol. 7 | e43504 | p. 8

Treatment Content

The treatment schedule is provided in Table 3. In the first half
of the treatment, participants were provided psychoeducation
about unhealthy eating behaviors and weight. Participants were
provided with material to increase awareness of their thoughts,
emotions, and behaviors and learn skills to reduce engagement
in problematic eating behaviors, such as bingeing, purging,
excessive exercise, and restriction. In the second session, the
participants were introduced to regular eating and encouraged
to engage in regular eating (ie, eating 3 meals and 3 snacks per
day) throughout the program. Throughout the treatment period,

the program identified targets for change and measured progress
through frequent monitoring. Clients were asked to complete
daily meal and ED behavior logs, weekly surveys on ED
symptoms, and weekly self-weighing. The latter half of the
treatment focused on reducing dysfunctional cognition and
behaviors related to body image, overconcern with shape and
weight, and body comparison. Strategies for change throughout
the treatment included behavioral strategies (behavioral
activation [ie, “disrupters”] and urge surfing), challenging
cognitive distortions (Mindtraps), behavior chain analysis
(BCA), interpersonal effectiveness skills, and exposure
techniques (open weighing, food exposures, body exposures).

JMIR Form Res 2023 | vol. 7 | e43504 | p. 9

Table 3. Schedule of treatment content.

Handouts or worksheets
Homework
Coaching session topics
Module topics
Week and module
name

1

1. Starting Well
•
Participant expecta-
tions guide
•
Begin weekly weighing
•
Orientation to treatment
structure
•
Psychoeducation info

about BEST-Ua structure
•
Weekly weighing
handout
•
Goal setting

2. What’s Weight
Got to Do With
It?

•
Psychoeducation about
weight
•
Introduction to meal logs
•
Review modules 1 and 2
•
Rationale for weekly
weighing
•
Problem-solving barriers
to weekly weighing

•
Orientation to treatment
structure
•
Goal setting

•
Introduction to meal logs
•
Review modules 1 and 2
•
Problem-solving barriers
to weekly weighing

2

3. What are Un-
helpful Habits?
•
Binge cycles hand-
out
•
Begin engaging in regular
eating
•
Review modules 3 and 4
•
Psychoeducation about
dieting and binge-eating
behaviors
•
Problem-solving barriers
to regular eating
•
Plan daily structure for
regular eating

4. Regular eating
•
•
Review modules 3 and 4
Rationale for regular eat-
ing
•
Problem-solving barriers
to regular eating
•
Plan daily structure for
regular eating

3

—b
5. More Unhelp-
ful Habits
•
•
•
Implement disruptors and
urge surfing to reduce dis-
ordered eating

Problem-solving regular
eating challenges
Psychoeducation about
compensatory behaviors
•
Review modules 5 and 6
•
Overvaluation and self-
comparison
•
Identify disruptors and
urge surfing

•
Reflection on treatment
progress so far

—
6. The Disruptors
•
•
Problem-solving regular
eating challenges
Instruction on using behav-
ioral disruptors and urge
surfing to reduce engage-
•
Review modules 5 and 6
ment with unhelpful urges
•
Identify disruptors and
urge surfing
•
Reflection on treatment
progress so far

4

7. Mindtraps
•
Mindtraps work-
sheet
•
Notice and challenge
Mindtraps in daily life
•
Review module 6
•
Identifying and challeng-
ing Mindtraps (ie, cogni-
•
Therapist guides the client
in identifying and challeng-
tive distortions)

ing a recent Mindtrap

5

8. Break the
Chains
•
BCA worksheet
•
Complete a new BCA
•
Review module 7
•
Video instruction in using

BCAc
•
Practice writing a BCA in
session

JMIR Form Res 2023 | vol. 7 | e43504 | p. 10

Handouts or worksheets
Homework
Coaching session topics
Module topics
Week and module
name

6

•
Interpersonal effec-
tiveness worksheet
•
Use DEAR MAN to make
an interpersonal request
•
Review module 9

•
Practice formulating a re-
quest using DEAR MAN

•
DEAR MAN GIVE FAST
interpersonal effectiveness
skills

9. Interpersonal
Effectiveness

7

—
•
Challenge a dietary rule
(behavioral exposure)
•
Review module 10

•
Discuss client’s experi-
ence with dietary rules

•
Three aspects of eating
(when to eat, how much
to eat, what to eat)

•
Dietary rules

10

—
•
Body comparison exercise
•
Review module 11

•
Discuss client’s body im-
age concerns

•
Overconcern about shape
or weight

•
Information about compar-
isons

11. Body Image
IQ

9

—
•
Complete 2 days of body-
checking logs

•
Engage in a valued activi-
ty identified from the pie
chart

•
Review module 12
•
Discuss the client’s experi-
ences with body checking

•
Complete values pie-chart
activity

•
Body checking
12. Shape and
Weight

10

—
•
Complete body exposure
exercise
•
Review module 13

•
Discuss the client’s experi-
ences with body avoid-
ance

•
Body avoidance

•
Body beliefs activity

13. Body Avoid-
ance

11

—
•
Complete body exposure
exercise
•
Review module 14
•
Formulate discharge plan
•
Discuss lapses or relapses
•
Goals for future

•
Evaluate the need for addi-
tional treatment

•
Reflection on progress in
BEST-U and plans for fu-
ture

14. The Road to
Success

aBEST-U: Building Healthy Eating and Self-Esteem Together for University Students.
bNo handout or worksheet included.
cBCA: behavior chain analysis.

App Overview, Content, and Structure

The BEST-U home page consisted of 2 tabs: the home tab and
the past modules tab (Figure 3). At the top of the home tab is a
welcome message, followed by the action items. The action
items included assessments assigned to be completed during a
given week. Below the action items were the assessment items
that the participants completed daily, including meal logs,
body-checking logs, and daily behavior surveys. All assessments
available on the home tab are described in further detail below.
The last component of the homepage was the assigned module
or modules for that week. There were 14 modules to be
completed during the 11 weeks of treatment. For the first 3

weeks of treatment, the participants were asked to complete 2
modules per week. For the remaining 8 weeks of treatment,
participants completed 1 module per week. Every module was
built upon the information from the preceding module; therefore,
we encouraged clients to complete them in the designated order.
If a participant forgot to complete a module during the week it
was assigned, they were asked to complete it the following week
before beginning the newly assigned module. All modules from
the previous weeks could be accessed and completed by
navigating to the past modules tab on the main screen of the
BEST-U app. Throughout the modules, we included images,
inspirational quotes, and pictures to make the app attractive and
engaging. To make the app as inclusive as possible, we selected

JMIR Form Res 2023 | vol. 7 | e43504 | p. 11

images that showed a range of body sizes, races, ethnicities,
and gender identities (see Figure 4 for sample images).

Each module began with a check-in question. These questions
assessed issues, such as how well the participants were doing
with the knowledge and skills gained from the previous week
or module. The check-ins served as an informal introduction to
the new module’s content by asking the participants to reflect
on their experiences with a topic before receiving instructions
on that particular topic. After the check-in (Figure 5), the app
provided the instructional content. The instructional content
included an introduction to the topic, a main lesson, and an
interactive component. The interactive component was designed
to deepen the participants’connection to, and understanding of,
the instructional content. These components included activities
such as “Q&As” (eg, “What kinds of thoughts fuel your
unhelpful behaviors?”), trivia, myth-busting (eg, “True or False?

Counting calories is an effective form of weight control”), or
behavioral exercises. The behavioral exercise from the Body
Avoidance module, for example, asked participants to do 2
things they currently avoided due to body image concerns (eg,
exercising in public and eating with other people). Each module
concluded with a check-out question. Check-out questions
provided an opportunity for the students to reflect on their
treatment goals, barriers and solutions for change, motivations
to change, and the quality of the participants’relationships with
their Coach. The questions also encouraged the participants to
reflect on how to incorporate the instructional content into their
lives. For example, the check-out questions from the Mindtraps
module asked participants to consider a time when a Mindtrap
(ie, a cognitive distortion) led to a negative consequence and
to think about how they could challenge that Mindtrap if it
happened again.

Figure 3. Home screen. BEST-U: Building Healthy Eating and Self-Esteem Together for University Students.

JMIR Form Res 2023 | vol. 7 | e43504 | p. 12

Figure 4. Sample Building Healthy Eating and Self-Esteem Together for University Students (BEST-U) module images. EMA: ecological momentary
assessment.

Figure 5. Check-in and check-out questions. EMA: ecological momentary assessment.

CBT Routine Outcomes Monitoring Within the App

ROM is critical because it allows coaches to monitor change
(or a lack of change) on a regular basis and incorporate
information from the assessments into weekly coaching sessions.
Thus, BEST-U clients completed daily, weekly, and monthly
assessments to track the outcomes of ED psychopathology and
overall internalizing symptoms. The advantages of embedding
assessments within the BEST-U app were the ability to track
time to monitor adherence to the intervention and the ability of
coaches to review the information before coaching sessions to
improve treatment planning and session preparedness. Some

assessments, including Meal Logs, Behavior Surveys, and
Weight Logs, are part of the CBT monitoring for EDs.

Meal Logs

The BEST-U clients completed daily meal logs electronically
within the app (Figure 6). In each meal log, participants reported
the time, date, and location (eg, home, dining hall, and
restaurant) of each meal or snack consumed. After noting the
type of meal (eg, breakfast, morning snack, lunch, afternoon
snack, dinner, evening snack, or other or unplanned meal), the
participants were asked to describe the type and amount of food
consumed. In addition to information about the meal, meal logs

JMIR Form Res 2023 | vol. 7 | e43504 | p. 13

included an assessment of emotional states and thoughts during
the meal. Participants also reported whether they engaged in
any ED behaviors (eg, binge eating, purging, self-harming,

restricting, or excessive exercising) before, during, or after
eating.

Figure 6. Meal log images. EMA: ecological momentary assessment.

Behavior Survey

To monitor the frequency of specific ED symptoms and
emotional states, BEST-U clients completed a daily behavioral
survey (Figure 7). Participants reported how often they engaged
in objective binge eating, self-induced vomiting, laxative and
diuretic misuse, and other diet supplement use on a 6-point
Likert scale ranging from “none” to “six or more times.” To
assess dietary restriction, participants replied “yes” or “no” to
questions about meal or snack skipping and restriction (eating

<1200 calories per day). Body checking and body comparison
surveys became available in the latter part of the treatment when
the topics of body image concerns and overvaluation of weight
and shape were introduced. When available, body checking and
body comparison frequency were assessed using a 6-point Likert
scale ranging from “none” to “50 or more times” in the past 24
hours. Finally, the frequency of positive and negative affect
over the past 24 hours was assessed on a 5-point Likert scale
ranging from “very slightly” to “extremely.”

JMIR Form Res 2023 | vol. 7 | e43504 | p. 14

Figure 7. Sample image from the Daily Behavior Survey. EMA: ecological momentary assessment.

Weight Log

Weight logs (Figure 8) were completed to monitor weekly
weighing when in-person weighing procedures were not possible
(eg, clients who fully used telehealth). The participants were
instructed to weigh themselves only once weekly, preferably
on the same day and around the same time each week. Coaches
reviewed potential barriers to weighing with clients at the first
coaching session, including problem-solving access to a scale,
if one was not available in their home (eg, borrowing a scale

and weighing at the student health care center, gym, or a friend
or family member’s home). Within the weight log, clients logged
their weekly weight, and the date was automatically recorded.
Clients also logged any emotions, thoughts, or ED behaviors
that occurred in the context of weekly weighing. The weight
log feature was included because weight exposure is a core
CBT-E and CBT technique for increasing participants’
acceptance of their body by reducing avoidance and fear
associated with the number on the scale [32,33].

JMIR Form Res 2023 | vol. 7 | e43504 | p. 15

Figure 8. Weight log.

Other Study-Related Outcomes Assessments

We included additional surveys in the app to assess the outcomes
for our larger clinical trial and to enable clinicians to further
monitor aspects of eating pathology and related forms of
psychopathology during the treatment. These measures are
described below.

Eating Pathology Clinical Outcomes Tracker

A weekly version of the Eating Pathology Symptoms Inventory
(EPSI) was completed in the app to monitor 8 dimensions of
ED psychopathology including body dissatisfaction, binge
eating, restricting, cognitive restraint, excessive exercise, muscle
building, and negative attitudes toward obesity. The EPSI [34]
is a 45-item self-report questionnaire completed monthly to
monitor changes in ED psychopathology. Participants respond
to the 45 EPSI items on a 5-point Likert scale from 0 (“never”)
to 4 (“very often”), with instructions to focus on the past week.
In past research, the EPSI has shown evidence of a strong factor
structure, excellent internal consistency (α=.84-.89), and
test-retest reliability of scales over a 2- to 4-week time frame
(r=0.61-0.85). The EPSI demonstrated evidence of good
convergent validity when compared with other ED self-report
measures and discriminant validity when compared with a
measure of internalizing symptoms [34-36].

Positive and Negative Affect Schedule–Expanded Form

The Positive and Negative Affect Schedule–Expanded
(PANAS-X) form [37] was completed monthly within the app
to monitor changes in positive and negative affect. The
PANAS-X is a 60-item self-report scale in which participants
report the extent to which they have experienced different

emotions over the past few weeks on a 5-point Likert scale
ranging from 1 (very slightly or not at all”) to 5 (“extremely”).
Past research on the PANAS-X has shown evidence of excellent
internal consistency of positive affect (α=.83-.90) and negative
affect (α=.79-.93) scales and convergent validity of positive
and discriminant validity [37].

Inventory of Depression and Anxiety Symptoms

The Inventory of Depression and Anxiety Symptoms (IDAS-II)
[38] was completed monthly in the app to monitor changes in
the internalizing symptoms of anxiety and depression, including
general depression, dysphoria, panic, social anxiety, insomnia,
lassitude, ill-temper, traumatic intrusions, traumatic avoidance,
well-being, suicidality, appetite loss, appetite gain, mania,
euphoria, claustrophobia, checking, ordering, and cleaning. The
IDAS-II was administered to assess monthly levels of anxiety
and depression. Participants responded to 99 items related to
anxiety and depressive symptoms over the past 2 weeks on a
5-point Likert scale ranging from 0 (“never”) to 4 (very often).”
In past research [38-40], the IDAS-II scales demonstrated
evidence of convergent validity with other measures of mood
and anxiety (r=0.44-0.68), discriminant validity, and 2-week
test-retest reliability (r=0.54-0.76).

Clinical Impairment Assessment

The Clinical Impairment Assessment (CIA) [41] is a 16-item
self-report measure of psychiatric impairment secondary to an
ED over the past 28 days. CIA was completed monthly within
the app. The CIA was rated on a 4-point Likert scale ranging
from 0 (not at all) to 3 (a lot).” The CIA demonstrated excellent
internal consistency as measured by Cronbach α (α=.93) and
item-total correlations (r=0.57-0.81) in past research [41,42].

JMIR Form Res 2023 | vol. 7 | e43504 | p. 16

The CIA also demonstrated acceptable test-retest reliability
(intraclass coefficient 0.86) over 3 days and convergent validity
with other measures of ED psychopathology in past studies
(r=0.27-0.68) [41,42].

App Integration With Telehealth Coaching Sessions

Session Format
The BEST-U app was supplemented with 25 to 30 minutes of
weekly telehealth coaching sessions by a trainee or licensed
provider. Each coaching session was intended to adhere to the
basic CBT session structure, which included agenda-setting,
check-in, homework review, discussion of agenda items, and
homework assignments. To increase compliance and consistency
among coaches and to lower barriers for future dissemination,
we developed a Coach’s Manual, which provided brief session
outlines, required session activities, and a summary of
information collected by the app to be reviewed before the
session.

Coaching Session Activities
In most CBT-gsh programs, coaching sessions are used for
problem-solving, motivation, and increasing treatment
compliance. BEST-U coaching sessions were intended to
accomplish these goals as well as to help the client apply the
skills, strategies, and lessons from the modules to meet their
own unique needs in the context of their personal circumstances.
BEST-U therapists engaged in discussions and used handouts
and worksheets that they shared on their computer screens to
increase the client’s understanding of key CBT and Dialectical
Behavior Therapy skills through structured activities. For
example, clients worked with their coach to identify and
challenge Mindtraps using structured worksheets, completed a
practice BCA in session, and formulated effective interpersonal
requests (DEAR MAN GIVE FAST skills from Dialectical
Behavior Therapy).

BEST-U coaching sessions built upon material within the
modules and extended them to the client’s specific eating and
body image concerns. For example, clients and coaches designed
individually tailored exposures related to dietary rules (eg, eating
feared foods), body checking (eg, response prevention
techniques), and body avoidance (eg, clothing or mirror
exposure), which were then assigned for homework. Coaches
and clients completed an exercise from CBT-E in which they
created a pie chart to visualize the factors that determined the
client’s self-worth. The pie chart helped clients visualize the
amount of the “pie” taken up by overvaluation of weight and
shape, which served as a discussion launcher for replacing
overvaluation with activities that would increase self-esteem
and value-directed living.

Coaching sessions also carried forward the skills and strategies
learned in the previous modules to reinforce learning. For
example, after cognitive change strategies were discussed in
the app, clients were encouraged to identify Mindtraps when
they arose in a session. Similarly, clients were encouraged to
complete BCAs when problem behaviors occurred throughout
the treatment. Clients were challenged to consider how they
could use their new skills (eg, disrupters and urge surfing) when
they described relevant situations in the review of homework

or logs. Clients were taught that through BEST-U, they were
learning skills and ways of thinking that could be applied to
future challenges related to eating as well as general situations,
such as life stressors, depressive symptoms, and anxiety
symptoms.

The final coaching session focused on a review of treatment
progress and the collaborative development of a written
discharge plan. The purpose of this session was to help clients
summarize their progress toward their goals, reflect on the skills
learned, identify potential signs of relapse, and set new wellness
goals for their personal development. Together with their coach,
the clients identified “warning signs” for relapse and
problem-solved strategies for managing relapses. Finally, we
asked clients to identify their areas of desired future
development and how they could work toward those with the
skills they had learned through BEST-U. The participants were
provided with a copy of their discharge plan to use as a guide
after completing the program.

Postdischarge Check-Ins

After the discharge, BEST-U clients had the option of
scheduling a 25- to 30-minute check-in session with their coach
at the 3- and 6-month follow-up. These sessions involved a
collaboratively set agenda, with no formal lessons or information
provided. Sessions typically involved briefly reviewing the
client’s progress over the treatment, discharge plan, and
discussing any problem areas or challenges that the client
experienced or anticipated would arise in the future.

Compliance and Engagement

We computed the participants’ survey compliance data based
on 7 participants who completed the BEST-U 1.0 program and
provided feedback. The compliance and outcome data from the
other 8 participants in BEST-U 1.0 who participated in a
multiple-baseline design trial are reported in a separate paper
[21]. Engagement was assessed based on the number of modules
that the participants submitted. Module submission requires
that participants scroll through each screen of the module,
answer prompts within the app, and click “submit” to submit
their module as completed. As defined by module completion,
the completion rate of the weekly modules was 89% (87/98),
which indicated high engagement in BEST-U 1.0. The
submission rate for the Weekly Weight logs was 68% (57/84).
The submission rate of Weekly Surveys was 61% (51/84).
Compliance with the Monthly Survey was 64% (9/14). The
participants had extremely high compliance with the coaching
sessions, with 100% of the sessions attended. In contrast,
participants completed 32.7% (192/588) of the Daily Behavioral
Surveys, which was lower than the ideal. Although not reported
here, compliance and engagement data for the other 8
participants who participated in the multiple-baseline design
study were similar to those reported for the other BEST-U 1.0
participants [21].

User Satisfaction and Usability

Table 4 provides the user satisfaction, usability, and
attractiveness ratings from BEST-U 1.0 participants. The
average scores were calculated for each question. The scores
ranged from 1 (“strongly disagree”) to 7 (“strongly agree”).

JMIR Form Res 2023 | vol. 7 | e43504 | p. 17

Mean scores of ≥5 (“somewhat agree”) were used as evidence
for acceptability. Mean scores of ≥6 (“agree”) were used as
evidence for “high” acceptability. Participants’ feedback on
BEST-U as a treatment package was positive, with an
acceptability grand mean of 5.89 across all quantitative survey
items for BEST-U 1.0. The participants reported that they
planned to continue using the resources, information, and
activities learned in BEST-U to continue working on their goals.
Participants also reported that they would recommend BEST-U
to a friend experiencing similar problems. Participants were
highly satisfied with the brief coaching sessions, as evidenced
by the fact that all questions about coaching were rated ≥6 on
average. Participants reported that they enjoyed the study, felt
comfortable using the app, and that the amount of time spent
reading the content of the modules was reasonable. In the
qualitative survey, 5 participants endorsed items that indicated
that the program had a positive impact on their body image.
These data also corresponded to quantitative ratings of items
indicating that they felt their eating behaviors had changed and
were proud of the changes they made in the program. App
attractiveness was the area of greatest concern, with an average
rating of<5.

Qualitative comments from the participants indicated that they
enjoyed the coaching sessions, felt they learned new coping
mechanisms and skills, liked the overall structure of the
program, and felt they improved their eating behaviors. One
participant commented that the app was “very easy to navigate.”

These positive qualitative comments were consistent with the
participants’ quantitative ratings. Overall, both the quantitative
and qualitative results showed that the BEST-U app was
satisfactory and acceptable, including the aspect of ease of use
and time spent on the app.

Students’ qualitative comments about changes that could be
made to the app were largely focused on the attractiveness and
availability of the meal logs. Student comments related to app
attractiveness included the following:

Making the app more user friendly, and allowing
answers to be saved, The overall view of the app, The
app itself might need some more polish, and The app
was not amazing, but it was not terrible. It could
definitely have a better, more attractive layout. It is
overall user-friendly but feels like it was made 15
years ago and could use some updating.
The other major area of concern was the lack of ability to have
continuous access to meal logs. One student commented as
follows:

I would have preferred access to my meal logs to just
keep track for myself without having to log them
elsewhere. It would also have helped me eliminate
any confusion I may have had about entering meals
with wrong times (frequently the AM and PM
confusion after submitting the log).

Table 4. User satisfaction and feedback on the appa.

Mean rating
Question

BEST-U 2.0
BEST-Ub 1.0

6.02
5.94
1. I enjoyed participating in this study

5.75
5.73
2. I felt comfortable using the app.

5.9
5.67
3. If I needed to seek help again, I would come back to your program.

5.37
5.40
4. The smartphone app was easy to use.

5.27
5.14
5. The amount of time I spent answering questions on the app was reasonable.

6
5.93
6. The amount of time I spent reading modules on the app was reasonable.

6.16
6.47
7. I was satisfied with the amount of coaching I received.

6.02
6.67
8. The coaching I received helped me deal more effectively with my problems.

6.12
6.47
9. If a friend were in need of a similar help, I would recommend they try BEST-U.

4.19
4.07
10. The smartphone app was attractive.

6.47
6.80
11. It was easy to schedule times to talk with my Coach.

5.61
6.14
12. I changed my eating behaviors and habits.

5.18
5.13
13. I improved my body image.

5.68
5.73
14. I was happy with the length of the program.

6.06
6.20
15. I learned new information about health, eating, and body image.

5.8
6.27
16. I am proud of the changes I made during the BEST-U program.

5.96
6.40
17. I plan to use the resources, information, and activities to keep moving toward my goals.

aAcceptability grand mean for BEST-U 1.0: 5.89; acceptability grand mean for BEST-U 2.0: 5.73.
bBEST-U: Building Healthy Eating and Self-Esteem Together for University Students.

JMIR Form Res 2023 | vol. 7 | e43504 | p. 18

Phase 3: Redesign

After the pilot study had concluded, the coaches participated in
a Coaches Workshop to discuss results and share concerns and
suggestions for the changes to be implemented in a second
version of BEST-U. Coaches reported that several participants
expressed interest in having continuous access to the information
from meal logs and daily surveys. However, because PiLR does
not easily allow these data to be saved within the app, coaches
decided to instead suggest that interested participants keep a
notebook with notes from modules, logs, and coaching sessions.
Coaches also commented about their own usability of the PiLR
data. With coaching sessions being brief, coaches explained
that it was difficult to efficiently discuss meal logs with
participants because the data were not neatly presentable and
were overwhelming for participants (and coaches) to view.
Coaches recommended the use of a PDF that compiled the data
into a user-friendly format so that it could be downloaded from
the Coaches’ Dashboard and viewed and discussed with
participants with ease. Thus, we worked with PiLR to build a
PDF to automatically integrate information from meal logs and
daily behavior surveys into an easy-to-read format that coaches
could download.

The coaches also raised concerns about a module that focused
on alcohol use and peer pressure at college parties as a trigger
for binge-eating episodes. We decided to remove the module
because the coaches noted that many of the participants reported
in the sessions that they did not drink alcohol, and nontraditional
students often reported that college “party culture” was not
relevant to their current problems. The coaches also noted that
several participants reported interpersonal issues that contributed
to the maintenance of unhealthy eating habits and poor body
image (eg, unhelpful comments from family or friends about
weight and shape), but they did not have the skills to address
these issues. Thus, we replaced the alcohol and peer pressure
module with an interpersonal skills module, which coaches
thought would be more universally applicable and is in line with
research on interpersonal dysfunction among people with EDs
[43,44].

In addition to replacing the alcohol and peer pressure module
with an interpersonal skills module, we made slight changes to
the content and ordering of other modules. For example, in the
initial version of BEST-U, a single coaching session was
dedicated to the discussion of both BCA and Mindtraps. Coaches
reported that there was too much content that week, and they
were routinely unable to cover all material in 1 session. To allow
more time for each of these complex topics, we split the content
into 2 separate sessions. The coaches reported that the
complexity of BCA was difficult to explain in a brief coaching
session, even with the inclusion of introductory information
provided in the app module. To address this concern, we created
and embedded 2 engaging videos in the BCA module that clearly
defined the rationale for BCA and provided an illustrative
example of how BCA can be used to change problematic eating
behaviors and body image concerns to allow participants to gain
an understanding of the skill before attending their coaching
session.

Coaches discussed the variability regarding the completion of
surveys in the app. Specifically, the coaches expressed concern
that the number of surveys participants were asked to complete
was potentially burdensome and could discourage participants
from engaging in the program. The team considered eliminating
the weight log and weekly survey to reduce the assessment
burden, but the surveys were ultimately kept to ensure that we
had ROM and because weight exposure is a core CBT-E
technique for EDs. Participants’access to the treatment modules
was extended to 6 months after discharge, which was better
aligned with their total time enrolled in the study.

Finally, in terms of app attractiveness, we had limited ability
to update the “look” of the app because the PiLR platform
functions similarly to web survey building tools, such as
Qualtrics, and the layout and format is subject to their overall
platform design. Although we added videos that our team felt
were highly attractive and additional images to the app to
improve the attractiveness, we were limited in our ability to
fully address this concern.

Phase 4: Further Pilot-Testing of Usability and
Acceptability

Compliance and Engagement

Survey compliance data were based on 48 participants who
completed the 11-week BEST-U 2.0 program and provided
feedback. Engagement was defined as the number of modules
submitted per week. Participants submitted 90.3% (607/672)
of the weekly modules, indicating high engagement with
BEST-U 2.0. Compliance with the Weekly Survey was 64.4%
(371/576), and approximately 0.03% (6/18185) of the data from
the submitted Weekly Surveys were missing. Missing Weekly
Surveys were largely owing to system errors within PiLR, which
led to a small number of surveys not being displayed on
participants’home screens. Most system errors occurred within
a 2-week period during which PiLR released a system update
on iOS. During this time, the participants who were impacted
were sent paper-based surveys. Compliance with the Weekly
Weight Log was 71%. (409/576). The Monthly Survey
compliance was 73% (70/96), and 0.32% (41/13003) data from
the submitted surveys were missing. Finally, participant
compliance with the Daily Behavior Survey, which assessed
engagement in ED behaviors each day was relatively low with
average compliance of 32.66% (1317/4032). In all submitted
daily behavior surveys, 8.12% (2052/25266) of data were
missing. Missing data from the weekly and monthly surveys
were due to occasional bad Wi-Fi connections, which led to
some responses not being recorded. Missing data in the daily
behavior surveys were due to participants not finishing the
survey or skipping the questions. Overall, compliance and
engagement were higher in BEST-U 2.0 compared with BEST-U
1.0.

App Usability

The participants completed an ad hoc survey to assess their
experiences using the BEST-U mHealth app and with their
coach. The participants reported their level of agreement on a
Likert scale ranging from 1 (“strongly disagree”) to 7 (“strongly
agree.”). Table 4 shows the average ratings from BEST-U 2.0

JMIR Form Res 2023 | vol. 7 | e43504 | p. 19

participants (right column) in comparison with BEST-U 1.0
participants (left column). Mean scores of ≥5 (“somewhat
agree”) were used as evidence for acceptability. Mean scores
of ≥6 (“agree”) were used as evidence for “high” acceptability.
BEST-U 2.0 had an acceptability grand mean of 5.73, indicating
that the treatment was viewed as acceptable. The results showed
that the highest-rated items reflected participants’ positive
experiences with their coach and the program as a whole. For
example, participants reported that they enjoyed participating
in the study and would recommend BEST-U to a friend who
was in need of similar help. Participants felt comfortable using
the app and thought that it was easy to use. Participants reported
that the amount of time spent reading modules and answering
questions within modules was appropriate. Importantly, the
participants were proud of the changes they made because of
the program and thought that their body image and eating
behaviors had improved; indeed, most participants planned to
use the information they learned in BEST-U 2.0 to in the future.
In terms of areas of relative weakness, similar to the initial pilot,
the participants’ lowest rating was for app attractiveness.

In terms of qualitative feedback, similar to BEST-U 1.0,
participants had positive comments about their experience with
their coach and the overall structure of the program (eg,
participants liked the combined app and coaching approach),
and some participants specifically mentioned benefiting from
the Mindtraps, BCA, and interpersonal effectiveness modules.
Areas for improvement were consistent with the feedback
reported in the quantitative survey and focused on (1) wanting
to have a back button or other means for viewing meal logs
once they were submitted and (2) improving the aesthetics of
the app. One participant noted as follows:

The clunkiness and aesthetics of the app could be
improved, but it was very functional...Being able to
review and revise past food entries would be helpful.
Sometimes I would get from page one to page two to
log a meal that occurred earlier in the day and have
realized I made a mistake and would have to start the
log over or submit another log. It also would have
been helpful to be able to see what I logged over time
so I could have reflected on patterns for things like
the BCA activity with that information because I did not always remember what I was feeling.

Discussion

Principal Findings

This paper describes the development, usability, and
acceptability of the BEST-U mHealth app, which is designed
to fill critical gaps in access to ED treatment on college
campuses. Consistent with the recommendations for mHealth
development [45], we used a 4-stage user-centered design
process. The four phases included (1) needs assessment, (2)
prototype development and initial evaluation in a pilot trial, (3)
redesign, and (4) further pilot-testing to assess the usability and
acceptability of the final version of the mHealth app. The aim
of this approach was to create, deliver, and refine content that
was acceptable, engaging, and efficacious for our end users.

The results from our provider-based survey indicated a high
demand for services but a lack of available ED treatment
resources for university students on our campus. These survey
findings led us to investigate the feasibility of creating and
implementing a new CBT-gsh mHealth app for university
students to address the high demand for services by using a
scalable tool with a relatively low provider burden. The BEST-U
mHealth prototype was an 11-week program that provided
interactive, weekly “modules” that focused on second and
third-wave cognitive behavioral skills. BEST-U was paired with
brief 25 to 30 minutes of weekly telehealth “coaching” sessions
provided by a trainee or licensed provider.

To increase inclusion and challenge stereotypes that lead to
stigma, we carefully considered age, weight, and race and ethnicity when we selected images and examples within the app
and attempted to address concerns that our team perceived as
common among university students. However, upon initial
pilot-testing, we found issues with one of the app modules that
therapists reported had low relevance to many of their client’s
experiences. Specifically, the coaches raised concerns with a
module that focused on alcohol use and peer pressure at parties
as a trigger for binge-eating episodes. We decided to remove
the module because coaches noted that many of our participants
reported that they did not drink alcohol, and several
nontraditional and graduate students reported that student “party
culture” was not relevant to their current problems. Coaches
also noted that several participants reported interpersonal issues
that contributed to the maintenance of unhealthy eating habits
and poor body image (eg, unhelpful comments from family or
friends about weight and shape), but they did not have the skills
to address these issues. Coaches expressed concerns about the
organization of the app content, in which 2 of the most complex
topics (Mindtraps and BCA) were covered in the same week,
which led to therapists not being able to cover all topics that
week. These issues were addressed in the redesign phase through
the removal, addition, and reorganization of content in BEST-U,
with the help of BEST-U therapists across 2 workshops. Finally,
one of the more complex topics, BCA, was challenging to fully
explain within the app, so we added 2 engaging videos to better
explain BCA to students using realistic examples.

The results indicated that the revised version of BEST-U was
highly acceptable and user-friendly. For example, participants
thought that the overall treatment length and amount of time
spent reading and answering questions in the app was highly
acceptable. Participants liked the overall structure of BEST-U
and particularly enjoyed the ability to briefly meet one-on-one
with their coach each week. In the open-ended qualitative survey
responses to the question, “What were the best things about the
BEST-U program?” the participants overwhelmingly indicated
that coaching was viewed as the most beneficial aspect of the
program. For example, 31 participants indicated that coaching
was a beneficial aspect of BEST-U; for example, one participant
indicated, Having a Coach to talk to and support me during this
experience was really valuable. Participants also felt that they
benefited from the skills taught through the app, particularly
the Mindtraps, BCA, and interpersonal effectiveness skills. In
all, 18 responses focused on benefits related to the skills taught
through the app; when asked, “What were the best things about

JMIR Form Res 2023 | vol. 7 | e43504 | p. 20

the BEST-U program?” one individual reported The modules
about how our thoughts affect our actions (Mind Traps,
Disruptors) and the weekly coaching. Finally, because of the
program, participants felt that they had improved their eating
habits and body image. A total of 5 responses explicitly
indicated improvements in body image, and 6 responses
explicitly indicated improvements in eating habits, suggesting
that BEST-U was perceived as providing a positive impact on
their body image.

Limitations

Our use of an mHealth app resulted in an intervention with
many strengths; however, there were also challenges during the
initial development and implementation of BEST-U. First,
although we conducted a careful literature review as part of our
needs assessment, we did not conduct a systematic review. Thus,
we did not track metrics such as search terms used, number of
articles accessed, or databases used in a systematic way. We
also did not conduct separate focus groups of students or collect
qualitative data on care providers’perceptions of needs in phase
1 testing. Second, in terms of our study design, although we
sent screens to all enrolled students, which increased our
representation of underrepresented students within the study,
the university as a whole had lower racial and ethnic diversity;
consequently, most participants identified as White and
cisgender women. However, the percentage of cisgender men
participating (13/87, 15%) was consistent with the overall
percentage of those with EDs who are male in our population.
In addition, the percentage of participants identifying as a
minoritized ethnicity (approximately 20/87, 23%) was lower
than the percentage of students at the university identifying as
a minoritized ethnicity (57%), indicating that work remains to
be done to effectively reach these populations. Although we
had more students in sexual or gender minority groups and more
males compared with many past CBT-gsh studies on EDs
[16,23], future studies are needed to expand and test the reach
of BEST-U beyond a single university and to a broader range
of diverse students. Third, we had a low enrollment rate relative
to the number of students we screened. This issue was due, in
part, to lower interest in participation at the beginning of the
pandemic when several eligible participants decided not to
participate because they were concerned about contracting
COVID-19 at the in-person medical evaluation appointment.
Toward the latter part of the project, we had a higher response
than anticipated, with many more students expressing interest
than we were able to serve, resulting in a staffing-driven
bottleneck in admitting students to the program. This increased
interest in participating may have been because of the sharp
increase in EDs among university students since the start of the
pandemic [46], which further increased students’ needs for ED
treatment.

Fourth, we experienced a small number of technical problems.
Our mHealth protocol required deviation from the standard use
of PiLR, the platform upon which BEST-U was built. For
example, we used longer assessment timeframes and data
collection periods than those used in standard ecological
momentary assessment (EMA) studies, which is the type of
study for which PiLR is designed. For example, a recent review
found that the average EMA study lasts for 7 days, with an

average of 6 assessments per day [47]. The users of our program
were instructed to log each meal and snack (recommended 3
meals and 2-3 snacks per day) for 11 weeks, in addition to a
daily ED behavior survey; thus, our assessment schedule was
equally intense on a daily level, yet longer than the typical study.
At the same time, in traditional CBT-E, clients are asked to
maintain a daily paper-and-pencil log for 16-21 weeks. These
daily logs include foods eaten, whether an ED behavior occurred
(eg, purging or binge eating), and any notes or observations the
client may have. Thus, although the standard EMA period is
much shorter than that in this study, the record for traditional
CBT-E is longer and more burdensome. Our unique use of PiLR
resulted in a small number of surveys not being delivered to the
participants’ BEST-U app during the intervention. When
technical issues arose, PiLR computer engineers thoroughly
investigated and troubleshooted the issue, which required a
temporary halt in access to the app. However, because the
participants were actively engaged in our treatment when these
issues arose, we were unable to pause the study, which limited
the testing capabilities of the computer engineers. When the
survey delivery malfunctioned, we emailed PDF versions of
the weekly or monthly surveys to the participants. Completed
surveys were emailed back to us and hand-scored by study team
members. Eleven weekly or monthly surveys were completed
in PDF format owing to the survey delivery malfunction.

Fifth, despite our redesign efforts, there were certain limitations
of the BEST-U app. For example, the PiLR platform does not
allow users to review submitted information, and once a user
advances the content of the app, they cannot return to the earlier
screens. The app is designed to immediately transfer all data
from the app to PiLR’s HIPAA-compliant server to ensure the
privacy of identifiable and personal information, particularly
in the case of the user’s phone being stolen or accessed by
another individual without consent. However, in certain
situations, it could be useful for clients to be able to review
previous logs on their mobile devices to identify patterns and
changes in their moods and behaviors over time. For example,
clients reported that they would like to have had the ability to
access the meal logs submitted through the app. Providing
clients with the web interface data in a session was not feasible
because the data required understanding and skill of reading
raw data from a relatively large and complex data set. Even
Coaches, all of whom had training in data analysis and survey
design, reported difficulty in quickly reading and interpreting
the raw data from the server. We attempted to address issues
related to the coach’s concerns about the readability of data by
creating automated PDF weekly summary sheets for each log
type. These summary sheets collated information from the raw
data and provided an easier-to-read overview of data submitted
through logs that could be viewed by coaches and shared with
clients in a session. However, flaws in the summary sheets (eg,
meal log information was not listed in chronological order) must
be further improved in future versions of BEST-U for optimal
clarity and usability.

Sixth, participants in BEST-U 1.0 reported concerns about app
attractiveness. Although we added images and videos to
BEST-U 2.0, we were limited in our ability to improve the
attractiveness of the app because the PiLR platform has settings

JMIR Form Res 2023 | vol. 7 | e43504 | p. 21

that limit the fonts, colors, and format options. Participants in
BEST-U 2.0 indicated that app attractiveness was still an area
of improvement. Finally, our team used a HIPAA-secure video
platform, Healthie, to schedule meetings, conduct video calls,
and document clinical notes. Ideally, we would have been able
to conduct therapy within the BEST-U app, but embedding
video call capabilities within the app was beyond our scope of
funding and expertise. However, the advantage of having notes
and video calls outside of BEST-U is that therapists in future
research will have a broad range of options and can conduct
coaching sessions on another platform or in person.

Strengths

There are a number of strengths of BEST-U. First, we selected
images and examples in an inclusive manner to encompass
multiple types of students who are not traditionally considered
in the development of treatment of EDs by depicting individuals
with minoritized races and ethnicities and individuals with a
range of body sizes and shapes. Second, individuals with EDs
are often unable to identify whether their behavior is “serious”
enough to warrant professional treatment. This distorted
perception of need represents a significant barrier to treatment
seeking [48]. To reduce this barrier, the term coach was used
throughout the BEST-U app to refer to the clinician because
coach had a more benign connotation than therapist and
empowered the student as the one in charge of their progress.
We conducted a survey of BEST-U providers, and none of them
had concerns with the use of the term coach because they viewed
it as reducing barriers to accessing care.

Third, the BEST-U intervention offered a great deal of autonomy
and flexibility. Participants were able to complete their work
on their own through the mHealth app, and the coaching sessions
were offered via telehealth. Participants could engage in the
intervention wherever they had internet access, which was
helpful considering the variable schedules of the students.
Because of this built-in flexibility, BEST-U was well suited to
accommodate the numerous and frequent changes brought about
by the COVID-19 pandemic (eg, university policies, living

arrangements of students, and mandatory isolation following
COVID-19 exposure). Fourth, BEST-U was able to send
automated reminders to participants to complete meal logs and
daily behavior logs throughout the day. Automated reminders
were helpful in prompting clients to complete various logs,
which may have improved treatment compliance. Fifth, the
coaches had digital access to module completion, meal, and
behavior logs through the web-based dashboard. This afforded
the clinician the opportunity to more readily identify trends in
the patient’s symptoms and treatment progress. Having digital
access to this information before the session allowed coaches
to plan appropriately, maximize their time with the patient, and
reduce the time to enter and monitor data. Access to client data
before the coaching sessions allowed a personalized approach
that likely supported client engagement and allowed BEST-U
skills to be practiced with personally relevant situations and
concerns. Finally, the interactive nature of the app may have
facilitated material retention, given that hands-on, active learning
improves both short- and long-term memory than the learning
methods that only include reading and lectures [49].

Conclusions

University students are a group that is at risk of developing EDs,
yet there are several barriers to accessing quality and
evidence-based treatment. Digital interventions can address
some of the barriers to treatment by facilitating access through
providing flexible scheduling and eliminating transportation
needs. However, mHealth remains an underused mental health
intervention, particularly for EDs. Our guided self-help cognitive
behavioral intervention, BEST-U, was designed to fill this
intervention gap by offering a brief, scalable mHealth
intervention for a diverse range of college students. Using an
mHealth-supported intervention, which is a digital format that
is familiar to a diverse range of college students [50], providing
a private and confidential mechanism to record and store reports
of thoughts and behaviors, shortening treatment length and
session times, and incorporating interactive components,
CBT-gsh through BEST-U is a promising new intervention with
the potential to target ED symptoms in college students at scale.