Take on transplant: human-centered design of a patient
education tool to facilitate informed discussions about
lung transplant among people with cystic fibrosis

Andrea L. Hartzler
1, Lauren E. Bartlett2, Mara R. Hobler2, Nick Reid1,
Joseph B. Pryor3, Siddhartha G. Kapnadak2, Donna L. Berry4, William B. Lober1,4,
Christopher H. Goss2, Kathleen J. Ramos2; for the Take on Transplant Study Group*

PHASE 1: NEEDS ASSESSMENT

Methods
The goal of phase 1 was to understand user needs and context
(HCD step 1). We conducted interviews with CF patients and sur-
veys of CF physicians to answer RQ1: What are the LTx informa-
tion needs of people with CF?

Interviews with CF patients (June 2019–September 2020) exam-
ined knowledge about LTx and perspectives on communication
about LTx with CF providers among transplanted and non-
transplanted
individuals.
Non-transplanted
individuals
were
sampled purposively for representation across varied lung function
levels (FEV1) with balance across genders and were recruited from
the University of Washington Adult CF Center. Transplanted indi-
viduals were identified based on time since LTx and to incorporate
diverse experiences with the transplant process (eg, variety of
comorbidities and complications). Transplanted individuals were
recruited from the University of Washington and the CFF Commun-
ity Voice.
The semi-structured interviews lasted 60–90 min, were recorded,
and transcribed. Interviews and analyses took place in 2 steps. First,
we analyzed transcripts from interviews with non-transplanted indi-
viduals using qualitative content analysis to inductively identify
emergent themes25,26 reflecting patients’ LTx information needs.
Data were collected until thematic saturation was achieved. Four
coders (KJR, MRH, PJS, and LEB) blind-coded 6 transcripts in
Dedoose (dedoose.com) as interviews were being conducted. Codes
were discussed during investigator meetings to achieve consensus on
a codebook of topics reflecting information needs. Thirteen tran-
scripts were then co-reviewed by 2 coders (MRH and LEB) to ensure
reliability of the coding and achieved agreement >85%.27 MRH
coded the remaining transcripts. The coders met weekly to discuss
code consistency, thematic patterns, preliminary findings, and exem-
plar quotes on topics that reflect patients’ information needs. Sec-
ond, we conducted interviews with transplanted individuals after
interviews with non-transplanted patients were completed. Drawing
upon topics that emerged from non-transplant interviews, 3 coders
(KJR, MRH, and LEB) applied the codebook deductively to tran-
scripts with transplanted individuals using directed content analy-
sis.25 We contrasted the information needs between groups by
comparing the prevalence of coding topics.
Surveys with CF physicians (May–June 2020) examined experi-
ences discussing LTx with CF patients and important topics to dis-
cuss in those conversations. We summarized
responses with
descriptive statistics, including prioritizing topics most relevant to
physicians for LTx discussions with patients.

Results
Fifty-five patients (35 non-transplanted and 20 transplanted partici-
pants) completed interviews (Table 1). The 105 physician survey
respondents (10% response rate) were 58% male with a broad range
of years in practice from both adult (44%) and pediatric (49%) cen-
ters (see Supplementary Material S1).

Supplementary Material S1 lists physician survey results regard-
ing their experiences discussing LTx with CF patients and topics pri-
oritized for LTx discussions with patients. All physicians reported
having discussed LTx with a patient and were willing to do so. The
majority (92%) reported that having discussions long before the
actual need for transplant referral would be useful. The majority
reported feeling moderately or very prepared to initiate a LTx con-
versation (97%), respond to LTx questions, (92%) and engage in
shared LTx decision-making (90%) with patients. The majority
were moderately or very interested (89%) in using an educational
tool for patients designed to facilitate LTx discussions in their clini-
cal practice. Physicians’ highest priority topics (ie, top 3) for LTx
discussions were early referral (67%), barriers/contraindications to
LTx that impact eligibility (58%), and adherence to therapy (51%).

Supplementary Material S2 lists information needs that surfaced
from patient interviews. Whereas transplanted individuals focused
more on topics related to the LTx procedure and recovery (eg, surgery,
recovery, post-LTx survival, quality of life), non-transplanted individ-
uals also discussed preparing for LTx (eg, LTx eligibility, evaluation,
waitlist). Overall, patient participants expressed needs spanning a
spectrum of clinical information about LTx (eg, surgery, recovery, sur-
vival, quality of life). When asked “What three things would you want
to know from a CF clinician about lung transplant”, the top 3 needs
among non-transplanted participants were LTx eligibility, recovery
from surgery, and post-transplant survival. For example, one non-
transplanted participant wanted to better understand their LTx eligi-
bility given their risks and prognosis: “Right now I have no idea
when, what triggers that kind of conversation. So just knowing some
different thresholds that you would need to cross, sort of, to enter in
the conversation, might be good to know ahead of time.”
As a major component of preparing for LTx, patient participants
also expressed the need for experiential information based on expe-
riences of LTx recipients. Many transplanted participants reflected
on the value of first-hand experience as they embarked on the proc-
ess. Desired information included aspects of the day-to-day lived
experience ranging from preparing for and recovering from surgery,
to finances, moving, work/school, and caregiver support. For exam-
ple, one non-transplanted participant inquired: “What can I expect,
and what is it like after? And how is my life going to go? Anything I
might need to prepare for that.”

Finally, transplanted participants described a range of informa-
tion sources they found useful (eg, clinicians, social workers, Inter-
net, peers). Some described tracking questions and answers from
different sources, such as a transplant Facebook group. Participants
expressed varied preferences for learning about treatment options
and discussing LTx with providers. Many wanted to moderate infor-
mation by controlling how much they received and when, based on
the urgency of the LTx discussion.
Findings revealed 3 key themes. First, people with CF need a
range of clinical information throughout the LTx journey that could
be supported through a “Resource Library” of didactic education
about LTx. Second, they need experiential information from other
patients that could be supported through “CF Stories” about experi-
ences of LTx recipients as well as those who chose to forgo LTx.
Third, they need information tailored to their current situation that
could be supported by a “My CF Stage” self-assessment that recom-
mends content specific to a patient’s LTx knowledge, readiness, and
disease severity.

PHASE 2: DESIGN GROUPS

Methods
The goal of phase 2 was to specify user requirements (HCD step 2).
We conducted design groups with transplanted people with CF who
could reflect upon their LTx experience as they responded to wire-

frame prototypes. This work answered RQ2: What design require-
ments do people with CF recommend for patient education tools for
LTx?
Wireframe prototypes: Based on the needs assessment, we cre-
ated low-fidelity wireframe prototypes with different design features
to support provision of didactic content through a Resource Library,
experiential information through narrative patient stories, and tail-
ored information through a knowledge assessment. We explored
design features for tracking “My Questions” that could prompt LTx
conversations with providers. Because the timing of LTx decisions
includes assessment of one’s prognosis, we included a “Risk Calcu-
lator” based on a 3-year prognostic model28,29 to address patients’
needs for clinical information about prognosis and LTx eligibility.
Design groups (July–September 2020) included a series of 3 2-h
sessions. We conducted 2 participant tracks of 3 design group ses-
sions in parallel. Participants in each track completed all 3 sessions.
Each session included 4–7 participants, was moderated remotely
through Zoom by an experienced lead (AH) and research team
members who took notes (KJR, MRH, and LEB), and were recorded
for review and synthesis through qualitative memoing.27 This sam-
ple size is consistent with similar group design methods, such as co-
design groups and workshops.30–33 We presented participants with
wireframes grounded in user personas of fictitious CF patients—
“Jack” who is not yet considering LTx and “Jill,” who is sicker and
approaching LTx. Group discussion elicited participant feedback on
design features. Supplementary Material S3 shows personas and
sample wireframes.
After each session, participants rated the wireframes by complet-
ing the System Usability Scale (SUS).34 SUS produces an Overall
score and subscale scores for Usability and Learnability. The instru-
ment has excellent reliability (r ¼ 0.9) and validity (r ¼ 0.82).35,36

Scores range from 1 to 100 (higher scores are better), which we sum-
marized with descriptive statistics. After each session team members
(AH, KJR, MRH, and LEB) debriefed to review notes for qualitative
memoing37 through which we summarized design feedback and cor-
responding design improvements in an executive summary of results
Between parallel sessions 1, 2, and 3, we compared and synthesized
design feedback across participant tracks, and then iteratively
refined the wireframes for subsequent sessions. We used SUS results
to benchmark design improvements across the 3 parallel sessions (6
sessions in total), which established user requirements for TOT.

Results
Across the 2 tracks, 14 transplanted individuals completed the series
of 3 design group sessions (Table 1). The mean time since LTx was
1.7 years (SD ¼ 1.8).
In design group session 1, wireframes conveyed the overall TOT
design concept which included a knowledge assessment survey that
guided the user to 4 modules: Resource Library, CF Stories, My
Questions, and Risk Calculator. Participants expressed enthusiasm
for the design concept—they verified the importance of didactic
resources and narrative patient stories from “someone like me.”
However, one African American participant reported not seeing
themself represented in the stories, which prompted us to create
more inclusive personas (revised names/images) and solicit more
diverse narratives. Participants recommended adding resources for
caregivers and expressed interest in frequently asked questions
(FAQ) rather than tracking questions. The risk calculator alarmed
several
participants
who
expressed
concern
about
a
non-
transplanted patient reading that they may be at a “high risk” for

dying or undergoing LTx in the next 3 years without a clinician
present to explain the nuances.
In design group session 2, we revised the wireframes to reflect
this feedback by replacing the Risk Calculator with “My CF Stage”
that included questions about disease severity and generated a tail-
ored report indicating “Lung transplant discussion urgency” and
content recommendations. We replaced My Questions with FAQs
answered by patients and clinicians. Although participants found
the revisions favorable, tension surfaced between preferences for the
“siloed” design (content separated into modules) versus a more inte-
grated user experience that integrated Resource Library content
with CF Stories and FAQ. Other feedback focused on health literacy
and accessibility, such as clearly defining medical terms (eg, FEV1,
CFTR).
In design group session 3, we revised the wireframes to explore
preferences for the siloed design versus an alternative “integrated”
design that lists related content of all 3 types (didactic education,
patient stories, FAQ) on the same page. Participants were split,
which we investigated further during iterative user testing. Despite
these mixed preferences, consensus was reached on the core design
features for TOT: didactic education (“Resource Library”), patient
narratives (“CF Stories”), “FAQ” answered by patients and clini-
cians, and tailored content recommended based on a self-assessment
(“My CF Stage”). Figure 2 shows improved SUS scores with design
refinements across sessions (Multimedia 3 shows SUS scores by
track). These findings established user requirements for TOT
(Table 2), which we used to create interactive prototypes for user
testing.

PHASE 3: ITERATIVE PROTOTYPING AND USER
TESTING

The goal of phase 3 was to generate design solutions (HCD step 3)
and then evaluate those designs against user requirements (HCD
step 4). We built, evaluated, and refined high-fidelity interactive
prototypes through iterative prototyping and user testing, including
lab-based usability testing (3.1) and 2-week field testing (3.2). Sam-
ple sizes for user testing were based on HCD guidelines that suggest
at least 8 representative users for formal user evaluations22 and best
practice guidelines that suggest 10 6 2 participants identify the
majority of usability problems.38 Additional participants were
recruited to achieve thematic saturation regarding qualitative usabil-

ity feedback. This work addressed RQ3. How can we iteratively
refine TOT to meet user requirements?

Usability testing
Usability testing (December 2020–March 2021) investigated useful
profile attributes of CF Stories (Study A) and usable architectural
layouts for TOT (Study B). This work answered RQ 3.1 What
design features do people with CF find most useful and usable?

Study A: Useful CF stories profile attributes
Because of user interest in finding stories about “someone like me”,
we created a limited version of the interactive TOT prototype that
presented only CF Stories (Figure 3). We adapted stories as narratives
presented in patients’ own words from interviews. CF Stories dis-
played in a standard format detailing experiences during “pre-trans-
plant and evaluation,” “the call, the transplant, and the recovery” (ie,
peri-transplant), “post-transplant,” and “My take on transplant”
offering the patient’s lessons learned. Stories of individuals who opted
to forgo Ltx (“not transplanted”) were inherently limited to pre-
transplant and evaluation experiences. Each story included a profile
with photo, first name, content tags, “story highlights,” and the fol-
lowing attributes: gender, age at transplant (or at transplant evalua-
tion for those not transplanted), FEV1 at transplant (or at transplant
evaluation for those not transplanted), current FEV1, CFTR genotype,
and CFTR modulator status at transplant. Study A investigated which
attributes participants found most useful.

Methods
We recruited non-transplanted participants for individual Zoom ses-
sions lasting 60–90 min in which they explored CF Stories. Partici-
pants were asked to scroll through profiles to select stories. After
reading, participants described reasons for story selection and what
they learned to help prepare for LTx discussions. We summarized
sessions with field notes to describe the number of stories selected,
reasons for selection including attributes of interest, and what they
found helpful about the stories. We recruited and conducted sessions
until reaching saturation in qualitative themes regarding attributes
of interest and helpful features of CF Stories.

Results
Twenty-five non-transplanted participants (Table 1) selected and
read an average of 3.2 CF Stories (SD ¼ 0.91, range ¼ 2–6). Several
participants appreciated the granular detail of stories. Some partici-
pants reflected on the helpfulness of narrative suggestions and depic-
tions of the “whole process.” However, others found stories less
helpful when content was unrelated to their personal experiences or
when they “already knew” the information. Reflecting those with
milder lung disease (further out from needing LTx), many com-
mented that it “made sense” to consider what the process would be
like if they were in a “similar situation.” One participant empha-
sized “If I ever got closer [to transplant] I for sure would read more
[CF Stories]—Knowledge is power.” Participants appreciated stories
that highlighted LTx conversations with loved ones, and found sto-
ries provided peer support.
Participants were particularly drawn to CF Stories from peers in
similar situations, highlighting the importance of profile attributes.
The profile attributes that influenced participant story selection
most included: age at transplant, gender, FEV1, CFTR genotype,
and CFTR modulator status. Some participants used photos to
determine whether the people in the CF Stories were “like them.”
Most participants wondered whether transplant recipients in the sto-
ries had access to newer, highly effective CFTR modulators. Based
on these findings, we revised the TOT prototype to include the pro-
file attributes participants found most useful.

Study B: Usable architectural layouts
The mixed findings from design groups on siloed (content types sep-
arated into sections) versus integrated (related content types inter-
woven) designs led us to more deeply investigate architectural
layouts. The design group findings indicated what content and fea-
tures to include in a web-based educational tool, but did not inform
how the content and features should be laid out together to assist an
individual in preparing for LTx discussions. To further inform the
design of the tool, we conducted usability study B to explore alterna-
tive architectural layouts. An unanswered question was how much
agency a person living with CF might prefer when using this tool.
Some interactive tools adopt “Author-Driven” designs that guide
readers in a linear path through an integrated set of recommended
content, whereas “Reader-Driven” designs present content in full to
allow readers to choose their own path through different types of
content.39 This mirrors how “system-driven” and “user-driven”
designs can be distinguished in personal informatics applications.40

After integrating improvements from Study A (profile attributes),
we generated 2 versions of the interactive TOT prototype (Figure 4):
The “Author-Driven” prototype recommends an integrated list of
tailored content based on responses to “My CF Stage” self-
assessment, and the “Reader-Driven” prototype siloes content by
type for participants to freely browse. Study B investigated which
layout participants found most usable.

Methods
We recruited non-transplanted participants for user testing to com-
pare prototypes through Zoom. During each 90-min recorded ses-
sion, participants interacted with both the Author-Driven and
Reader-Driven prototypes to complete scenario-based usability
tasks. For each task, the participant was given up to 15 min to
search for information they would find useful while playing the role
of 2 user personas: “Marco” (healthier patient) and “Tamika”
(sicker patient) (Supplementary Material S3). Afterward, they rated

SUS for each prototype and described their preferred architectural
layout in an exit interview. We reviewed usability tasks from record-
ings to determine which content types were viewed (Resource
Library, CF Stories, FAQ) in each prototype. We compared SUS
scores between prototypes with paired t-tests. We summarized quali-
tative comments to help explain SUS scores. We recruited and con-
ducted sessions until reaching saturation in qualitative themes
regarding preferred architectural layouts.

Results
Fourteen non-transplanted participants completed Study B (Table 1).
Participants first viewed more varied content types with the Reader-
Driven prototype (Table 3) than the Author-Driven prototype. The
Reader-Driven prototype led to higher overall SUS (90 vs 82,
P ¼ .001) and usability sub scores (88 vs 77, P ¼ .001), while learn-
ability was equally high (Table 3). During exit interviews, partici-
pants reported wanting greater control over finding information
about LTx. Although most participants found the tailored content
recommended by the Author-Driven prototype useful as a starting
point, they also found that prototype overly restrictive. They
expressed concern about missing “hidden gems” of potential inter-
est. Many participants expressed frustration with didactic and expe-
riential information shown together, and instead wanted to focus on
either finding “facts” or experiences. Based on these findings, we
developed the TOT website for field testing (Figure 5). The website
includes the “My CF Stage” feature of the Author-Driven prototype
to recommend content on a personalized home page, while main-

taining access to all content through the siloed design of the Reader-
Driven prototype.

Field testing
Field testing (July–September 2021) evaluated the feasibility of using
TOT over 2 weeks. This work addressed RQ 3.2 What is the feasi-
bility of using TOT?

Methods
We recruited non-transplanted individuals for field testing to assess
the feasibility of methods and explore website use and properties of
outcomes measures. Participants completed a baseline survey includ-
ing demographics and 3 survey instruments: (1) 10-item Decisional
Conflict Scale (reliability 0.81; validity 0.78–0.92),41,42 (2) 14-item
investigator-designed
LTx
knowledge
assessment,
and
(3)
investigator-designed Likert rating of preparedness for LTx discus-
sions with one’s CF provider from 0 “Don’t know” to 4 “Very pre-
pared.” Supplementary Material S4 provides the investigator-
designed instruments. The knowledge assessment included 14
confidence-weighted True/False statements,43 with the following
response options that were scored for a maximum sum of 28 points
and a minimum score of 28: “I am sure this statement is true.”(þ2
points), “I think the statement is true, but I am unsure.” (þ1 point),
“I think the statement is false, but I am unsure.” (1 point), “I am
sure this statement is false.” (2 points), and “I don’t know” (0
points). The 8 items with a false statement were reverse scored (eg,
“I am sure this statement is true.” (-2 points)).

After introducing participants to TOT, we asked participants to
use the website as desired for 2 weeks, during which we tracked site
interactions in usage logs. From usage logs we calculated time spent

interacting with CF Stories, Resource Library, and FAQ. After 2
weeks, participants completed a follow-up survey to rate TOT with
SUS,34 Feasibility Intervention Measure (FIM),44 and Acceptability

Intervention Measure (AIM).44 We summarized survey data with
descriptive statistics. Our primary outcome was feasibility as
assessed by time spent with the website, FIM, AIM, and qualitative
feedback. To explore preliminary efficacy of TOT, we re-assessed
decisional conflict, LTx knowledge, and preparedness for pre-post
comparison with paired t-tests.

Results
Nine non-transplanted participants completed field testing (Table 1).
They spent an average of 4.0 h (SD ¼ 2.5 h, range ¼ 0.6–7.5 h) using
TOT over 2 weeks. Most time was spent interacting with CF Stories
(M ¼ 1.9 h, SD ¼ 1.4 h), followed by Resource Library (M ¼ 0.8 h,
SD ¼ 0.7 h), and FAQ (M ¼ 0.4 h, SD ¼ 0.4 h). Table 4 shows out-
come measures. Overall SUS ratings were high, corresponding with
the highest possible rating of “Best imaginable.”34 FIM and AIM
ratings were also high. There was a significant 2-week improvement
in decisional conflict (36.7 vs 9.4, P ¼ .008), LTx knowledge (10.2
vs 15.3, P ¼ .034), and preparedness for LTx discussions (2.9 vs 3.8,
P ¼ .026).

DISCUSSION

To address gaps in educational resources promoting a deliberative
approach to LTx shared decision-making, as recommended in CFF
guidelines,7,15,16 we employed HCD with CF patients and physi-
cians to develop TOT. Needs assessment identified the value of clini-
cal, experiential, and tailored information based on disease severity.
Design groups established design requirements to meet those needs
through a Resource Library, CF Stories, FAQ, and recommended
content based on My CF Stage. Iterative user testing optimized the
design of CF Stories and architectural layout, and then demon-
strated feasibility of TOT use over 2 weeks. Benchmark improve-
ments in usability were shown throughout the HCD process. Field
testing showed potential to reduce decisional conflict, improve LTx
knowledge, and prepare patients for LTx discussions with care
teams.
Shared decision-making should start well before point of care
consultations, a time when many one-time decision aids are deliv-
ered. Informatics support for patient deliberation20 has received
comparably less attention. Well-designed educational tools should
support deliberation over time by improving knowledge and reduc-
ing decisional conflict as patients’ needs evolve while preparing for
shared decision-making. Our findings identify content domains and

design features to help patients learn about LTx and prepare for
LTx conversations. The importance of tools meeting a breadth of
interests should also be recognized, which was demonstrated by var-
ied preferences for Reader-Driven and Author-Driven layouts. This
variation is intuitive given the varied disease severity in CF, where
LTx may be emergent for some, while for others LTx remains years
away. Other factors may influence preferences (eg, health literacy,
learning styles, coping mechanisms) and thus flexibility of educa-
tional tools is critical. In TOT, we retained design features of both
layouts for flexibility to meet needs across the illness trajectory,
while giving the user control over the amount of LTx information to
which they are exposed (eg, showing “highlights” from CF Stories
as a preview of the content).
In addition to demonstrating informatics opportunities for
patient deliberation in the context of shared decision-making, our
findings expand research on peer support for patients with rare con-
ditions.45 Findings demonstrate the importance of experiential sto-
ries in helping patients engage in healthcare, as was shown to have a
pivotal role in other conditions like cancer.46 Combining clinical
didactics with experiential narratives meets a spectrum of informa-
tion needs,47 which may be valuable for CF in which few educa-
tional resources exist and access to peer support is limited.45

Offering diverse narrative stories in TOT, indexed by profiles that
aid users in locating relevant peer support,48,49 could improve
patient engagement.43 Diverse representation surfaced not only in
finding relatable CF Stories, but also in personas to engage research
participants. This insight echoes findings of disparities in shared
decision-making experiences among CF patients that call for tail-
ored interventions.50 Such strategies to improve diversity, equity
and inclusion in biomedical informatics research and practice are
critical.51

Although we engaged adults from varied socioeconomic back-
grounds, our sample lacked racial and ethnic diversity. The preva-
lence of CF is highest in White non-Hispanic individuals,52 yet CF is
present in other groups who experience treatment disparities and
worse outcomes.53,54 Inclusion of diverse participants in future
research is critical for improving equity. We prioritized the voices of
participants from underrepresented groups, which led us to develop
more inclusive study materials (personas) and content. For example,
40% of CF stories were contributed by patients on Medicaid.
Although the results from field testing demonstrate feasibility, the
sample size was too small to discern generalizable outcomes on pre-
liminary efficacy. Despite these limitations, our iterative stakeholder
engagement across different stages of disease led to design refine-
ments that demonstrated improved usability through SUS bench-
marks. Future research should further investigate inclusive design
affordances that promote TOT engagement among diverse CF
patients and caregivers, and engage providers on fitting TOT into
clinical workflows.

CONCLUSION

This project describes the use of HCD for a patient education tool to
help CF patients prepare for LTx discussions with their care team.
Findings provide design guidance for educational tools that meet the
diverse and evolving information needs of patients across the illness
trajectory, which could translate beyond the context of CF and LTx.
Informative profiles help patients select experiential stories for rele-
vant peer support. Combining affordances of Author-Driven and
Reader-Driven architectures offers users both guidance and control
to meet diverse, evolving information needs. These design contribu-

tions fill a gap in informatics support for the process of patient
deliberation as a critical foundation for shared decision-making.