ALOHA: developing an interactive graph-
based visualization for dietary supplement
knowledge graph through user-centered
design

Xing He1†, Rui Zhang2†, Rubina Rizvi2, Jake Vasilakes2, Xi Yang1, Yi Guo1,3, Zhe He4, Mattia Prosperi5, Jinhai Huo6,3,
Jordan Alpert7,3 and Jiang Bian1,3*

Methods
Data sources
Dietary supplements, often defined as a category of food,
are widely consumed in people’s daily life, despite the
limited knowledge around their safety and efficacy as
well as the lacking of any well-established regulatory
policies, unlike their drug counterparts [23]. There is an

urgent need for a well-integrated, evidence-based DS
knowledge base that can facilitate dissemination of sci-
entific knowledge around DS use. The iDISK was cre-
ated as a standardized source of DS and DS related
safety information (with a focus on drug-supplement in-
teractions [DSIs]) to help clinicians, researchers, and
consumers make informed decisions about DS use. The
data in iDISK are standardized in an ontological struc-
ture consisting of three main parts: concepts related to
DSs, relationships between these concepts, and the attri-
butes of these concepts and relationships. The current
version of iDISK focuses on information around individ-
ual DS ingredients and their relationships with 4 other
concept categories: 1) drugs or herbs with which the DS
ingredients will interact (e.g., “Melatonin interacts with
Nifedipine”), 2) diseases or conditions on which the DS
ingredients will affect (e.g., “Melatonin is effective for in-
somnia or sleeplessness”), 3) signs/symptoms through
which DS ingredients manifest their adverse reactions
(e.g., “Melatonin has adverse effects of tachycardia or in-
crease heart rate”); and 4) DS products that contain the
DS ingredients (e.g., “Sleepaid contains the Melatonin”).

Development of ALOHA following a user-centered design
process
The main goal of ALOHA is to facilitate the target users
of iDISK to find and consume DS information, especially
safety information associated with DS ingredients. UX is
one of the most critical factors to be considered. Thus,
we employed a UCD process in developing ALOHA. As
shown in Fig. 1, our design and development process of
ALOHA can be divided into 5 steps: 1) an initial hypoth-
esis making process through summarizing existing re-
search; 2) analysis of the needs and requirements of the
intended end-users; 3) a prototype design with the re-
quired functionalities and related visualizations; 4) a work-
ing prototype development; and 5) usability assessments
and collection of user feedback. The last four steps: ana-
lysis, design, prototype, and user evaluation should be
conducted iteratively.

Hypothesis making
A project following UCD principles should begin with a
hypothesis that has come from stakeholders and was
informed by existing literature. Based on our prior
work on visualizing social networks [27], discussions
with various domain experts including clinicians, phar-
macists, DS researchers, ontologists and experts on
semantic web knowledge base/graph, as well as our re-
view of existing literature, we hypothesized that a
graph-based visualization would be an effective way for
end-users to explore, perceive, and reason over the
graph-structured knowledge presented in iDISK.

Analysis of the needs and requirements
In our previous work [28], which was the first design it-
eration, we gathered a list of potential DS relevant ques-
tions that would interest the intended end users from
relevant Yahoo Answers! (i.e., a social question and an-
swer system) posts (e.g., searching for DS products to
remedy specific conditions and questions on potential
safety issues of the DS products). Based on these con-
sumer questions, we identified an initial collection of
intended end users’ needs and requirements. In the sec-
ond and third design iteration, we analyzed the feedback
collected from previous iteration’s usability assess-
ment session and updated the needs and require-
ments (e.g., adding additional functionalities to help
end-users explore product-level information such as
“What ingredients does product X contain?”).

Design
In the first design iteration, we reviewed existing literature
on visualization approaches in presenting ontologically-
structured data and determined that graph−/ network-
based visualizations have been widely used and proven
useful. We have also identified a number of existing
graph-based visualization frameworks such as D3.js [29]
and Sigma.js [30] as well as those that are embedded in
state-of-the-art graph databases (e.g., Neo4j [31] and
GraphDB [32]). We then sketched the initial features
desired by the intended end-users and developed the func-
tional requirements based on the needs and requirements.
In the following two design iterations, based on user
feedback from the usability assessment sessions, we rede-
signed or refined existing features (e.g., removed unneces-
sary information that clogged user attentions such as the

UMLS semantic type of DS ingredients) as well as added a
number of new features (e.g., added “Zoom and Filters” to
help user focus on the information that is more important
to the specific user). One key design principle that we
consistently followed throughout our UCD iterations is
that the user interface (UI) should be clean and simple yet
provide all the necessary functionalities. When conflicts
arose between the two (clean vs. comprehensive), we
chose a simpler design that makes the UI clean.

Application
As depicted in Fig. 2, ALOHA includes three components:

1) A Neo4j graph database that can store ontologically-
structured knowledge and execute semantic queries.
We used Neo4j as the graph database for ALOHA.
Data in iDISK are in UMLS RRF format that cannot
be imported into Neo4j directly. Thus, we first
transformed the RRF formatted data into comma-
separated values (CSV) format and then imported
into a Neo4j database via Cypher [33]—a graph query
language designed specifically for Neo4j.
2) A Flask-based Python backend with Representational
State Transfer-ful (RESTful) application programming
interfaces (APIs). We used the Flask framework [34],
a popular web application framework in Python,
as the backend framework. We followed the best
practices in developing web applications and
provided RESTful—an architectural style for
designing web services—API endpoints to
connect the frontend UI with the backend
graph-based data services through the Neo4j
Python driver [35].

Fig. 1 An iterative user-centered design process for developing ALOHA

3) A web frontend built with the popular Angular web
application framework with d3.js-powered
interactive visualizations. We used Angular [36]
(commonly referred to as “Angular 2+” or “Angular
v2 and above”)—a TypeScript-based [37] open-
source front-end web application framework for
rapid application development combined with d3.js-
based interactive graph visualizations. We chose a
force-directed graph drawing algorithm to provide an
aesthetically-pleasing visualization of the information
in iDISK. A force-directed layout uses a physics-
based simulator for positioning visual elements. In a
force-directed graph layout, there are two types of
forces: a repulsive charge force and a pseudo-gravity
force. Forces can be set up between nodes, so that 1)
all nodes repel one another; 2) nodes are attracted to
the center of the gravity; 3) linked nodes are a fixed
distance apart; and 4) nodes may not overlap. A
force-directed layout keeps nodes centered in the
visible area and avoids expulsion of disconnected
subgraphs.

As shown in Fig. 2, as users interact with the frontend
interface (e.g., post their DS questions materialized as in-
teractions with the graph-based visualizations), the fron-
tend sends HTTP requests to the various REST API
end-points on the backend. The backend services will
reformulate the questions and user interactions as Neo4j
Cypher queries through various pre-defined query tem-
plates and then retrieve graph-structured data from the
Neo4j graph database with reasoning enabled. The Cy-
pher query results are processed on the Flask backend
(mostly house-keeping procedures such as reformatting
the data into JavaScript Object Notation, JSON, so that

the data can be easily consumed by d3.js). The processed
data will be returned to the frontend, where the d3.js-
powered interactive visualization module will render the
nodes and links according to data received, as our query
results are essentially a subgraph of the iDISK know-
ledge base relevant to the specific user questions.

User acceptance and usability assessments
In each design iteration, we inspected the usability of
ALOHA with a focus group of 8 to 10 participants re-
cruited from a convenience sample (i.e., college stu-
dents). Our primary research questions were: (1) Will
users accept the graph-based visualization of DS infor-
mation? What are facilitators and barriers to the accept-
ance? (2) Are existing question templates useful? What
other ways do the users want to facilitate navigation of
the KB (3) What tailored features do users expect? (4)
What design specifications are ideal for usability? Each
focus group session lasts 1 h with 5 segments: 1) an intro-
duction to the study and basic functionalities of ALOHA;
2) the participants explore the ALOHA system freely for
20 min; 3) quantitatively assessements of usability using a
modified System Usability Scale (SUS) [38]; 4) the users
answer 4 open-ended questions to stimulate user thinking;
and 5) at last, open discussions to gather user experience
and feedback for improvements.

Analysis of the data collected in usability assessment
focus groups
We employed both quantitative and qualitative methods
to analyze the data gathered from the focus group in
each design iteration.

Fig. 2 The system architecture of ALOHA

Quantitative analysis
To evaluate ALOHA’s usability quantitatively, we used
the SUS that provides a quick view of the usability of the
overall system [38]. The original SUS questions were
created to evaluate the usability of systems, such as “I
think that I would like to use this system frequently.” To
make it more suitable for evaluating web-based applica-
tion ALOHA, we simply replaced the word “system”
with “website,” e.g., “I think that I would like to use this
website frequently.” The SUS is, however, technology
independent and has been used on evaluations of hard-
ware, general software, websites, and mobile apps. The
10-item SUS questionnaire is based on a 5-point Likert
scale and scales to a maximum score of 100 on the
users’ impression of the usability of a system in general.
A SUS score of 0 to 50 means the usability of the system
is not acceptable, and a score of 50 to 70 means mar-
ginally acceptable. A score higher than 70 means the
system’s usability is acceptable.

Qualitative analysis
We posted four open-ended questions before each us-
ability assessment session: 1) “What other functions
should be added to the website?”; 2) “Do you have any
ideas or advice for this visualization?”; 3) “List the most
negative aspect(s)”; and 4) “List the most positive as-
pect(s).” We then encouraged the participants to “think-
aloud” and verbalize their experience interacting with
ALOHA [39]. Participants were also encouraged to dis-
cuss other related issues, such as their perceptions and
attitudes about using a system like ALOHA. With the
participants’ consent, the focus group session was re-
corded and then transcribed.
The usability issues were identified and categorized by
themes and heuristics. We used a 2-step process to
qualitatively analyze the usability assessment sessions: 1)
we collected an initial set of usability issues from users’
answers to the open-ended questions; and 2) we then
analyzed the transcripts of the sessions to extract more
usability issues from the conversations. All usability is-
sues were encoded using themes derived from the the-
matic analysis [40] and mapped to usability heuristics
defined in Gerhardt-Powals’ cognitive engineering prin-
ciples with a focus on identifying any violations of the
usability principles [41]. The usability heuristics contains
10 principles: 1) automating unwanted workload; 2)
reducing uncertainty; 3) fusing data; 4) presenting new
information with meaningful aids to interpretation; 5)
using names that are conceptually related to function; 6)
grouping data in consistently meaningful ways; 7) limit-
ing data-driven tasks; 8) including in the displays only
that information needed by the user at a given time; 9)
providing multiple coding of data when appropriate; and
10) practicing judicious redundancy [41]. We followed a

well-established process for the thematic analysis [40]
commonly used in human-computer interaction projects
consisting of 5 steps: 1) familiarizing with data (i.e., the
answers to the open-ended questionnaire and the tran-
scripts); 2) assigning initial annotation codes (i.e., a de-
scription of what has been said by the participants) to the
data; 3) sorting (or grouping) codes into broader themes;
4) reviewing and refining the themes identified before; and
5) naming and describing each of the themes.
Through the thematic analysis, the usability issues re-
ported by the participants were encoded by themes in
each design iteration. We derived the usability themes
based on the characteristics of the identified usability is-
sues. Similar usability issues reported by different partic-
ipants were grouped as a unique issue type.
More importantly, we extracted suggested usability
improvements from the open-ended questions and the
transcribed text from voice recording. These suggested
improvements were analyzed and ranked by importance,
which were used to inform the design choices in the
next iteration.

Results
An evolving prototype of ALOHA
Compared to our previous ALOHA prototype in the
first design iteration [28], Fig. 3 shows an evolved UI of
ALOHA. The new UI consists of four parts: 1) a top bar
for users to pick and enter DS questions of their inter-
ests based on a set of pre-defined question templates, 2)
a canvas for graph-based interactive visualization, 3) a
left group of information boxes including the current
user question and various visualization options such as
zooming and filtering, and 4) a right group of informa-
tion boxes to show detailed information of the current
selected node and search history.

Consumer questions
In the first design iteration, we analyzed a historical Yahoo
Answers! dataset covering 2009 to 2014 (~ 3.8 million
questions and 13.5 million answers posted by 339,193
users). Using the keyword “dietary supplement”, we found
157 questions related to DS in the “Health” category and
primarily from the “Alternative Medicine” sub-category in
Yahoo Answers!. Based on these questions, we identified
the initial set of user needs. Combined with expert opin-
ions and information contained in iDISK, we identified 7
question templates that consumers of DS are interested
in. These questions are:

1) What is/are available product(s) containing DS
ingredient X?
2) To which ingredient category does DS ingredient
X belong?

Page 6 of 18

3) Which LanguaL type does DS product with
ingredient X belong to?
4) What is the background/origin of DS ingredient X?
(24 out of 157; 15.4% of Yahoo Answers! posts, e.g.,
“Phytochemistry - Thyme Thymol effects on human
body as a dietary supplement?”)
5) What are the common uses of DS ingredient X?
(25 out of 157; 15.9% of Yahoo Answers! posts,
e.g., “Do amino acid dietary supplement help
lose weight?”)
6) What is/are the common adverse reaction(s)
associated with DS ingredient X? (11 out of 157;
7.0% of Yahoo Answers! posts, e.g., “I’ve heard that
taking fennel as a dietary supplement helps with
digestion, any negative side effects?”)
7) With what medications does DS ingredient X could
interact with? (3 out of 157; 1.9% of Yahoo
Answers! posts, e.g., “Can dietary supplements effect
how a flu shot works?”)

In the following two iterations, we extended the question
templates and added three DS product related questions
based on user feedback from the usability assessment ses-
sion of the previous iteration:

1) What ingredients does Dietary Supplement product
X contain?
2) What drug does Dietary Supplement product X
interact with?
3) What diseases is Dietary Supplement product X
effective for?

As the 3 new questions are all about DS products (ra-
ther than DS ingredients), we added a new search tab
named “Product Search” to the top bar. Further, we also
added a question type selection function to distinguish
between ingredient or product related questions through
switching the two tabs (i.e., “Ingredient Search” and
“Product Search”) below the top bar.
In the “Ingredient Search” tab, as the questions are all
focused on the relationships between a DS “ingredient
X”, the top bar consists of 2 parts. As shown in Fig. 3, in
the “Question” part (the left part of the top bar), the user
first needs to choose a question template of her interest
and then types the name of the ingredient in the “Ingre-
dient X” part (the right column of the top bar). There is
an autocomplete function, she only needs to enter a par-
tial name of the ingredient. This functionality is similar
in the “Product Search” tab except that it focuses on
product-related questions.

Graph-based interactive visualization
As shown in Fig. 3, based on the user question, the system
formulates high-level semantic queries using the Neo4j’s
Cypher query language to query against the underlying
iDISK knowledge base. The Neo4j graph database organizes
data as nodes, relationships, and properties in a property
graph model (PGM). Naturally, ontologically-structured
data in iDISK can also be expressed in a PGM. The Neo4j
Cypher is a declarative graph query language. One of the
main advantages of the Cypher language is that its syntax is
similar to the commonly used Structured Query Language
(SQL) for relational databases but optimized to operate on

Fig. 3 The main user interface of ALOHA

Page 7 of 18

PGMs. Nevertheless, the Neo4j’s query engine supports
semantic queries with reasoning needs (i.e., leveraging the
knowledge encoded in the ontology).
The query results (in responding to the specific user
question) are then organized as a knowledge graph (i.e.,
nodes of concepts connected by edges indicating the
relationships between nodes)—a relevant subgraph of
the entire iDISK knowledge base. We built various con-
venient functions to make it easier for the users to
explore the knowledge graph.

1) Node expansion. The node expansion function is
the main functionality for users to explore the
knowledge graph. As shown in Fig. 3, when a user
double-clicks on a concept node or clicks on the
purple expansion option button around the selected
node, the system will expand the node and show all
other nodes directly connected (i.e., 1-degree
neighbors) to the selected nodes as well as the
relationships between them. In the initial design, we
restricted the number of nodes to be a maximum of
30 in each Cypher query result, considering that
too many nodes displayed in one screen will be too
crowded to navigate. However, in the following
design iterations, we found that even a limit of 30
nodes for each Cypher query could result in
hundreds of nodes after several node expansion
operations. Further, some nodes have more than 30

neighboring nodes (e.g., “Ascorbic acid” and “Calcium”
are respectively linked to 10,593 and 8,923 other nodes
through corresponding relationships); and limiting the
query result to only 30 nodes will result in incorrect
answers to user’s question (i.e., showing a random set
of 30 nodes that may not be of user interest). Thus, we
re-implemented the node expansion functionality. As
shown in Fig. 4, expanded nodes are grouped into 4
larger nodes (i.e., group nodes) by types (e.g. “DS
Product”, “Disease”, “Signs/Symptoms”, “Drug/Herbs”).
When a user clicks on a group node, as shown in
Fig. 5, the user can choose to display or hide individual
nodes by checking or unchecking the checkboxes of
the nodes of interest in a pop-up table.

Every node, including individual node and group node,
is color-coded based on its concept type. For example,
as shown in Fig. 4, medications that interact with the
specific DS ingredient are colored in orange, while DS
ingredient nodes are colored in blue.

2) Tutorial. By employing HelpHero [42], a tool for
creating interactive, easy-to-follow web application
tours, we created four tutorials to help users get
started and learn new features of ALOHA quickly.
At the first time when a user enters ALOHA, the
“Brief Introduction” tutorial will appear automatic-
ally and briefly introduce the main functionalities of

Fig. 4 An example of both individual nodes and group nodes after expanding “Melatonin”

Page 8 of 18

ALOHA, such as the search bar and node information
boxes. As shown in Fig. 5, a blue flag icon on the right
bottom corner of the screen allows the end users to
re-access the tutorials at any time. Figure 6 shows an
example of the tutorials. Currently, there are two video
tutorials and two tour tutorials.
3) Node information box on the right sidebar. When a
node is selected, more information about the node
such as the background and safety information of a
DS ingredient is shown on the right side of the
screen. Compared to the previous version of
ALOHA, we removed a number of unnecessary
information based on user feedback and shortened
the length of long text description by utilizing a
“Show More / Hide” functionality, to reduce the
cognitive load on end-users.

Usability assessment focus group results
In the first design iteration in our previous work [28],
the average SUS score of the initial ALOHA prototype
was
marginally
acceptable
(63.75 ± 7.2).
The
focus
group participants have also indicated very different
experience when using ALOHA. Overall, 23 distinct us-
ability issues were reported by the participants; and our
analysis grouped the 23 usability issues into 7 themes
(Table 1): 1) lack of functionalities, 2) unnecessary in-
formation, 3) incomplete functionality, 4) unclear infor-
mation presentation, 5) incomplete information, 6) lack
of information, and 7) unintuitive information. The ma-
jority of these usability issues are related to lack of
information or functionalities. We also mapped these

Fig. 5 An interface for users to navigate the group nodes (i.e., the option to show or hide nodes of interest)

Fig. 6 An example of an interactive ALOHA tutorial built with Help Hero

Page 9 of 18

distinct usability issues to the 10 usability heuristics
described in Gerhardt-Powals’ cognitive engineering
principles. The most frequent usability heuristics are

a) reducing uncertainty and b) including in the dis-
plays only the information needed by the user at a
given time.

Table 1 Usability issues identified in the first design iteration’s usability testing focus group

Theme
Usability Issue
Heuristic
Number of participants
reporting the issue
(n = 9)

Incomplete functionality
Some weird characters, unreadable
Unicode characters
Reduce uncertainty
1/9

There are two across signs work the
same way, one of them should be
modified

Reduce uncertainty
1/9

Two graphs in the same page separate
too far away
Reduce uncertainty
1/9

Can not read the full text content of
some questions
Reduce uncertainty
1/9

Can not read the full name on the circles
Reduce uncertainty
1/9

Lack of functionality
Users can not hide information after they
have looked at them
Include in the displays only that
information needed by the user
at a given time

1/9

Users can not remember the question
they asked
Reduce uncertainty
2/9

Don’t know how to start to use the system
Reduce uncertainty
2/9

Expect more information when hovering
on nodes
Practice judicious redundancy
1/9

No alert message for error or null value
Reduce uncertainty
2/9

Questions should be able to start from
everywhere (products, ingredient, etc.)
Provide multiple coding of data
when appropriate
1/9

Users need go through every circle to
figure out the anwser of a question
Group data in consistently
meaningful ways
1/9

URL is fixed, users can not return
to the previous page
Automate unwanted workload
1/9

Lack of information
No sufficient information for some
relationships(like “effects_on”, need
more details)

Provide multiple coding of data
when appropriate
1/9

Unclear information presentation
Links overlap and relationships are
hard to be read
Reduce uncertainty
1/9

Nodes’ font is difficult to be read
Reduce uncertainty
2/9

Small finder icon, it is hard for user
to notice it
Present new information with
meaningful aids to interpretation
1/9

Unintuitive information
Questions are not easy for laypeople
to understand
Present new information with
meaningful aids to interpretation
1/9

Unnecessary information
Preferred names and scientific names
are unnecessary nodes
Fuse data
1/9

Redundant information for some
questions’ results
Include in the displays only that
information needed by the user
at a given time

2/9

Show too much information without
limitation
Include in the displays only that
information needed by the user
at a given time

3/9

Unnecessary information (Number in
the parentheses) in right column
Include in the displays only that
information needed by the user
at a given time

1/9

Unnecessary information
(UMLS Semantic Type) in right column
Include in the displays only that
information needed by the user
at a given time

1/9

Page 10 of 18

The usability improvements suggested by the partici-
pants were consistent with the identified usability issues.
These proposed improvements included: 1) removing
unnecessary information; 2) grouping similar informa-
tion; 3) changing the expression of data to be easier for
laypeople to consume; 4) improving readability; and 5)
adding functions. Table 2 lists selected suggested im-
provements and our corresponding actions for each
design iteration.
In the second design iteration, we improved some
of the existing features but primarily added many

new features according to reported usability issues. In
the usability assessment session of the second design
iteration, we recruited 8 participants where 4 of them
attended the usability assessment session in the first
iteration as well. The total number of usability issues
(Table 3) reported by the participants decreased. The
total number of usability issues reported was 22, and
there were 13 distinct issues after grouping. The us-
ability themes revealed were a) readability, b) long re-
sponse time, c) information presentation, d) lack of
functionalities, and e) incomplete functionality.
However, the SUS score decreased to 52.2 ± 11.0.
After further analysis of the usability testing results,
we found that the newly added functionalities en-
hanced and enriched the ALOHA application but also
increased the complexity of the overall system. Simply
adding new functionalities or changing existing fea-
tures without due consideration could bring severe
usability issues and impair users’ experience of using
the application. Further, for the second design iter-
ation, the suggested usability improvements (as shown
in Table 4) changed to mostly focused on 1) refining
the user interface, 2) improving existing functions, 3)
adding auxiliary functionalities to make ALOHA more
usable, and 4) improving readability.
Learning from the previous design iterations, in the
third design iteration, we focused mostly on improv-
ing the existing functionalities. The SUS score in-
creased significantly to 64.4 ± 7.2, which means that

Table 2 Selected important improvements suggested in the
first design iteration

Improvement Category
Improvement Action

Removing unnecessary
information
Remove number in the
parentheses

Remove UMLS Semantic Type

Grouping similar information
Group questions with same types

Group same types of
information together

Changing the expression
of data to be easier for
laypeople to consume

Find layperson questions that
someone who is using the
database would probably ask

Adding functions
Add toggle function for nodes
to display information

Add tutorial

Improving readability
Change the color and size of
texts in the nodes

Table 3 Usability issues identified in the second design iteration’s usability testing focus group

Theme
Usability issue
Heuristic
Number of participants
reporting the issue
(n = 8)

Readability
The words in the tutorial are too small
Reduce uncertainty
2/8

The word on the line is too close to the line
Reduce uncertainty
1/8

Long response time
The loading time for queries is too long
Reduce uncertainty
5/8

Information presentation
The web application layout design is
initially not easy to understand
Present new information with
meaningful aids to interpretation
1/8

The search box should be on the top
Automate unwanted workload
2/8

The text in the node should be
maintained by word level
Automate unwanted workload
1/8

Some nodes will be out of the
viewport after node dragging
Reduce uncertainty
1/8

It is hard to find the most important
information from the result
Include in the displays only that
information needed by the user
at a given time

1/8

Lack of functionalities
There should be a way to cancel
delete node operation
Automate unwanted workload
2/8

Search history is needed
Automate unwanted workload
2/8

Incomplete functionality
The tutorial should be more comprehensive
Automate unwanted workload
2/8

Sometimes the disease node can’t expand
Reduce uncertainty
1/8

The arrow should be a double direction
Reduce uncertainty
1/8

Page 11 of 18

the usability of ALOHA increased compared to previ-
ous versions even with more complex and powerful
functionalities.
In the third design iteration, we recruited 8 partici-
pants where 5 out of the 8 participants attended the
previous design session. The total number of usability
issues reported was 22; 10 distinct issues (Table 5)
remained after grouping, and most of these issues
were minor. The usability themes revealed were a)
lack of instruction, b) system complexity, c) incom-
plete functionality, d) long response time and e) un-
clear
information
presentation.
Compared
to
the
second design iteration, there were no new features
requested from users. Table 6 lists the suggested us-
ability improvements.

Discussion
The use of DSs (e.g., vitamins, minerals, botanical ex-
tracts, and protein powders) is common around the
globe, although consumers have limited knowledge of
their safety and effectiveness. In this study, we con-
ducted two design iterations to further improve our
prototype interactive visualization system, ALOHA [28],
based on a well-integrated DS knowledge base—iDISK.
We followed user-centered design principles during
these design iterations, leading to a more user-friendly
and useful application.

Two use cases demonstrating the utility of ALOHA
The utility of ALOHA can be demonstrated through two
use cases.

Use case 1: searching for drugs that interact with a DS
product “Sleepaid”
A user has recently encountered some sleeplessness prob-
lems, and she started to take “Sleepaid”—a DS product
used for relief of occasional sleeplessness. However, she is
also taking other medications at the same time, and she is
curious about whether “Sleepaid” has some interactions
with the medications she is taking. So, the user decides to
give ALOHA a try. First, as shown in Fig. 7, she chooses
the “Product Search” under the top search box and asks
the question “What drugs does Dietary Supplement prod-
uct Sleepaid interact with?” She receives the query result
in few seconds visualized as a graph.

Table 4 Selected important suggested improvements from the
second design iteration’s usability assessment session

Improvement Category
Improvement Action

Improving readability
Change text size in the tutorial

Improving user interface
Move the search box to the
top of the page

Modify the layout of the page

Improving functions
Tune the Cypher queries and
Neo4J database to reduce
query time

Make a more comprehensive tutorial

Adding auxiliary functions
Add “search history” function

Add “cancel delete operation” function

Table 5 Usability issues identified in the third design iteration usability testing focus group

Theme
Usability Issue
Heuristic
Number of participants
reporting issues
(n = 8)

Lack of instruction
Lack of instructions for the node buttons
Reduce uncertainty
2/8

System complexity
Need to watch the tutorial first before
using the system
Reduce uncertainty
3/8

Incomplete functionality
Search history should not contain
duplicates
Group data in consistently
meaningful ways
1/8

Search history should be categorized
by type
Fuse data
3/8

Sometimes the lines between nodes
disappear after filtering
Reduce uncertainty
1/8

The zoom button is not moving with
the mouse pointer
Reduce uncertainty
1/8

The number of provided questions is
not enough
Provide multiple coding of
data when appropriate
1/8

The “Brief introduction” tutorial
appears every time
Automate unwanted workload
1/8

Long response time
The reaction time for product search
autocomplete is too long
Reduce uncertainty
2/8

Unclear information presentation
It is a little hard to understand the
search results
Present new information with
meaningful aids to interpretation
2/8

Page 12 of 18

As shown in Fig. 8, Sleepaid contains 5 DS ingredients
(i.e., 5-htp, Melatonin, Passion flower, Valerian, and
Hops), and each ingredient can potentially interact with
different drugs. The user knows about Melatonin as the
main ingredient in Sleepaid; and found from ALOHA
that Melatonin can interact with 4 drugs/herbs. She then
clicks the “Drug/Herb” group node that is linked to
Melatonin and a table pops up showing the 4 drugs that
Melatonin can interact with. As shown in Fig. 9 and
Fig. 10, she found that Nifedipine, a drug she is taking
for her high blood pressure, is in the list, which makes
her worry about the potential adverse effects. Thus, she
wants to find a replacement of Melatonin as well as the
DS product “Sleepaid”.

Use case 2: finding a replacement of “melatonin”
Because of the observed interaction between Melatonin
and Verapamil, the user decides to learn more about
Melatonin and possibly find a replacement of Melatonin
to address her sleeplessness issue. She first explores the
DS ingredient Melatonin in ALOHA. As shown in
Fig. 11, she chooses the “Ingredient Search” tab and en-
ters the question “What is the background/origin of Diet-
ary Supplement ingredient Melatonin?”. The system
responds with a graph of 4 group nodes linked to Mela-
tonin, and the “Node Information” box shows the back-
ground and safety information about Melatonin. After
reading the information about Melatonin, the user be-
comes curious about what diseases Melatonin is effective
for. Therefore, she clicks the brown disease group node;
and the system shows her a list of 9 diseases for which
Melatonin is effective. As shown in Fig. 12, the user
notices the disease “sleeplessness,” which is one of her

current health problems. Hence, the user chooses “sleep-
lessness” to see what other DS ingredients might be
effective for helping with sleeplessness. The user ex-
pands the “sleeplessness” node but hides other types of
nodes that are not of interest to her through the “Filter”
function, as shown in Fig. 13. After checking the effect-
iveness rating (part of the “Node Information” as shown
in Fig. 13) of each DS ingredient for sleeplessness, the
user finds only Lemon Balm, Melatonin and Valerian
are possibly effective. Subsequently, the user decides to
explore more about Lemon Balm and Valerian to deter-
mine which DS ingredient is safer and more effective
considering her current health issues.

Lessons learned from an iterative user-centered design
process in developing consumer-facing health applications
The lessons learned from the three design iterations
are valuable to guide not only future developments of
ALOHA but also other consumer-facing, knowledge
graph-based
online
health
information
systems.
Through the three usability testing focus groups, a
number of usability issues were revealed with specific
action points to improve both the usability and utility
of ALOHA. Nevertheless, simply adding all function-
alities requested by end-users without due consider-
ation could bring severe usability issues and impair
user experience. The SUS score in our second design
iteration
dropped
significantly
to
52.2 ± 11.0
from
63.75 ± 7.2 mainly due to these issues. For example,
based on user requests, we added a number of tuto-
rials hoping that they will help users quickly get a
sense of the different functionalities of the system.
However, in the usability evaluation focus group of
the second design iteration, a number of participants
ignored the newly added tutorials. When asked, they
expressed that “I am confident that I can learn how
to use the system myself.” However, compared to
other resources that users used to find relevant health
information
such
as
Google
search
engine
and
WebMD, a graph-based visualization tool is signifi-
cantly different; and thus, it is not easy for users from
the general public to get familiar with quickly. There
were also many usability issues in the tutorials, which

Table 6 Selected important suggested improvements from the
third design iteration’s usability assessment session

Improvement Category
Improvement Action

Revising existing functions
Categorize search history

Add more questions for
searching

Improve the performance of
autocomplete function using
database

Polishing user tutorials
Make the tutorial more comprehensive

Fig. 7 A user searches for a question: “What drugs does Dietary Supplement product Sleepaid interact with?”

Page 13 of 18

impaired the user experience. As shown in Table 3,
two of the eight participants thought that the texts in
the tutorials are too verbose and the size of the text
font is too small; so they chose to ignore the tutorials
all together. Further, two of the eight participants
thought
that
the
tutorial
was
not
comprehensive

enough to cover all features of ALOHA. Thus, more
work is needed to refine these tutorials.
We also revised a number of existing functionalities,
especially improved a number of areas around the
interactive visualization. However, the response time
for ALOHA increased significantly as we introduced

Fig. 8 Query results as an interactive graph-based visualization the for question “What drugs does Dietary Supplement product Sleepaid
interact with?”

Fig. 9 A list of 4 drugs or herbs that can interact with Melatonin

Page 14 of 18

the new visualization mechanisms. For the ALOHA
prototype in the first design iteration, we set a con-
straint (i.e., a maximum of 30 nodes) to each Cypher
query to reduce the number of nodes rendered in the
visualization to make the graph more clear. In the
second design iteration, we removed the restriction as
we want to get a more accurate answer for each
query. Nevertheless, some queries resulted in a large
number of nodes (i.e., more than 1000 with a long
query execution time) that filled the entire screen
making the information unreadable. To solve this
problem,
we
introduced
a
new
visualization

mechanism, where we grouped nodes of the same se-
mantic type to reduce the total number of nodes on
the screen. This new design not only simplified the
user interface but also reduced the query execution
time that ultimately improved overall user experience.

Conclusions
In sum, a user-centered design process enabled us to
create a user-friendly web-based application, ALOHA,
for the general public, especially DS consumers, to ex-
plore DS knowledge relevant to their needs, through
an iterative development process. Moreover, our study

Fig. 10 The “interacts with” relationship between Nifedipine and Melatonin

Fig. 11 The query result of question “What is the background/origin of Dietary Supplement ingredient Melatonin?”

Page 15 of 18

showed that graph-based interactive visualization is
promising in helping DS consumers explore complex
health concepts quickly and can potentially lead to a
new way of finding and consuming health information
online. This is significant as recognized by many
health
behavior
theories
such
as
the
integrated

behavior model, accessing to adequate health informa-
tion activates individuals’ participation in self-care and
leads to healthy life-style [43]. Conversely, inaccess-
ibility to adequate health information is associated
with serious health risks [44]. In the United States,
72% of adults seek health information online [45].

Fig. 12 A list of diseases for which Melatonin is effective

Fig. 13 A list of DS ingredients which are effective for sleeplessness

Page 16 of 18

Nevertheless, typical consumers cannot translate the
vast amounts of online information into usable know-
ledge, nor gauge its quality [46]. Information access bar-
riers include overload and disorganization, lack of user-
friendliness, and inconsistencies [47]. A novel knowledge
exploration mechanism such as ALOHA maybe appealing
to the general public and can serve as a template for de-
veloping consumer-facing, evidence-based (i.e., supported
by scientific literature) knowledge graphs in many other
health and disease domains. Nevertheless, future work is
warranted in ALOHA to address other online health in-
formation issues such as translating and linking the scien-
tific terms in iDISK into consumer language. Further, a
more formal assessment of ALOHA’s visual interface is
needed to demonstrate its effectiveness, for example,
through comparing end-users’ knolwege gains between
text comprehension and visual comprehension of the
same information.