RESEARCH ARTICLE
“It reminds me and motivates me”: Human-
centered design and implementation of an
interactive, SMS-based digital intervention to
improve early retention on antiretroviral
therapy: Usability and acceptability among
new initiates in a high-volume, public clinic in
Malawi

Jacqueline HuwaID1*, Hannock Tweya2, Maryanne Mureithi3, Christine Kiruthu-
Kamamia1, Femi Oni3, Joseph Chintedza1, Geldert Chiwaya1, Evelyn WaweruID3,
Aubrey Kudzala1, Beatrice Wasunna3, Dumisani Ndhlovu1, Pachawo Bisani1,
Caryl FeldackerID4,5

1 Lighthouse Trust, Lilongwe, Malawi, 2 International Training and Education Center for Health (I-TECH),
Lilongwe, Malawi, 3 Medic mobile, Nairobi, Kenya, 4 Department of Global Health, University of Washington,
Seattle, WA, United States of America, 5 International Training and Education Center for Health (I-TECH),
Seattle, WA, United States of America

Methods

Study setting

At Lighthouse, patients are initiated on ART following the test and treat strategy, which
includes immediate ART initiation for all patients tested HIV positive regardless of clinical or

3 / 16

immunological stage [43]. All new initiates receive augmented adherence and HIV disclosure
counselling as part of ART initiation. New ART patient visits are scheduled monthly during
the first six months on ART and then every three- or six-months if the patient is stable and
adherent to ART. Ideally, the B2C program identifies and traces patients who miss clinic
appointment by at least 14 days; however, delays in tracing patients are not uncommon, and
treatment interruptions may continue beyond 2 weeks. At 60 days, patients failing to return
are considered lost to follow-up (LTFU). All ART care, including B2C, is provided free to
patients as mandated by MoH.

Study population and recruitment

In the overall, parent quasi-experimental, pre-post study of retention outcomes, eligibility cri-
teria for opt-in 2wT enrolment are: 1) Patients who initiated ART within 6 months; 2) 18
years; 3) possession of own phone at enrolment; 4) willing to receive/send SMS; 5) informed
consent; and 6) receives confirmed 2wT enrolment text to verify enrolment number. Those
without cell phones and who did not wish to participate were excluded from the study and
received routine B2C retention support.
Information about 2wT was disseminated during routine patient care as part of ART initia-
tion counseling. New ART initiates who completed B2C locator forms and had mobile phones
with them were requested to enroll in 2wT study. Interested patients were then referred to the
2wT site study coordinator for informed consent and enrollment. Those who successfully
received a confirmation text were enrolled. Participants were given a thorough overview of the
SMS system, including required replies and instructions on how to confirm a clinic appoint-
ment, report a transfer out, or reschedule a clinic visit. A total of 500 participants, including 50
from a 2wT system pilot, were enrolled in 2wT group and 500 in the retrospective comparison
group for the parent study.
The 100 2wT participants for the usability and acceptability assessment were recruited
between August 2021 and January 2022 and selected via a purposeful, strategic sampling
approach, enrolling the first 50 participants to reach 6- and 3-months, post 2wT launch, with-
out overlap participants between groups.

2wT system development

Technology background..
Since 2008, Medic equipped more than 41,000 health workers
to support more than 80 million care activities across 15 countries [44]. Medic is the steward
of the CHT open source project that currently supports almost 60 apps across 23 unique work-
flows [44, 45], including 2wT-based apps in Malawi, South Africa, and Zimbabwe. Apps built
using the CHT work on basic phones, smartphones, tablets, and computers with or without
internet connectivity, in any language [46] and are tailored to meet key digital health charac-
teristics recommended by the WHO [33]. The core areas of functionality used by the Malawi
2wT system include peer-to-peer and automated interactive messaging, task management fea-
tures (unread message; message not delivered), longitudinal patient records, routine syncing,
and reports for routine monitoring (e.g. patient response rates, referrals, etc.).
2wT human-centered design..
The Medic-led HCD approach for 2wT for early ART
retention [30] focused on patient and provider users’ needs, working in collaborative, multi-
disciplinary teams (Fig 1). Before 2wT system adaptation, system developers, HCWs, monitor-
ing and evaluation (M&E) teams, B2C staff and patients discussed and specified the context
use. A brief formative research was conducted to inform adaptation and implementation.
Then, a pilot of 50 ART patients solicited end-user experience in message context, optimal
message delivery timing and language preferences (Chichewa or English) with the aim to

4 / 16

launch a patient-centered, usable, and acceptable app. Formative message research and pilot
testing results also ensured participants’ privacy and confidentiality were protected, making
changes to messaging protocols to improve patient protections. Prior to updating the system
messages, text messages were reviewed by expert patients (experienced ART patient mentors)
for clarity and understandability. After system deployment, weekly technical feedback meet-
ings were conducted to provide a platform to incorporate the voices and experiences of patient
users in further refinement processes.
System components and functionalities..
The 2wT system (Fig 2) is a hybrid automated
and manual texting interaction between patients and healthcare workers. In the 2wT system,
weekly motivational messages are sent without a response request. Individually tailored
appointment reminders are sent in anticipation of a visit with a response requested. Multiple
responses and free text are accepted at any time. Messages are sent either in English or Chi-
chewa according to patients’ preferences. Patients can send a message with any content at any
time in any language. Generally, the 2wT officer responds to any SMS during routine clinic
hours within 1–2 days of any message. Patients can opt out of motivational and/or visit
reminder messages at any time.
2wT intervention: Weekly motivational messages..
The 2wT system broadcasts weekly
motivation messages with a new health-related message sent each week; example are shown in
Table 1. The messages are sent from the same Lighthouse aggregator number and contain no
information related to HIV or AIDS. Messages repeat after approximately 6 months. For
weekly motivational messages, there is no response required nor requested from patients.
Patients may respond if they choose.
2wT intervention: Visit reminders and responses..
The 2wT system sends individualized
clinic visit reminders with a response requested. Patients are asked to respond to the visit
reminder messages with a single number: 1 = yes if confirming clinic attendance or 0 = no if
they will not attend (Fig 2). A "yes” triggers, "See you soon!" and stops visit reminders for that
specific visit. A "no" triggers automated, scripted texts to determine if someone has transferred

Fig 1. Medic’s human-centered design (HCD) approach. Medic’s HCD approach was utilized for designing, developing and optimizing 2wT for MC
post-operative care [30, 47]. Republished from [47] under a CC BY license, with permission from B. Wasunna, original copyright, Medic 2020.

https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0278806.g001

5 / 16

Fig 2. 2wT flow diagram for ART retention. This hybrid automated-interactive 2wT flow diagram illustrates typical pathways of client interaction
with the system and 2wT officers.

https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0278806.g002

Table 1. A sample of motivational messages sent by the 2wT for ART retention.

https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0278806.t001

6 / 16

or wants to change their visit date. The system also allows for free text interaction between
2wT staff and the patient to determine next steps. Patients can request an appointment date
change, report transfers, or request a call. Patients receive automated missed visit alerts on
days 2, 5, and 11 post appointment date when a clinic appointment is missed. Motivational
and reminder visit messages are muted if or when specific ART outcomes are ascertained
(stopping ART, transferring to other clinic and death). A 2wT officer prompt for B2C tracing
is automatically triggered by the system when a patient misses a clinic appointment by 14 days.

Data collection and management

A brief, semi-structured, interviewer-administered questionnaire (S1 File) contained 16
closed-ended questions to assess 2wT usefulness, acceptability, perceived benefits, and barriers.
In open-ended questions, patients were asked for feedback on the intervention, express con-
cerns and suggest improvements.
Participants were also observed completing key 2wT tasks to assess the effectiveness of 2wT
education at enrollment and to help improve participant’s adherence to 2wT prompts. Partici-
pants were shown four pictures of 2wT visit reminder messages and asked to indicate, using
words or touching their phone, how they would: (a) confirm visit attendance, (b) transfer out
to another clinic, (c) change appointment dates; (d) ask for help with something else (Fig 3).
Results from assessment methods were combined to understand 2wT usability and acceptabil-
ity from patient users.

Statistical analysis

Quantitative data analysis was conducted using Stata software version 17.0 (S2 File). For ques-
tionnaires on acceptability, frequencies were used to explore closed-ended or partially open-
ended responses (S3 File Short answers). Atlas.ti 8 was used for qualitative data from open-
ended short answers. Qualitative data were entered and coded by one coder using a mix of

Fig 3. Usability assessment of 2wT messaging on feature or smart phones. Answer/education sheet showing clients how to respond to visit
reminders, transfer reporting, visit date change requests, and requests for additional help.

https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0278806.g003

7 / 16

deductive and inductive approaches guided by the questionnaire and thematic content. Initial
thematic content was shared with the study team for feedback and revisions incorporated into
final results.

Ethics

The parent study, including the usability and acceptability components, was reviewed and
approved by the University of Washington and the Malawi National Health Sciences Research
Committee. All participants provided written informed consent.

Results
Demographic characteristics

One hundred 2wT participants were included in this sub-study (Table 2), including 28 from
the pilot period. On average, participants were age 37.1 (SD 9.4) years; almost 40% of partici-
pants were under 35 years old. The majority (67%) of the participants started ART with
WHO stages 1 or 2.

2wT app usability

Most participants were satisfied with visit reminders (95%) and the motivational messages
(90%) (Table 3). Over 88% would recommend both. However, 9% did not understand the
weekly motivational messages schedule, while over 25% expressed challenges responding cor-
rectly to reminders. There were also some confidentiality concerns: 17% were worried about
breaches.

2wT task completion

All 100 participants completed four tasks designed to test their ability to respond to 2wT mes-
sages. Overall, 72% answered correctly to interactive message task: 94% visit attendance confir-
mation, 72% informing the facility of transferring to another clinic, 73% changing clinic

Table 2. Characteristics of ART patients using 2wT for ART retention in Lilongwe, Malawi.

*2 participants were not correctly matched to baseline data and were omitted from the demographic table, only

https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0278806.t002

8 / 16

appointment dates task 1, and 99% changing clinic appointment date task 2 (Table 4). Overall,
more participants in the 4–6 months group completed the task correctly compared to those in
the 1–3 months group, although not significantly different (78% vs. 66%, p = 0.181). Both
groups had difficulties completing the transfer-out and appointment dates tasks.

Qualitative responses on acceptability and usability

Of 100 respondents, 95 provided responses to the open-ended questions (S3 File). Most
respondents provided positive feedback and support for the 2wT intervention, asking the team
to "continue sending us messages, most people forget their clinic appointment." The vast majority,
noted their appreciation for the visit reminders, like this patient:

"This system is good and continue offering us this service. We got reminded when we forget
the dates. I came on 26 January for consultation, but I didn’t get drugs then when my days
were coming close, I received the reminder message. I thought in my mind that I had
already received the meds. Thank you for reminding me."

Table 3. 2wT usability at 3- and 6-month periods of participation duration.

Were you satisfied with the motivational messages?

Did you understand that an SMS would arrive on your phone each week (motivational message)?

Did you have challenges responding to visit reminders?

Did you have challenges receiving text messages (SMS)?

Were you worried about privacy receiving these text messages (SMS)?

Would you recommend motivational messages to friends?

Would you recommend visit reminder messages to friends?

https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0278806.t003

9 / 16

Participants overwhelmingly noted that they felt encouraged and motivated by the mes-
sages, appearing to perceive the messages as coming from a member of the Lighthouse support
team. Respondents, like this person, asked the team to, "continue sending messages as they are
encouraging us to stay healthy. It reminds me and motivates me." Another participant noted,
"when I see the messages, I do have the conscious to take the medicine." Patients felt cared for
and supported by the Lighthouse team, noting feelings of comfort such as, "through these
interactions, we are not afraid as we know you will help us," and "I am very thankful when I
receive these messages."
Patients also liked the weekly SMS health-related message, as one patient reporting: "I am
thankful because the messages remind me of my clinic appointment and encourages me to live a
healthy life." 2wT was also received positively as a good alternative to reminder phone calls.
One participant expressed that "SMS visit reminder is better than through phone call because
colleagues ask us why someone is calling me."
There were several themes that suggest the need for improvement. A few patients noted
confusion with how to stop messages while others noted delays in HCW responses to their
visit change or support requests. One patient also requested changes to support lower literacy
patients, remarking that, "the messages are good for people who know how to read. You should
also prepare something for those who cannot read." Lastly, a few patients receive missed visit
reminders when they attended their visit on time, leaving them frustrated. "Stop sending mes-
sages reminding us that we have missed the visit when we already reported."
Not all responses were in support of 2wT. A few patients noted that even without explicit
mention of ART nor the clinic name, they still had concerns about disclosure. One patient
noted that they were "always afraid that someone might see the messages as my phone is always
with neighbors. Someone who knows the number XXXX might realize that this message is from
Lighthouse and might compromise with my privacy."

Discussion

Likely as a result of the HCD-based adaption of the 2wT model, we found 2wT to be highly
usable and acceptable as an early retention intervention for patients at MPC’s routine ART

Table 4. 2wT task completion.

https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0278806.t004

10 / 16

program. Although some patients, including those who are older or illiterate, may prefer
reminder calls [14], these results indicate that the vast majority appreciated both the visit and
motivational messages and would recommend 2wT for their friends. However, a quarter of
respondents had trouble responding correctly to messages and there were some who expressed
concerns with confidentiality, namely people seeing their messages. Compared to those in the
1–3 months in 2wT group, slightly more participants in the 4–6 month group correctly com-
pleted the tasks, showing that patient understanding and confidence likely increase over time.
Although confirming visit attendance was considered simple, almost 30% found it difficult to
report a transfer out or reschedule a clinic visit respectively. These findings suggest several
strengths and areas of improvement for 2wT.
Iterative, highly-participatory, HCD was central to App optimization. Routine B2C reten-
tion staff helped co-design, develop, test, and optimize 2wT through a series of formative input
sessions that also included ART patients, monitoring and evaluation staff. Cycles of optimiza-
tion strengthened app specifics including: message frequency; motivational message content;
timing of delivery; and wording of the automated messages. Pre-testing was also critical: the
pilot test conducted among 50 participants prior to the roll-out helped to identify system
weaknesses, coding flaws, and bugs which were rectified before study implementation. The
hybrid approach, blending automated motivation messages and individually tailored visit
reminders with access to direct, interactive, healthcare worker-to-patient messaging, put a
human face to the intervention. Although SMS was the primary form of communication,
phone calls were made at patient request. This flexibility to respond to patients via SMS or
phone also demonstrates prioritization of patient preferences. Patients believed and were
assured that a member of the Lighthouse team was supporting them in the manner they pre-
ferred, likely contributing to 2wT satisfaction.
Multi-method formative assessment of usability also added rich data on which to improve
the system for patient users. Quantitative, observational, and qualitative data each provided
key information to ensure that 2wT was both easy to use and highly useful to new ART
patients, resulting in a system that helped patients attend visits and stay motivated in care.
Other research also used multiple methods to help ensure adaptation and optimization for the
local context. In South Africa, an app for HIV self-testing showed that nearly all (98.7%) found
the app easy to use and reported that 89.0% of participants could follow all the steps on the app
without error [48]. However, usability does not always indicate usefulness. In another South
African app for HIV self-testing, high usability (87.8%) did not lead to participants to log onto
the app: only 22% self- reported results [49]. In Malawi, assessment of two electronic commu-
nity case management Apps to support decision making for childhood illnesses found signifi-
cant differences between the two apps in ease of use [50].
There are several areas for improvement in the 2wT system. First, participants received
training on responding to the 2wT system messages at enrolment only, which likely contrib-
uted to observed differences in usability over time. Practice and repetition, complemented by
refresher patient education (in-person or via posters) during subsequent clinic visits may be
recommended as patients tend to understand the system over time. Second, similar to other
studies [51–53], confidentiality concerns or fear of disclosure of HIV status using SMS for
ART reminders, were reported by some participants. Several protections were implemented to
reduce confidentiality concerns. 2wT message co-creation and pre-testing with patients
attempted to ensure that both motivational and visit reminder messages were neutral and
benign, reducing potential associations with HIV-related care or services. 2wT was also imple-
mented only as opt-in: patients were consented after 2wT educational counseling that included
a presentation with example messages. Those who self-reported phone sharing were also
excluded. However, this may not have been enough as 17% of the participants reported that

11 / 16

they were afraid someone else would see the messages. Additional protections should be
explored. Lastly, 2wT is limited only to new ART enrollees and those with mobile phones and
is intended to contribute to, and not replace, the routine Back to Care retention activities.
However, reducing the literacy level required for participation or considerations of how to
include those with shared phones would improve access to this retention support.
Limitations

As with all interviewer-led questionnaires, it is possible that patients were affected by the inter-
viewer, a bias that could have influenced responses in a more positive or negative direction.
Usability could change over time. One hundred patients were included in the usability assess-
ment, but de-identified data linked to study-specific IDs resulted in errors linking usability
results to patient demographics, reducing the sample size for demographics from 100 to 98.
Lastly, SMS response rates, retention outcomes and cost data is forthcoming. It is expected
that these results will shed additional light on whether high usability and acceptability will
result in effectiveness of the 2wT approach on retention as expected.

Conclusions

2wT for early ART retention at Lighthouse Trust was purposefully designed with patients at
the forefront. As a result, it appears that the App was highly usable and acceptable to those
who chose to enroll in the retention support intervention, perhaps setting them up for a suc-
cessful start to lifelong engagement in care. Although 2wT is not for all patients in all settings,
the 2wT intervention approach has several strengths that are worthy of consideration for other
digital health collaborators working to improve early ART retention. The local team led this
process, ensuring that needs, priorities, and practices from Lighthouse, and not from interna-
tional collaborators, were centered in the decision-making [54]. 2wT was purposefully built
using the open-source Community Health Toolkit (CHT), a global digital good. By leveraging
an existing set of tools, and adapting from previous 2wT-based evidence [34], delays with App
development were reduced while the potential for sustainability increased. Lastly, as 2wT is
implemented in a routine, MoH ART services context, the HCD process reflected the realities
of routine, and not research, settings, raising the likelihood of longer-term fidelity and poten-
tial scale-up of the 2wT intervention in other LMIC programs.