Original Paper

A Clinical Decision Support System for Sleep Staging Tasks With
Explanations From Artificial Intelligence: User-Centered Design
and Evaluation Study

Jeonghwan Hwang1*, BSc, MSc; Taeheon Lee1*, BSc, MSc; Honggu Lee1, BSc, MSc, PhD; Seonjeong Byun2, MD

1Looxid Labs, Seoul, Republic of Korea
2Department of Neuropsychiatry, Uijeongbu St Mary's Hospital, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Uijeongbu-si, Republic of
Korea
*these authors contributed equally

Seonjeong Byun, MD
Department of Neuropsychiatry
Uijeongbu St Mary's Hospital, College of Medicine
The Catholic University of Korea
271, Chenbo-ro
Uijeongbu-si, 11765
Republic of Korea
Phone: 82 31 820 3946

Methods

Study Design

This study aimed to understand what information should be
provided to assist sleep technicians in collaborating with
AI-based CDSS and to implement this system practically using
a user-centered approach. Recent studies for designing
explanations in CDSS propose frameworks that identify three
key components from the perspectives of users: why information
from CDSS is desired for a task, what content should be
included in the explanation, and how explanations should be
presented to users [20,21].

To define why users need explanations from the CDSS, the
context within which users request explanations must be
understood first. This question relates to the needs of the users
and the purpose of the explanations. The perspective of users
should determine the explanatory objective concerning the
information that should be provided. A possible set of
information that can be considered from this phase includes
explanations for the input data, explanations related to the
domain knowledge used in the task, causal information on how
the system generates an output, and how results change with
changes in input data [21,22]. Finally, several design factors,
such as the units and format used for explanations, are
considered when determining how information should be
provided.

To design a CDSS within this framework, our development
process 
included 
three 
phases: 
(1) 
interviews 
with
polysomnographic technicians to identify why users might desire
explanations from the CDSS when adopting AI-based sleep
scoring systems, (2) user observations of how polysomnographic
technicians score sleep stages from EEG recordings to determine
the information that could help them, and (3) an iterative design

process to construct a user-friendly CDSS interface that
addresses the formulation of explanations in the system. After
development, the polysomnographic technicians performed
quantitative and qualitative evaluations of the system. In this
section, we describe the objectives of each phase and explain
how we conducted each phase (Figure 1).

Figure 1. Overall development process. AI: artificial intelligence.

Participants

Polysomnographic technicians with expertise in sleep staging
were recruited for this study. Only technicians with a national
license for medical laboratory technologists who were eligible
to conduct polysomnography scoring were considered. To recruit
participants with expertise in sleep scoring, we restricted their
participation to those with experience in polysomnography
scoring. We recruited 10 technicians to participate in the user
interviews during the first phase and subsequent evaluation
studies. We set the number of participants to 10, following
previous studies on CDSSs, in which the number of participants
was between 6 and 12 [15,23]. Among the technicians, we aimed
to recruit 1 technician who could deeply engage in the
development process by participating in the user observation
and iterative design processes, which required regular meetings.
We recruited technicians from secondary and tertiary hospitals
rather than primary hospitals. Participants were recruited through
emails sent to the polysomnographic technician community.

We recruited participants and divided them into two groups,
novice technicians with <5 years of experience and senior
technicians with >5 years of experience, to evaluate whether
there were any differences in the helpfulness of the CDSS based
on the amount of experience. On the basis of the Rasmussen
skill-, rule-, and knowledge-based behavior model [24], we
assumed that senior technicians would score stages

subconsciously compared with novice technicians who
consciously process the EEG characteristics. Here, we expected
that novice technicians would more extensively refer to the
provided explanation than senior technicians because novice
technicians may find it difficult to quickly locate important EEG
patterns. Thus, it was thought meaningful to investigate how
our explanations affected technicians based on their skills.

Development Procedure

User Interview: Why Explanation Is Desired

We conducted user interviews with polysomnographic
technicians to investigate why technicians would need
explanations from the CDSS when AI-based support systems
were adopted for sleep staging. During the interview, we first
presented several questions regarding user needs during manual
sleep staging and the perceptions of technicians regarding the
utility of previous sleep staging AI tools. The technicians were
asked whether they were using the automated sleep staging
programs. Furthermore, the reasons for not adopting such
automated sleep staging programs were investigated. Upon
further investigation, we established the context in which
explanations from AI were desired when reviewing automated
sleep staging results. A user study was conducted using
structured interviews with the sample questions listed in Textbox
1.

Textbox 1. Examples of interview questions in the user study.

Topic and question statement

User needs during manual sleep staging

1.
How much time do you spend on a sleep staging task when performing polysomnography?

2.
For sleep staging tasks, on which features of electroencephalogram recordings do you mainly focus?

3.
Do you feel any need for assistance during sleep staging?

Utility of sleep staging artificial intelligence (AI) tools

1.
There are several AI programs that automate sleep staging tasks; are you adopting them in your workflow? If not, what are the problems associated
with these programs?

2.
In which processes do you need AI programs to assist your sleep staging tasks?

3.
Assuming that there is an AI program that automates sleep staging tasks and sleep technicians only need to review its scorings, in which context
are explanations desired for an efficient review process?

User Observation: What Information Should Be
Contained in Explanations

A user observation study was performed to understand the sleep
staging conventions of clinical practitioners. From the observed
sleep staging conventions, we aimed to construct a list of EEG
characteristics to which technicians refer. During this study,
hour-long weekly meetings were held over a month in which a
participating technician scored EEG epochs in a think-aloud
protocol. The technician was requested to verbally express how
the information in the EEG recordings during sleep scoring was
processed. Afterward, the technician reviewed the scoring with
detailed explanations of the reasons for scoring the epochs with
the annotated stages. The objective of these observation sessions
was to formulate what information could assist technicians in
reviewing predictions from AI algorithms. The observations
were made based on characteristic EEG patterns such as sleep
spindles, k-complexes, and frequency waves listed in the sleep
manual [1]. We investigated how the listed EEG characteristics
were inspected in practice. Subsequently, we grouped the EEG
features into typical explanations that our CDSS could provide.

Iterative Design Process: How Explanations Can Be
Presented

We conducted an iterative design process with a technician to
identify how explanations should be presented to CDSS users.
For 2 months, we held weekly 2-hour meetings.

The Template-Guided Neural Networks for Robust and
Interpretable Sleep Stage Identification from EEG Recordings
(TRIER) was selected as the AI algorithm for generating
explanations. It is a convolutional neural network architecture
used to process single-channel EEG data for sleep staging, and
was proposed to extract clinically meaningful EEG wave shapes.
This study demonstrated the possibility that features in the
convolutional filters could be related to important EEG
characteristics such as sleep spindles and k-complexes, with a
sleep staging performance comparable with human raters with
macro-F1 scores of 0.7-0.8 on public sleep data sets. We
considered three components in the TRIER, namely
convolutional filters, saliency values, and intermediate
activation, as sources of information for generating explanations.
These three components have been widely used in interpreting
neural network operations in previous machine learning studies
[25-30]. Detailed technical descriptions of these components
are provided in Multimedia Appendix 1 [1,29-32].

During the iterations, we aimed to investigate whether the
information contained in the above components could provide
the desired information obtained from the user observation
study. In these sessions, the technician inspected the features
obtained by the neural network components and expressed an
opinion on whether they could provide sufficient explanation
for the task. Information from the components was refined based
on the feedback. Subsequently, we chose the exact component
for generating explanations from the neural network
components. However, because the information in neural
networks is numerical, adequate visualization is required to
enhance the user-friendliness of the explanations. Therefore,
we iteratively collected feedback on the representation format

of the explanations during the later sessions. The technician
tested the prototype versions of the proposed tool and provided
feedback in terms of their intuitiveness and helpfulness.
Consequently, visualization strategies were constructed for the
explanations and overall interfaces.

Evaluation Study

Data Set Preparation

During the evaluation, technicians scored the sleep stages on
sleep recordings from a public sleep EEG data set, the
ISRUC-Sleep 
Dataset 
[33]. 
These 
data 
contain
polysomnographic recordings obtained from 100 subjects with
evidence of sleep disorders. This data set was collected from
the Sleep Medicine Centre of the Hospital of Coimbra
University. We adopted the public data set for sleep staging to
calculate sleep staging performance based on the ground-truth
labels provided in the data set. The characteristics of the data
sets are summarized in Table 1.

The data were divided into a training set (80 participants),
validation set (10 participants), and test set (10 participants).
Only data samples from the training data set were used for
training the deep learning models. We used the validation data
set to select the model to be used for constructing the CDSS.
The model with the best performance scores for the validation
set was selected. The experimental results and corresponding
findings were drawn exclusively from the test data set, which
means that to avoid information leakage issues that may affect
model accuracy, the data samples used for training the model
were not used during the evaluation study.

To construct the data set for the evaluation study, we randomly
extracted 15-minute EEG segments from the EEG recordings
in the test data set. EEG segments with no changes in sleep
stages were excluded from the selected segments. We evaluated
the sleep scoring performance with 15-minute segments rather
than whole-night polysomnography to evaluate the helpfulness
of the tool effectively. Considering that technicians often skim
through recordings and pay attention to EEG epochs with stage
changes, the effectiveness of the system might not be revealed
or hindered by the back-and-forth temporal relations between
the sleep stages. This evaluation configuration was also adopted
in a previous CDSS study for sleep staging [15]. In addition to
the test set of 15-minute segments, we constructed a test data
set composed of disconnected single epochs of EEG recordings
to function as a stress test in which technicians must interpret
the characteristics of an EEG epoch only from the EEG epoch
without temporal relations derived from previous epochs. In
these single-epoch test sets, because there are no previous or
following epochs to provide information about the current epoch,
the technicians can no longer rely on the scoring results from
the previous epochs. The intention here was to clearly reveal
the effectiveness of the explanations of the EEG characteristics.

In summary, our test data set consisted of two EEG settings: a
set of 15-minute EEG segments and a set of single-epoch EEG
segments. All the participants scored the same set of EEG
recordings. A figure explaining our data setting is provided in
Multimedia Appendix 1.

Table 1. Summary characteristics of the ISRUC-Sleep Dataseta (N=100).

ISRUC-Sleep Dataset
Characteristics

Gender, n (%)

55 (55)
Male

45 (45)
Female

51 (16)
Age (years), mean (SD)

aISRUC-Sleep Dataset was scored based on American Association of Sleep Medicine Rules.

Experimental Setting

During the experiments, we compared sleep staging performance
under 2 different settings. The first was sleep scoring using our
CDSS against the baseline AI, where technicians scored stages
with AI systems that included only AI predictions provided
without any explanation. The second was sleep scoring using
our CDSS versus a conventional setting, where technicians need
to score each epoch without the predictions by AI. We
configured the baseline AI and conventional settings to compare
sleep staging settings for our CDSS.

To compare the sleep staging performance under different
scoring settings, the technicians had to score each EEG epoch
twice as follows: once each with our CDSS and the comparison
setting. This was a fair comparison setting to evaluate the
efficacy of the system because the characteristics of EEG
segments affect sleep staging results significantly. Previous
CDSS studies also employed this scoring setting to compare 2
different sleep staging support systems [15]. We divided the
test data set into 2 groups and used the first to compare our
CDSS with the baseline AI system. A different portion of the
test data set was used to compare our CDSS with the
conventional sleep staging setting. We randomly permuted the
order of the EEG segments and the staging settings.
Furthermore, there was a washout period before the second
reading of the EEG to avoid the memorization effect.

Quantitative Evaluation

On the basis of the scoring results obtained from the
experiments, we evaluated 2 important performance aspects for
assessing sleep staging results. First, we considered the accuracy
with which the technicians scored the sleep stages under
different sleep staging settings. Studies on previous CDSSs
have witnessed enhancements in diagnostic accuracy when
using the developed CDSS [34-37]. Similarly, we investigated
how explanations from our system affect the accuracy of sleep
staging. To estimate the classification performance after
reviewing the AI predictions, the macro-F1 score, which was
adopted in previous studies for evaluating sleep staging
performance, was used as a performance metric [4,6]. We
calculated the metric using the sleep stage labels provided in

the public data set as the ground-truth sleep stages. The
macro-F1 scores were calculated for each 15-minute EEG
segment and a portion of single-epoch EEG recordings.

Second, we evaluated whether interrater reliability was improved
by adopting our CDSS. Interrater reliability between
polysomnography technicians has been a critical issue in sleep
staging 
because 
of 
the 
variability 
in 
interpreting
polysomnography recordings among technicians [38]. Following
previous work in sleep medicine, which demonstrated that an
adequate information system could reduce interrater reliability
[19], we investigated whether the information from our CDSS
could enhance this property. With this objective, interrater
reliability was measured using the Cohen κ score [39]. Given
the sleep staging results for a 15-minute EEG segment, we
calculated the Cohen κ score for every possible pairing of
technicians under the same sleep staging setting.

In addition to the above metrics, we also evaluated whether
participants could critically assess the accuracy of the model
prediction in our system. We calculated the correction rates of
the predictions for incorrectly classified epochs. Here, we
measured the number of incorrectly predicted epochs revised
by technicians and incorrectly predicted epochs revised to
correct stages. We assumed that for incorrectly predicted epochs,
the AI might generate erroneous explanations. Thus, it would
be easier for participants to detect incorrectly predicted samples.
To evaluate this aspect, we intentionally provided EEG epochs
with incorrect AI predictions during the evaluation study.

Qualitative Evaluation

To investigate the extent to which the developed system
supported polysomnographic technicians, we conducted
semistructured postevaluation interviews. During the survey,
we asked questions on a wide range of topics, such as the
helpfulness of the information and how the participants adapted
to the system. User trust in a system is an important aspect in
designing AI-based CDSSs [16,40]. Thus, questions regarding
user trust in the developed system were included in the
postevaluation interviews. Questions regarding how information
from the system was used in the sleep staging process were
asked during the interviews to reveal notable adoption strategies.
The sample interview questions are presented in Textbox 2.

Textbox 2. Examples of interview questions in the qualitative evaluation.

Topic and question statement

User experience of the tool

1.
Were the automated predictions and explanations provided in the clinical decision support systems helpful during the experiment? If not, which
aspects were unhelpful?

2.
How did you perceive the provided explanations when the automated predictions agreed or disagreed with your decisions? Did it affect your
trust in the system?

3.
Did the explanations correspond well to your perception of the important waveform patterns?

Adoption strategy for the tool

1.
How did you use each explanation strategy during the experiment?

2.
Was there any notable strategy for adopting the explanations rather than merely accepting the information in the explanations?

Statistical Analysis

As mentioned in the previous section, each EEG epoch was
read twice under 2 different settings as follows: once with our
CDSS and once with comparison methods, the AI system
without explanations, or the conventional staging setting without
AI predictions. A statistical comparison was conducted to
investigate whether the sleep staging performance was enhanced
by adopting our CDSS compared with the comparison settings.
Rather than comparing the distribution of the scores, we
performed a paired comparison analysis in which we compared
2 sleep scoring performances on the same EEG segments under
2 different score settings. As scoring results could be affected by the complexities and characteristics of particular EEG epochs,
it is critical to control these variabilities when assessing the
significance of each performance. Furthermore, to exclude
variability arising from interrater differences and only consider
enhancements in performance by adopting our CDSS, we
exclusively performed within-subject analysis for the macro-F1
scores.

The Wilcoxon signed-rank test, a nonparametric statistical test
for a set of matched samples [41], was used to estimate the
significance of the improvements by adopting the proposed test.
For every participant, the data pairs were configured as follows:
the macro-F1 and Cohen κ scores from the baseline or usual
sleep staging setting (μ1 κ1) and the classification results when
adopting our CDSS (μ2 κ2). For macro-F1 scores, for
performance pairs from the same technician, there could be a
clustering effect. Thus, we used the Wilcoxon signed-rank test
for clustered data, which can account for clustering effects
[42-44]. This test aimed to reveal whether performance was
significantly enhanced by pairwise comparison when controlling

for the variance arising from the interrater characteristics and
the differences in EEG epochs. The significance of the results
is reported by in terms of P values. We set the significance
threshold at .05. All statistical and significance tests were
performed using Python 3.6. We calculated the P values, sample
sizes (n), z statistics, and effect sizes (r) using the Wilcoxon
signed-rank test [45].

Ethical Considerations

The study was approved by the institutional review board of
the 
Uijeongbu 
St 
Mary’s 
Hospital 
(IRB 
number
UC20ZADI0137), which waived the requirement for informed
consent owing to the nature of the study. All EEG recordings
used in this study were acquired from public data sets. All data
were anonymized to ensure confidentiality.

Results

Participants Characteristics

In total, 10 polysomnographic technicians were recruited from
3 different affiliations, 2 tertiary hospitals, and 1 secondary
hospital. A total of 10% (1/10) of the technicians participated
in the user interview, user observation sessions, and an iterative
design process. We refer to this participant as technician A
throughout the Results section. The other 90% (9/10) of the
technicians participated in user interviews and evaluation
studies. Among the 10 participants, 40% (4/10) were novice
technicians with <5 years of experience. A total of 60% (6/10)
were senior technicians with >5 years of experience. Technician
A, who participated in the tool design process, was excluded
from the evaluation study to avoid bias in favor of our CDSS.
The participant characteristics are summarized in Table 2.

Table 2. Participant characteristics.

Senior technicians (n=6)
Novice technicians (n=4)
Demographics

12.5 (4.7)
1.75 (1.3)
Experience (years), mean (SD)

Affiliations, n (%)

1 (17)
2 (50)
Secondary hospital

4 (83)
2 (50)
Tertiary hospital

User Interview: Why Explanation Is Desired

Reasons Technicians Did Not Use Automated Scoring
Tools

In total, 20% (2/10) of the participants had no experience of
using automatic sleep scoring programs; the other participants
preferred not to refer to the automated sleep staging results
during sleep staging. The technicians answered that even when
predictions were automatically recommended by the software,
they removed the automated predictions and scored all the
epochs themselves.

In addition to the inaccuracies of algorithms, 50% (5/10) of the
participants pointed out that a lack of explanation was the main
barrier to adopting AI. One technician stated that, “The tools I
have experienced do not provide any explanations for
predictions, and I need to score every epoch all by myself again
when reviewing the predictions.” Participants further called for
the clinical soundness of their explanations. Another technician
answered as follows:

There certainly exist clinical features to focus on for
sleep staging. Even if automatic programs provided
some sort of explanation, we need to check whether
clinically appropriate EEG features, such as sleep
spindles or amplitudes of alpha waves, are used in
the algorithms.
These assertions reflect important considerations regarding
explanations and the clinical soundness of algorithm procedures
when designing a CDSS [13,16,46].

The Context in Which Explanations Will Be Used

As stated in the subsection above, technicians requested that
AI programs should provide clinically sound explanations for
predictions, as reviewing the correctness of AI predictions
without this information is no different from the manual
annotation of sleep stages from scratch. Participants were

requested to suggest desirable AI adoption scenarios during the
interviews.

In total, 80% (8/10) of the technicians wanted clinically sound
explanations of the predictions. This is relevant to correct EEG
patterns that are important for scoring sleep stages, where users
can easily assess the correctness of the reasoning from the AI
model based on the conventional manuals for the clinical task:

Some automatic programs seem to use procedures
that differ from the widely adopted conventions shared
among sleep technicians. I think information from AI
should adhere to the procedures that we were trained
with to make it easier for us to assess the rationale
for the explanations.
Another technician said as follows:

When reviewing the AI predictions, I need grounds
that convince me. As we are trained to stage based
on standard manuals, explanations from AI should
be closely related to these processes.
This point is especially critical in the clinical domain, where
predefined sets of rules exist [10].

To summarize the trend of the interview answers, the technicians
wanted explanations to validate the correctness of the AI
predictions based on their clinical knowledge of sleep staging.

User Observation: What Information Should Be
Contained in Explanations

By observing technician A for 1 month, we obtained an
understanding of how technicians interpret EEG signals during
sleep staging. Using the clinical context proposed in the manual
[1], we categorized EEG patterns based on how the technician
processed the information in the EEG recordings. On the basis
of how they processed each EEG feature, we created a list of
explanation types that can be provided in the CDSS. The
candidate explanation-type categories are listed in Textbox 3.

Textbox 3. Explanation type to be provided in the clinical decision support systems.

Explanation type 1: occurrence of signals

For some patterns in electroencephalogram recordings, their presence is a clear indicator of certain sleep stages. For example, the occurrence of sleep
spindles and k-complexes is strongly correlated to non–rapid eye movement (REM) 2 stages. In general, technicians search the entire signal to find
these patterns. Therefore, proper detection of these patterns is sufficient information for polysomnographic technicians.

Explanation type 2: ratio of signals

Technician A claimed that estimating the ratio of delta waves in an epoch is the most critical part in identifying the non-REM 3 stages since the scoring
manuals recommend annotating the epoch as stage non-REM 3 when delta waves account for more than 20% of the signals [1]. The participant
mentioned that technicians usually count the number of delta waves manually to correctly identify the non-REM 3 stages in sleep recordings.

Explanation type 3: changes in signals

Alpha waves are prevalently observed during the wake and non-REM 1 stages. However, the participant mentioned that changes in the amplitudes of
alpha waves are important criteria for distinguishing non-REM 1 stages from the wake stages. According to the manual [1], the alpha waves in the
non-REM 1 stages normally exhibit smaller amplitudes compared with the wake stages. Technician A mentioned that perceiving the overall changes
in alpha waves is the primary task in detecting boundaries between the wake and non-REM 1 stages.

Iterative Design Process: How Explanations Can Be
Presented

Refinements of Model Components

In the first iteration session, convolutional filters obtained from
TRIER [28] were shown to technician A. The participant
expressed the concern that although the convolutional filters
contained morphologically significant shapes, undesirable
features (high-frequency noises or low-frequency fluctuations)
were also intermingled in the filter. The participant requested

a refinement of the convolutional filters to improve the quality
of the features. For example, in formulating filters that
correspond to slow waves, the participant wanted to remove
high-frequency components because delta waves have frequency
components <4 Hz. The filter refinement process is illustrated
in Figure 2. Consequently, the convolutional filters contain
features that correspond to the following EEG patterns: alpha
waves, theta waves, delta waves, sawtooth waves, vertex sharp
waves, sleep spindles, and k-complexes. After refinement, the
filters are depicted in Multimedia Appendix 1.

Figure 2. The filter refinement process is as follows: (1) delta waves were low-pass filtered, (2) regions outside the sleep spindle were zeroed-out, and
(3) only the regions corresponding to k-complex features were selected and low-pass filtered afterward.

Selecting Information Source for Making Explanations

Owing to the previous refinement process, components in the
convolutional filter are clinically meaningful, and the
corresponding features in the neural networks can be interpreted
accordingly. For example, for a filter that was designated for
k-complex–related features, the activation values generated
from the filter were used to locate k-complexes in the data.
Similarly, filters analogous to alpha waves can generate
information related to alpha wave changes in the data.

Therefore, we selected convolutional filters and activation values
as basic elements to generate explanations of the model
predictions. In addition to the 2 components, a saliency map
[29], or the gradient values of the input points, was also adopted
to mark significant regions in making a prediction. This
information indicates which regions in the data were important
from the AI perspective. The neural network components used
for generating explanations are summarized in Textbox 4.

Textbox 4. List of information sources for generating information for the clinical decision support systems.

Component 1: convolutional filters and their activation values

Convolutional filters represent the clinical electroencephalogram patterns on which the model is based. Information regarding each clinical feature
can be obtained from the activation values acquired from the filters.

Component 2: saliency values calculated from neural networks

Important regions, which significantly contributed to model predictions, can be inspected from the saliency values. Users can view the data from the
perspective of the artificial intelligence model with saliency values.

Visualization Strategies

Visualization strategies for each clinical feature were devised
to provide information in an easily adopted form for sleep
staging. Initially, plots of activation vectors without any
processing were provided to the participating technician. In this
case, the technician failed to use any of the information in the
activation values. They emphasized that information should be
compatible with the scoring procedure of the technician: “I

cannot make use of the information. I want information to be
provided in a form that can easily fit with my procedure.” This
argument is closely linked to the critical issues in designing AI
assistant tools: information from the system should be easily
integrated into tasks of users [47,48].

From this standpoint, we constructed different visualization
strategies for each explanation type because conventions
observed during the user observation study constituted the

representative logical procedures for processing information in
EEG recordings (Textbox 5).

Figure 3 shows an in-tool visualization of the strategies. Through
visualization, explanations from AI can be conveyed to users

with their proper clinical contexts. Technician A attested that
such explanations with enhanced readability could be easily
adopted in the sleep staging process.

Textbox 5. Four visualization strategies developed in this study. The first three strategies correspond to the interpreting conventions observed during
the user observation study.

Strategy 1: detection boxes

Technician A claimed that the patterns, the presence of which alone indicates a sleep stage, should be more easily identified from the recordings. After
that, it would be sufficient for the technicians to check whether the artificial intelligence (AI) model correctly located these patterns in the
electroencephalogram (EEG) recordings. Therefore, we outlined detection boxes in regions that were detected to include the desired EEG patterns.
Detection algorithms were implemented based on the amplitudes of the activation values calculated from the convolutional filters with the desired
pattern.

Strategy 2: delta wave blocks

As polysomnographic technicians rely on the number of delta waves in the recordings, it is important to make the distribution of delta waves more
visually intuitive. For these cases, technician A wanted to perceive each peak in delta waves as a single entity. We digitized the activation values from
the convolutional filters of delta waves such that regions with activation values higher than a set threshold were encoded as 1 or otherwise as 0.
Visualizing the encoded digits from the activation vectors, technician A perceived the information as blocks of slow waves and counted the number
of blocks in the figure.

Strategy 3: alpha activation surfaces

For detecting changes of alpha waves on the boundary of the wake and non-REM 1 stages, the activation values generated directly from the convolution
between the alpha wave filters and the input recordings were used. In this case, the participant requested fluctuations to be easily perceivable in the
interface. During the iterations, technician A acknowledged that overall fluctuations of the activation values matched well with the perception of the
changes. In such a setting, it was felt that the activation values amplify the changes in amplitudes. The technician asserted that these values are perceived
as a surface area, thus making it more intuitive to sense overall changes in the signal.

Strategy 4: saliency highlights

The participant claimed that saliency values could be helpful for technicians as they could view the recordings from the AI perspective. In particular,
the technician wanted to identify the EEG regions with high saliency values. Therefore, we highlighted the EEG recording segments with high saliency
values.

Figure 3. Visualization strategies for each interpretation pattern. Information in electroencephalogram (EEG) recordings is visualized differently for
each interpretation convention introduced in Textbox 5.

Constructing the System Outline

In the original version of the system, we empower users to
explore EEG recordings interactively with a filter selection box
with which users could choose the desired EEG patterns and

analyze signals based on the selected features. However,
technician A observed that the system with an exploratory filter
selection process might degrade its usability, as it disrupts the
workflows of the technician:

Usually scoring of an epoch takes place in a short
time, typically between five to ten seconds and even
down to one second for easy cases. The selection
process can be a bottleneck during scoring, thus other
technicians are more likely to skip filter selection and
score EEG epochs on their own.
This indicates that for clinical tasks where large numbers of
data points are annotated in a relatively short time, the
accessibility of desired features could be more important than
interactivity. Therefore, instead of interacting with multiple
features, we implemented an information system to be directly
accessible.

Specifically, rather than providing multiple sets of available
information, we chose to show only the information
corresponding to the predicted sleep stage for the epoch (Figure
4). For example, only the detection boxes of sleep spindles and
k-complexes were provided for the epochs that were predicted
as N2 stages. In this version, technician A acknowledged that
the usability of information is enhanced compared with previous
versions where multiple sets of information are provided, which

results in too much information on a single screen and poor
readability. Furthermore, the visualizations could explain the
model predictions because the model provides only information
relevant to its predictions. In Table 3, we list specific
information provided for each stage.

Similar to other tools for assisting sleep staging [49], our system
provides basic information from EEG recordings (Figure 5). It
displays the hypnogram, a graph that visualizes changes in sleep
stages over time, on top of its interface. Hypnograms for
annotated stages from users as well as predictions from AI are
provided so that users can monitor their editing process. A table
that contains time information and annotated sleep stages is
located on the right panel of the interface. The EEG and EOG
recordings of an epoch are depicted in the main interface. In
addition to the basic components, our CDSS provides the
following 
information: 
AI-generated 
predictions 
and
explanations from the AI model around the target EEG channel.
Video recording provided in Multimedia Appendix 2
demonstrates the overview of the CDSS and how users interact
with it.

Figure 4. Visualization strategies for the system. In the electroencephalogram (EEG), the recordings predicted as N2, k-complex, and sleep spindles
are detected and visualized as red and blue boxes. In EEG recordings predicted as N3, detected delta waves are visualized as green blocks. Regions
with high saliency values are highlighted in pink on the EEG recordings. Strategy is abbreviated as S.

Table 3. Information provided for each sleep stage.

Saliency highlights
Alpha activation surfaces
Delta wave blocks
Detection boxes
Stage

✓
✓
Wake

✓
✓
N1a

✓
✓
✓
N2a

✓
✓
N3a

✓
✓
✓
REMb

aN1-3: non–rapid eye movement stages 1-3.
bREM: rapid eye movement.

Figure 5. The following is the overall interface of the system: (1) hypnogram; (2) scoring table lists the time sequence of model predictions and user
annotations; (3) physiological recordings of the data set are visualized in the main panel; (4) predictions; and (5) explanations from artificial intelligence
(AI) are in the middle of the interface. EEG: electroencephalogram; EOG: electrooculogram.

Quantitative Evaluation

Accuracy

Figure 6 illustrates macro-F1 scores. Each point in the scatter
plots corresponds to the performance pair measured using the
comparison method (AI only, μ1) and our method (AI+explainer,
μ2) on the same test set.

For the overall data set, which consisted of 15-minute EEG
segments and single-epoch test set, there were no significant
differences between baseline AI and our CDSS for results from
all participants (µ1=60.22; µ2=61.31; P=.09; n=26; z=1.63;
number of clusters=9). However, a performance improvement
can be observed when we restricted this data set to participants
with <5 years of work experience (µ1=56.75; µ2=60.59; P=.05;
n=26; z=1.63; number of clusters=4). For a single-epoch test
set, in which the utility of the methods could be more accurately
determined, we also observed improvements in accuracy
(µ1=46.55; µ2=50.28; P=.03; n=18; z=1.94; number of
clusters=9).

For the overall data set, compared with the conventional staging
setting where predictions from the AI were not provided (µ1),
the macro-F1 scores were significantly improved when the
technicians adopted our method (µ1=43.23; µ2=68.04; P=.004;
n=17; z=2.64; number of clusters=9). Similarly, the macro-F1
scores improved for novice technicians when we compared our
CDSS with a conventional sleep staging setting (µ1=39.52;
µ2=70.58; P=.05; n=6; z=1.67; number of clusters=3).

It should be noted that these results cannot be directly compared
with sleep staging performance in other studies where
performance was evaluated for whole-night sleep staging results.
In our setting, the performance was measured from short
segments of the EEG recordings. Here, sleep staging
performances could be reported to be lower than the whole night
sleep staging results in previous works, as the macro-F1 scores
of the sleep staging results could be significantly affected by a
few incorrect predictions.

Figure 6. The improvements of the macro-F1 scores in various settings. The results measured as follows from (1) all participants and all test sets; (2)
participants who have <5 years of work experience and all test sets; and (3) all participants and single-epoch test sets are provided. AI: artificial
intelligence.

Correction Rates for Incorrect Predictions From the AI

For the erroneous predictions generated by the AI, statistics
regarding the ratio of correctly revised epochs did not show
significant differences between the baseline AI and our method.
Among the 392 EEG epochs in the test data, 30.8% (121/392)
were incorrectly predicted epochs from our network. Of the
30.8% (121/392) of the epochs, technicians detected 28.5%
(112/392) of the incorrect predictions made with our CDSS,
whereas 28.5% (112/392) were detected in the baseline AI.
There were no significant differences in the detection rates of
incorrectly predicted epochs (P=.39; n=9; z=0.28;r=0.11).
Furthermore, among these incorrectly predicted epochs from
AI detected by technicians, there were no significant differences
in the ratio of correct revisions where technicians identified the
correct stages for incorrect predictions (µ1=15.68%; µ2=16.42%;
P=.76; n=9; z=−0.70; r=0.28). Similarly, for technicians with
<5 years of experience, we did not observe improvements in

the detection rates of incorrectly predicted epochs (µ1=27.19%;
µ2=30.52%; P=.86; n=9; z=−1.10; r=−0.60) and the ratio of
correct revisions (µ1=12.90%; µ2=16.67%; P=.97; n=9; z=−1.83;
r=−1.0).

Interrater Reliability

Scatter plots of the Cohen κ scores calculated for the baseline
(κ1) and our method (κ2) are shown in Figure 7. As with the
macro-F1 scores, improvements in reliability for all cases were
observed (κ1=57.02; κ2=59.54; P=.07; n=212; z=1.49; r=0.17).
However, more significant improvements were observed for
the single-epoch test set (κ1=51.28; κ2=57.21; P=.002; n=64;
z=2.80; r=0.57). According to the criteria for interpreting the
Cohen κ score [50], we obtained moderate agreement between
technicians for both the proposed CDSS and baseline AI
settings. Compared with usual sleep staging settings, where
predictions from AI are not provided, interrater reliability also
improved (κ1=35.06; κ2=77.48; P<.001).

Figure 7. The improvements of interrater reliability in various settings. The results measured from the following: (1) all participants and all test sets
and (2) all participants and single-epoch test sets are provided. AI: artificial intelligence.

Qualitative Evaluation

In this section, a qualitative evaluation of the tool is described.
The adoption strategies developed by the participants and the
perceived usability of the system are discussed.

Helpful Aspects

In total, 78% (7/9) of the participants responded that our system
helped to review AI predictions. They reported that they referred
to information from the CDSS when inspecting AI predictions.
Several aspects of the utility of the tools were confirmed.

Reducing the Workload Required for Pattern
Recognition

One of the most important utilities mentioned during the
interviews was that our tool reduced the workload required to
inspect EEG epochs. Analyzing EEG epochs is similar to visual
searching tasks, where technicians must identify specific patterns
in a visual environment [51]. Participants attested that
information visualized by saliency highlights and detection
boxes drew their attention to important regions [52]. Helped by
the information provided by the detection boxes, participants
were easily able to identify important regions for examination.
On the basis of this information, they assessed whether the
patterns were correctly detected by the algorithm. Similarly,
for delta waves, participants replied that they only needed to
count the number of delta wave blocks, and they did not need to check delta waves one by one from the EEG recordings.

Providing Quantitative Visual Reference

Interviewees stated that sleep staging tasks heavily depend on
the subjective criteria of each technician. Perceiving the
attenuation in alpha waves on the boundary of the wake and N1
stages is one of the most representative cases in which sleep
staging is affected by subjective perception. In total, 55% (5/9)
of the participants used the information from the alpha activation
surfaces as a reference when they were not confident whether
changes in the alpha wave were significant. Even the participant
who was not satisfied with the system answered that this
information was helpful for similar reasons.

Unhelpful Aspects

Two senior participants answered that they did not find the
system helpful. They claimed that the specificity of the
information from the system was below the desired level:

I am quite strict in detecting sleep EEG patterns like
delta waves. However, from my point of view, too
many regions were annotated as significant points.
Thus, for many cases, I did not refer to the provided
information.
This point emphasizes that for clinical tasks where
decision-making may differ between individuals, personal
differences among users should be considered to improve the
usability of a tool. In our domain, for example, user interfaces
that control the sensitivity and specificity of the pattern detection
algorithm can be provided.

Another technician did not refer to the system during the
experiments because it was inconvenient to consider information
other than the EEG recordings:

Due to time constraints, I am used to scoring stages
speedily compared to other technicians. Thus, in some
sense, I tend to rush during sleep staging sessions,
and would rather not care about information in the
system.
Interviews from the participants reveal that the tight time
constraints in clinical environments are another challenge to be
considered when designing a clinical support tool because
changing the workflow of medical staff is a complicated task,
which requires not only reliable performance but also usability
in the workflows [46].

Explanations and Trust in the System

In this section, we summarize how the explanations of our
systems affect user trust during the experiments.

Explanations in Agreed Epochs

For epochs in which the predictions of the participants agreed
with those of the AI, the technicians expressed trust in the
predictions. In this case, the participants expressed that, as
annotated regions from the system matched the important
regions determined by the users, they were confidently able to
continue to the next stages.

Explanations in Epochs With Disagreement

For the epochs where the predictions differed between the AI
and users and were consequently modified by the technicians,
the participants felt that the explanations clarified why AI
predicted the epochs differently. In these cases, one technician
argued:

Without explanations, I might jump to a conclusion
that the accuracy of the AI is not at a desirable level.
However, after being exposed to the explanations,
there were some convincing factors in the
AI-generated predictions, and I tried to re-investigate
the recordings based on the AI explanations to find
out whether my reasoning on predictions was strong
enough to modify the AI prediction.
Even the technician, who did not think that the tool was helpful,
reported:

At first, I totally disagreed with the predictions from
the AI. Throughout the experiments, however, I found
out that AI algorithms were reasonable on some level.
In summary, even though user trust could be severely affected
when the AI predictions were inconsistent with those of the
users, the explanations provided in our CDSS improved the
trustworthiness of the system. In particular, the explanations
helped users find reasonable aspects of AI predictions.

Notable Adoption Strategies

We obtained various sets of answers such as “I first focused on
saliency highlights and then inspected signals based on the
detection boxes” or “I used the alpha activation surfaces in
detecting sleep arousal.” Among these answers, some notable
strategies were identified. We discuss these strategies and their
implications for human–AI collaboration in clinical domains.

Rediscovery of Unnoticed Features

Classifying REM stages solely from EEG recordings is deemed
an impossible task, and sleep technicians prefer to rely on chin
EMG and EOG recordings for REM stages [1]. Thus, most
participants had difficulty evaluating sleep epochs that were
predicted as REM. However, several participants found that
they could distinguish REM from the N1 stages with our
method:

In general, I used to disregard sawtooth waves
because REM has more distinct landmarks in EOG.
However, the AI model correctly captured the
sawtooth waves (patterns that occur in REM stages)
and convinced me that the given epochs are from
REM. Without such information, I might incorrectly
score the stages.
These use cases demonstrate that our tool successfully conveyed
important but easily dismissed features of the data. We believe
that the above insight illustrates an important aspect of
human–AI collaboration because alternative but significant
viewpoints from the AI system successfully convinced the users
during decision-making, which resulted in a performance
enhancement.

Attention Allocation

In the adoption of a clinical AI system, to allocate their attention
efficiently to weak portions of the algorithms, it is important
for users to properly understand the strengths and weaknesses
of AI. This scenario is termed the attention allocation [18].
During the experiments, several technicians developed strategies
related to attention allocation. One participant found that AI is
vulnerable to misidentifying sweat artifacts as delta waves. This
participant strategically allocated more attention to annotated
regions in epochs that were predicted as N3 stages and inspected
whether the annotated regions corresponded to delta waves or
sweat artifacts. With this strategy, this participant effectively
distinguished the N3 stages from epochs contaminated by sweat
artifacts.

In this adoption pattern, participants constructed strategies to
successfully collaborate with AI [48]. Specifically, users
evaluated the convincing and unconvincing contributions of AI,
thus efficiently allocating their attention during the adoption.

Discussion

Principal Findings

To our knowledge, this work is the first to construct an
interpretable AI system using deep learning with a user-centered
approach to develop a CDSS for sleep staging. Recent studies
continuously demonstrate that deep learning algorithms can
achieve comparable performance compared with human experts
[7-9]. However, previous studies have found that human
practitioners require information beyond the delivery of accurate
predictions [18]. To achieve this, we focused on constructing
a CDSS that provides information compatible with the
diagnostic patterns of human raters and helps technicians easily
integrate the CDSS into their sleep staging procedures. Through
user observation and an iterative design process, we obtained

the desired characteristics for the explanations provided in the
CDSS for sleep staging. First, clinical practitioners wanted
explanations to help them validate AI predictions. Here,
technicians wanted explanations that adhered to their clinical
knowledge. Second, we categorized the type of information
based on our observations of how technicians interpret the
characteristics of each EEG. Finally, during the iterative design
process, we confirmed that information contained in neural
network components can be used to generate explanations for
sleep staging results. The design components were updated
iteratively based on the feedback of the technician.

When evaluating the improvements in the sleep staging
performance of all participants, we did not observe significant
improvements when the P value was approximately .17.
However, we believe that our quantitative evaluation contains
meaningful results. First, when assessing the improvements for
novice participants, we observed that the macro-F1 scores
improved by 6.7% with a P value of .02. Considering that novice
technicians may rely more on supportive information than expert
technicians, this result implies that our tool could be effectively
used to augment the sleep scoring capacities of novice
technicians with acceptable sleep-relevant explanations. Second,
when assessing the improvements in a single-epoch sleep
scoring setting, which is similar to a stress-test configuration,
we observed significant improvements in the macro-F1 scores
and interrater reliability. Notable results in this stress test setting
could indicate that our explanations to an extent helped
technicians interpret the signal characteristics of each EEG
epoch. Third, the results of the qualitative evaluation implied
that the CDSS supports sleep staging by reducing the workload
required for pattern recognition and providing quantitative visual
references. These findings show that the developed system
successfully and appropriately complemented the assessments
of the technician by suggesting the desired information. Our
tool obtained such utility for two reasons: (1) clinically sound
features were correctly addressed and (2) information
visualization was designed to be acceptable in conventional
workflows of the sleep staging process.

We identified further issues that should be considered when
designing a CDSS. During the experiments, 20% (2/10) of the
technicians indicated that our system was not adoptable for
workflow in sleep staging. In particular, 10% (1/10) of the
technicians expressed a lack of trust in the AI system. In general,
the avoidance of algorithmic results is an important challenge
to be addressed when adopting an automatic system [53].
However, these challenges can be interpreted based on skill
levels of the technician. For example, based on the Rasmussen
skill-, rule-, and knowledge-based behavior model [24], senior
technicians may score sleep stages without consciously
processing EEG information. Therefore, additional explanations
from the CDSS can distract such technicians. In contrast, novice
technicians may require additional cognitive processing of
information in the recordings. Therefore, explanations from the
CDSS could be helpful as guiding information during processing
and lead to significant enhancements in their performance when
a CDSS is adopted.

In addition, over reliance on computer systems is another
challenge to be considered when adopting decision support tools

[11,54]. When adopting AI systems, there are cases where users
tend to accept predictions from systems without any personal
judgment on whether the information is correct. In our
evaluation, the correction rates for erroneous predictions did not improve. This means that even though explanations from
our system successfully operated as convincing components for
model predictions, they failed to reveal ambiguous predictions.
These results have implications for further development (eg,
explanations for uncertainties in predictions can be provided
by the model to inform users about ambiguous components in
the data [15]). The confidence of the predictions can be
algorithmically estimated by the models as additional
information [55]. Such features can be integrated into a single
framework to enhance safety in human–AI interaction systems.

Comparison With Previous Work

Previous studies on sleep staging have confirmed that
suggestions for proper computational features can enhance sleep
staging performance. An experimental study demonstrated that
interrater reliability among technicians can be significantly
improved by computer-derived suggestions [19]. Taking
inspiration from that study, our work proposes an approach to
provide clinically meaningful information from deep learning
models. Our results are consistent with those of a previous study,
as the interrater reliability in our system improved significantly.
However, our study differs from previous works in several
respects. Although previous tools for sleep staging have already
provided sleep-relevant information to users [56,57], these
algorithms require a large amount of parameter tuning to fit
each data set [58]. In this sense, these works used a manually
curated algorithm rather than augmenting the AI system to
provide information. Furthermore, our work addresses the utility
and readability of the system during the development of the
tool, whereas previous studies preferentially focused on the
calculation of sleep-relevant features in EEGs.

In the domain of human–AI interaction, several deep learning
models have been exploited as information sources to assist
medical staff with appropriate knowledge. In these works, the
usability of clinical AI was mainly addressed from the
perspective of human users [18]. A previous study surveyed
how and what information should be provided for the analysis
of radiographic images [59]. This work stressed that information
systems should be designed based on the user needs of clinical
practitioners. Another study introduced a novel medical image
retrieval system that leverages embedding vectors in a neural
network to retrieve similar medical images [47]. These bodies
of work demonstrated that model interpretations should be
formulated in the context of clinical knowledge, as users require
medical explanations during adoption. Similarly, our work
extensively investigates the desirable characteristics of sleep
staging AI and proposes how these features can be provided in
a CDSS.

For sleep staging, an earlier work proposed an AI framework
that prioritizes ambiguous epochs in EEG recordings with
explanations in cases of uncertainty [15]. However, this study
proposes a conceptual framework rather than a practical
implementation of the system. In this work, CDSS was simulated
in a Wizard of Oz experiment, where human researchers

manually generated the explanations in the system to address
the ambiguous epochs in EEG recordings. In contrast, our work
proposed a practical methodology for constructing meaningful
information on sleep stages to assist clinical practitioners.

Limitations and Future Directions

The limitations that require consideration remain in our study.
First, we conducted user observations and iterative design
sessions with only 1 technician. Although manuals for sleep
staging support most of the feedback of the technician, specific
requirements defined by different users are necessary for
user-centered 
design 
research. 
Moreover, 
during 
the
experiments, participants reviewed the EEG recordings provided
from a public EEG data set. As EEG recordings are highly
heterogeneous across data sets and recording environments, the
utility of the system could be more accurately evaluated if the
neural network model was trained on data sets recorded in
real-world settings.

Our work is further limited as we only considered EEG
recordings for sleep scoring. Assuming real-world sleep scoring
is performed with polysomnographic recordings, which include
EEG, EOG, EMG, and ECG signals, not considering other
recordings may have affected the scoring results. For example,
eye movement patterns are crucial factors in identifying the
REM stages. As we have only provided information for EEG
recordings, we could not offer explanations regarding eye
movements. However, we believe that our overall design
approach can be applied similarly in future studies to explain
the output of other physiological sensors, such as EOG and
EMG. These future studies could construct a more
comprehensible CDSS for sleep scoring. In addition, evaluation
of the CDSS system with whole-night polysomnography will
provide more generalizable performance results that can be
connected to the results of real-world polysomnography.

The overall sample size may not be sufficient for comparison,
considering that there are high interrater disagreements on the
sleep staging results depending on individual characteristics.
Even though we observed some notable improvements with the
small sample size, a further evaluation study with more
technicians is desirable. Furthermore, the representativeness of
participants should be mentioned. Technicians from secondary
and tertiary hospitals participated in the evaluation study, and
technicians in primary hospitals were not considered.
Technicians in primary hospitals may exhibit different
tendencies toward the adoption of automatic sleep scoring tools.
Thus, our study did not address this population. However,
considering that technicians in primary hospitals tend to have
relatively short experience in polysomnography, we believe
that these results from novice technicians can be generalized to
polysomnographic technicians in primary care.

An AI system that provides explanations for predictions was
compared with conventional models that do not provide
explanations. In this setting, there was a risk that the participants
were aware that the experimental objective was to construct and
evaluate the effectiveness of the explanations. However,
considering that explainable AI systems for medical domains
have not been widely developed, many previous CDSS studies
conducted experiments in a similar manner to our work [15].

Nevertheless, the omission of blinding conditions is a limitation
of our experimental setting.

Although our work qualitatively evaluates how users perceive
the CDSS, future work is required to quantitatively assess the
usability of the tool. For example, the NASA-Task Load Index
[60] could be used in a prospective study to compare the
required workload for each sleep scoring tool. Other aspects,
such as time spent scoring sleep stages, could be estimated in
a more controlled experimental setting. We believe that future
studies will provide more insights into the usability of CDSS.

Conclusions

Our findings indicate that formulating clinical explanations for
automated predictions using information from an AI system
that incorporates a user-centered design process is an effective
strategy for developing a CDSS for sleep staging. The proposed
CDSS has great potential to be integrated into the real-world
clinical workflow in a sleep laboratory based on the extent to
which performance was improved and is highly useful in sleep
staging.