FIELD ACTION REPORT

Using Human-Centered Design to Develop, Launch, and
Evaluate a National Digital Health Platform to Improve
Reproductive Health for Rwandan Youth

Nicole Ippoliti,a Mireille Sekamana,a Laura Baringer,a Rebecca Hopea

DESIGNING FOR DIGITAL WITH
YOUTH
Between 2016 and 2019, CyberRwanda was devel-
oped using a youth-driven and youth-led design
process with 1,074 Rwandan youth, caregivers,
teachers, health care providers, and government sta-
keholders (Figure).
The platform’s intended outcomes for adoles-
cents aged 12–19 years were to:

1.
Improve knowledge: Help adolescents gain
employment skills, set future goals, and learn
about FP/RH in a private, safe space

2.
Improve access: Support adolescents’ ability
to access FP/RH products and services by
strengthening linkages to services

3.
Improve quality: Improve providers’ knowl-
edge on FP/RH and address provider bias to
improve service quality for youth

We describe the methods used to design
CyberRwanda
and
the
populations
engaged

throughout the phases of design research, proto-
typing of initial and refined concepts, product and
content development, pilot, and adaptive imple-
mentation and evaluation. Throughout the design
and implementation process from 2016 to 2021,
our team moved from youth-centered design to
youth-driven, to a youth-led approach today
(Table 1 provides definitions of terms), where
youth members of the team led decision making
on intervention design. This transition from youth-
centered to youth-driven and youth-led approaches
was supported through dedicated training of youth
members in the following: how to conduct each
phase of the HCD process, conducting user experi-
ence testing of digital prototypes, and ensuring the
safeguarding and protection of youth participants.
Additionally, all staff members (youth and adult)
were trained in youth-driven or youth-led design
principles. This includes how to recognize and ad-
dress the power imbalances that exist between adult
and youth team members and how to create

FIGURE. Overview of Phases of HCD Phases, Data Collection Objectives, and Methods Throughout the Design, Pilot, and
Implementation of the CyberRwanda Project

Abbreviations: HCD, human-centered design; RCT, randomized controlled trial.

Throughout the
design and
implementation
process, our team
moved from
youth-centered
design, to youth-
driven, to a youth-
led approach.

S247

opportunities for youth members to lead activities
and/or cofacilitate with appropriate support and
guidance.

Design Research
Design research is the primary stage in the HCD
process that leverages qualitative and observa-
tional data to understand human behavior, latent
needs, and the environmental factors or social
norms that might contribute to the design of an in-
tervention. The team began the design research
phase (Table 2) with the key question of how to
leverage technology to address 2 pressing and
inextricably linked issues facing young people:
teen
pregnancy
and
unemployment,
with
young people as the primary users. This phase
consisted of interactive codesign workshops,
focus group discussions, and in-depth inter-
views with young people, health care providers
in both public and private facilities and phar-
macies,
parents,
government
officials,
and
other critical stakeholders. Interviews were

conducted by Rwandan youth designers, in
Kinyarwanda with simultaneous English trans-
lation. During the HCD process, participants
were purposely sampled in 8 districts (Gasabo,
Nyarugenge, Kicukiro, Nyagatare, Ruhango,
Huye, Musanze, Rwamagana) in
rural, urban,
and peri-urban contexts, to ensure diverse represen-
tation regarding socioeconomic status, gender,
age, educational status, and social vulnerabilities
(participants included former sex workers, insecure-
ly housed youth, and domestic workers). A literature
and policy review and landscape analysis of existing
digital and youth-centered programs was also con-
ducted to ensure that CyberRwanda’s focus was
non-duplicative and aligned with national priorities.
The design research phase enabled the team to
rapidly assess the desirability of a digital interven-
tion and potential barriers to access for urban/
peri-urban youth. It also revealed young peoples’
and providers’ beliefs and behavioral drivers and
barriers as they related to FP/RH. Journey map-
ping was used to understand topics and themes

TABLE 2. Selected Design Research Methods Used for CyberRwanda

a Personas are adapted from World Health Organization (WHO). Digital Implementation Investment Guide (DIIG): Integrating Digital Interventions Into Health
Programmes. WHO; 2020. https://apps.who.int/iris/rest/bitstreams/1303132/retrieve.

In the design
research phase,
journey mapping
was used to
understand topics
and themes that
youth found most
interesting.

S248

that youth found most interesting (Table 2).
Young people mapped their various life goals and
important milestones and by when they hoped to
achieve them. The youth then listed resources and
information they would need to achieve those
goals at the desired age. This process provided im-
portant insights into a young person’s lived reali-
ty; mapping their everyday experiences, goals,
motivations, and challenges enabled the design
team to develop prototypes that integrated content
and features that ultimately resonated with what
young people found to be desirable and inspiration-
al. Research with parents, teachers, and health care
providers revealed how to develop prototypes that
would be socially accepted and aligned with national
priorities, revealed appropriate “entry points” when
discussing sensitive topics, and unearthed pharma-
cists as potential secondary users.

Prototyping
Using the learnings from the design research phase,
multiple rough prototypes were tested with young
people and pharmacists. Rough prototypes are

quick, tangible, low-fidelity versions of a product or
intervention used to gather rapid user feedback on
the design, content, delivery channel, and experi-
ence. Table 3 shows selected methods used to share
prototypes with participants and the methods of eli-
citing feedback. These rough prototypes not only en-
abled the team to test and iterate on ideas quickly
and cheaply but also signaled to young people and
pharmacists that they could provide honest feed-
back, even if it meant dramatically changing the ap-
proach. When refined and polished prototypes are
presented, participants are more likely to hold back
critical feedback if they believe much of the design is
already fixed.22

Prototyping was conducted in 2 phases to en-
able the team to iterate ideas and develop increas-
ingly high-fidelity prototypes based on learnings
from the previous phase. Prototypes were tested
and assessed based on predefined criteria that
included desirability for participants, cultural ac-
ceptability, and feasibility. We used research ques-
tions to assess these factors during the prototyping
phase and the subsequent ways in which they

Rough prototype of Shop interface. © 2018 Caroline Wong/YLabs

S249

informed pivot points for the intervention de-
sign (Box 1).

Product and Content Development Through
User Testing
Building on lessons from the previous stages of
work, the team proceeded to develop the final
digital intervention design. Although at this stage
the intervention was more fully refined, addi-
tional testing and iteration with young people
and pharmacists were conducted during all stages
of content development, web application user
experience design, service design development,
and visual design. Product refinement and testing
during this phase enabled the team to improve
user
experience
and
identify
any
potential

barriers to use through testing the web app flow
and function, brand, look and feel.
To develop the narrative and factual content in
preparation for the RCT, a team comprised a nar-
rative content writer, social norm and FP experts,
and a behavioral scientist mapped the behavioral
outcomes to the theory of planned behavior. The
team determined how best to communicate key
messages throughout the content based on an in-
tervention mapping protocol for integrating theo-
ry and evidence-based behavior change methods
into an intervention.23

Pilot
In preparation for the RCT launch across 60 schools
and 75 pharmacies in 8 districts, an 8-week pilot

TABLE 3. Prototyping Methods Used to Develop CyberRwanda

Methods of sharing prototypes used
Description

Paper prototyping: used to develop the initial design platform
and subsequent iterations, content, and marketing materials
(content, UI/UX, social media marketing strategy, promotional
materials)

Paper and cardboard prototypes are used or co-created to create a quick but
interactive physical representation of the product or experience.

Role play: Used in prototyping the end-to-end ordering
experience
Participants are assigned certain scenarios and roles to help designers under-
stand the interactions through observing the improvised scenario-specific
performances.

Storyboarding: Used in prototyping workshops with pharma-
cists to walk through the potential value of the platform and pain
points

Drawings or images displayed in sequence for pre-visualizing a new experience
or service (e.g., a clinic visit).

Low- and high-fidelity interactive prototyping/digital prototyp-
ing: Used in the final stages of prototyping of the digital
platform

Participants interact with an interactive prototype that has the look and feel of
the final product.

“Wizard of Oz”: used to test a motorcycle taxi delivery service
prototype
Participants interact with a digital product that appears to be computer-driven,
when in fact responses are human-controlled. This method may intersect with
others listed here.

Methods of eliciting feedback and preferences
Purpose

Ideation and co-creation: used to design and iterate on the cast
of CyberRwanda webcomic characters, as well as developing
storyline and content)

Participants generate entirely or partly new ideas for prototypes to test based on
a design brief.

Elicitation: commonly used at the end of a prototyping session
after showing multiple concepts
Asking the participants directly what improvements can be made to the proto-
types to better reflect their needs and desires, what they prefer, and why.

Ranking: used to rank preferred channels of communication for
young people to inform CyberRwanda marketing (e.g., posters,
radio ads/shows, referral cards, and SMS alerts)

Participants vote and/or rank their preferred prototypes and top concerns.

Pre-/post-survey: this was used to evaluate knowledge im-
provement after interacting with an early prototype
Use surveys to evaluate change in specific indicators pre- and post-interaction
with prototypes. The level of rigor may vary depending on the needs and the
phase of the project. In early stages when testing low-fidelity, “rough” proto-
types, these may help in rapidly deciding on prototype selection, but the sam-
ple size may not be powered appropriately. During the pilot, and
implementation, and sometimes for live prototyping, an adequately powered
sample is used.

S250

was conducted to finalize service design and imple-
mentation models, baseline data collection tools,
and training. The pilot, conducted across 4 schools,
1 youth center, and 8 pharmacies, enabled the
team to test every component of the web app
and implementation models before a large-scale
launch. Through post-pilot in-depth interviews
and focus groups with 158 stakeholders and stu-
dents, data from Google Analytics, and pilot base-
line test data, the team gained critical learning and
iterated appropriately. Learning from the pilot in-
formed the need to provide more intervention
touch points for pharmacists and pharmacy staff as
primary users, to increase the number of tablets
provided at each school, to refine the school re-
cruitment and sensitization strategy, and to im-
prove the user experience of the shop and the site
as a whole (outlined in the Results section).

Adaptive Implementation and Evaluation
CyberRwanda is entering into a 2-year implemen-
tation and evaluation phase, in which the same
HCD methodology used to design CyberRwanda
will be applied as the team iterates the design of
the web app and adds features and content. This
will include working with young people to devel-
op all new narrative content and validating it be-
fore it is finalized, analyzing data generated by
Google Analytics to understand which pages and
content young people respond to the most, con-
ducting focus group discussions with youth and
teachers on additional topics and features that
are needed, and working with parents and other
stakeholders to support usage of CyberRwanda in
schools and at home. From 2018 to now, the team
continues to use HCD to iterate, test, and evolve
CyberRwanda’s
product
and
implementation

BOX 1. Research Questions Used to Develop Prototypes of CyberRwanda

Do the themes and tone of the educational content resonate with young people?
Our initial prototypes for youth and providers included a virtual nurse/educator that answered questions through real-life stories.
Through prototyping this idea with young people, they shared a preference for combining information about future planning and em-
ployment with the health-focused content. Parents, who reported concerns about their children being exposed to the often-taboo topic of
family planning (FP)/reproductive health (RH), responded positively to prototypes presenting CyberRwanda as a guide to future health
success, integrating employment-related content. Therefore, the final CyberRwanda curriculum was changed to reflect these prefer-
ences. The content on CyberRwanda today contains RH and FP content but also integrates other key aspects that young people care
about, such as finding a job, goal setting, and economic empowerment. The content role models conversations between young people
and parents, between parents, and between young people and providers and provides examples of how to navigate conversations on
sensitive topics.

How do we ensure accessibility and affordability through the delivery of the CyberRwanda program via various
digital channels (i.e., SMS, native app, etc.)?
Via focus groups and interviews, the team carefully mapped young people’s access to and use of different digital delivery channels such
as personal or shared mobile devices and use of different social media and printed media channels. Through this research and low-
fidelity prototyping (Table 3), youth expressed that they rarely download native apps and had concerns about the costs of data and
memory use associated with using a native app. Furthermore, young people shared that they were using computer labs at the youth
center to look for jobs and access information through online resources. They wanted CyberRwanda to be among the resources they
could easily access using those computers. Therefore, the team pivoted the design to a web app that could be more readily accessed
on any phone, tablet, or computer. This finding also expanded the implementation model to focus on loading CyberRwanda on tablets
in youth centers along with schools. However, some schools and youth centers are in areas where Internet connectivity is not reliable,
which delays the loading of content for users. As a backup, the team also developed a native app that is installed on tablets at schools
and youth centers. With the native app, the youth at the schools and youth centers can access CyberRwanda content offline without
needing to rely on the Internet.

What would encourage young people to provide accurate information when accessing over-the-counter contraceptive
methods?
During design research, pharmacists expressed concerns about young people not honestly answering medically relevant questions when aiming to
purchase contraceptive products. Young people were concerned about their privacy when requesting services in front of other customers. Youth
reported pretending to purchase products for someone else to avoid judgment and potentially uncomfortable questions. In turn, pharmacy staff
had concerns that young people were purchasing products without the necessary information to use them safely.
Initial prototypes were developed to explore how privacy might be improved in pharmacy settings. Initially, a “screener” survey prototype was
explored. Upon arrival, the pharmacy staff directed young people to a paper survey including all medically relevant questions. Young people
were concerned that other customers would be able to view private details while they were completing the form. Using the learnings from this
prototype, the shop portion of the CyberRwanda platform now includes an online questionnaire with medically relevant questions that the user
completes before purchasing a product. Depending on their answers, the platform allows them to proceed with the order or suggests a better
alternative.

S251

model, with the participation of an additional 400
stakeholders.
Throughout the design and adaptive imple-
mentation process, the team prioritized several spe-
cial considerations when applying HCD approaches
to designing with youth (Box 2).

RESULTS
From 2016 to the present, more than 1,000 Rwandan
youth, caregivers, teachers, health care providers,
and government stakeholders have been en-
gaged
in
the
design
and
evolution
of
CyberRwanda to answer the question, “How
might we leverage technology to address teen
pregnancy and unemployment among urban
youth?” The HCD process resulted in a digital
behavior change intervention designed with 2
main users in mind: urban and peri-urban
young people and pharmacy staff (nurses and
head pharmacists).

For young people, the web and future native
app includes 3 sections:

1.
Stories. Interactive behavior change web-
comic series, with stories featuring a cast of
characters designed with young people.

2.
Learn. A robust library of young people’s pri-
ority questions, with more than 200 (and
growing) frequently asked questions and a di-
rectory to help youth locate both public and
private health care facilities and pharmacies
in their area.

3.
Shop. Young people can discreetly and pri-
vately order, purchase, and pick up certain
pharmaceuticals and other health products at
the CyberRwanda pharmacy of their choice.
Location and pricing are transparent on the
site.

CyberRwanda will be available to participating
schools and youth centers where the intervention

CyberRwanda web app loaded on a tablet. © 2020 Oscar Muhire/AfricaMile

The HCD process
resulted in a
digital behavior
change
intervention
designed with
2 main users in
mind: urban and
peri-urban young
people and
pharmacy staff.

S252

is made available on online tablets. Youth may also
access CyberRwanda on their personal devices and
school computers, where available.
For pharmacy staff, CyberRwanda is building a
network of private pharmacies to support the provi-
sion of high-quality, youth-friendly care. Pharmacies
who join this network have access to:


Training: In-person and virtual training to
CyberRwanda pharmacy staff. The 1-day in-
person training for either the staff nurse or phar-
macists covers key topics such as youth-friendly
service provision, FP methods, and how to use
the CyberRwanda platform and pharmacy por-
tal. Providers who attend the CyberRwanda
training will receive continuing professional de-
velopment credits through accreditation by the
National Pharmacy Council. A more condensed
accredited version of the training is available vir-
tually for all other pharmacy staff.


Portal: Pharmacies access the online Cyber
Rwanda pharmacy portal that enables them to
add and update health products and pricing
online as part of the Shop. When youth order
products from the pharmacy of their choice,
pharmacy staff can build relationships with
young people in their communities.


Additional support: The CyberRwanda team
provides weekly support to pharmacies to en-
sure that they can use the portal and receive
orders and to identify additional training areas
and needs.

Implementation will be accompanied by a
2-year impact evaluation, consisting of a 3-arm
RCT in schools, serial cross-sectional study in
youth centers, qualitative studies, and a cost-
effectiveness evaluation across 60 schools and
9 youth centers in 8 districts in Rwanda (sample
at baseline n=6,082; 2,953 male; 3,129 female).6

The 3 arms of the RCT are: (1) “self-service” mod-
el: schools will be provided with tablets, a hotspot,
and trained school ambassadors who promote
CyberRwanda; (2) “facilitated” model: schools
receive the same as the self-service model, plus
structured activities held in a CyberRwanda club,
where trained peers support youth to explore
CyberRwanda content in a group setting with dis-
cussion and reflection; (3) control: schools without
any form of the intervention. In addition to being
implemented in the schools participating in the RCT,
the self-service model will also be implemented in
9district-levelyouthcentersand4 pilot schools,total-
ing an additional 13 implementation sites.

Table 4 shows key findings during the design
process and the resulting major changes that
were made to the intervention design. Using HCD
as an end-to-end approach resulted in several crit-
ical process learnings that were foundational to
the
eventual
design
and
implementation
of
CyberRwanda.

Expanding the Audience of Focus
CyberRwanda’s original demographic focused on
adolescent girls. However, design research sessions

BOX 2. Methods Used to Safely Design With Youth

Training youth designers. Using a predominantly youth-led or youth-driven approach (Table 1), young Rwandans were trained as youth
researchers to conduct human-centered design (HCD) sessions and most sessions, including user testing and development of all content, were
led by youth. Trained youth designers were compensated in line with national salary benchmarks and not expected to volunteer their services for
free.

Creating safe spaces. The design team used multiple techniques to support the development of a safe space for youth to engage by incorpo-
rating principles of trauma-informed care and led icebreaker activities designed to address the inherent power differential between researcher
and participants. Less taboo topics were leveraged as “gateway” activities, and the team took steps to ensure that the session was valuable to youth
by providing activities of interest and use to them (such as follow-up question and answer sessions). All young people were compensated for their
time and participation.

Ensuring comprehensive safeguarding protocols. Several precautions were taken to ensure that child and youth safeguarding mea-
sures were in place. All staff were background checked and trained on child protection and safeguarding and followed robust child protection
policies. Staff never conducted sessions alone with young people.

Conducting comprehensive risk mitigation assessments. Sensitivities and stigma surrounding reproductive health means prototyping
with youth could potentially pose a social or safeguarding risk to them. Risk analysis and mitigation planning were conducted before prototyping,
and prototypes were also tested with parents, teachers, and community leaders for acceptability and to help inform risk estimation before the pilot.

Ensuring ethical use of participant images and data. All young people provided written consent or assent with adult consent for their
participation in the HCD process. Images were only taken and/or used with written consent from the young person. No images of youths aged
younger than 18 years were used in program materials.

S253

revealed that young men had limited knowl-
edge about FP/RH and had few trusted sources
of information on the topic, though they were
often the most influential driver of girls’ FP de-
cision making. Young men lacked the confi-
dence to access condoms and shared the same

concerns about privacy when seeking care at a
clinic. Based on these insights, the project team
expanded the project scope to include informa-
tion, topics, webcomic characters, and delivery
channels that appealed to young men as well as
girls.

TABLE 4. Key Findings and Iterations to Intervention Design of CyberRwanda

Key Finding
Iteration to Intervention Design

Supply-side barriers to quality care

Youth often saw health care providers as “gatekeepers” to acces-
sing methods and were afraid about the questions they might be
asked at health care facilities

We pivoted the platform away from simply linking to clinics to providing
direct-to-consumer products and information directly in the hands of youth
to reduce barriers associated with gatekeeping. Medically relevant screen-
ing is conducted at point of order to minimize bias-related barriers to FP/RH
care and expedite the interaction between provider and youth. Youth can
choose from a selection of pharmacists with transparent pricing.

Youth strongly preferred pharmacies as a point of access for con-
traception due to expediency and privacy
Deliver products and services via pharmacies: Young people’s priority con-
cerns for privacy and expediency informed the pivot to supplying products
via pharmacies instead of clinics, as originally planned. The platform also
links to all public clinics in the intervention districts for longer-term methods.

Pharmacists lacked confidence in addressing young peoples’ SRH
needs and had knowledge gaps on FP
Designed tailored training modules with and for pharmacists and pharmacy
staff to address common misinformation, provide training on adolescent-
friendly care, and support self-identification of provider bias to help provi-
ders improve access to care for adolescents.

Demand-side barriers to quality care

Program lacked content on economic opportunity and job readi-
ness, making it less appealing to youth and less acceptable to
parents

The webcomic stories and FAQs now include content on preparing for em-
ployment and address gender stereotypes on careers. The site links to job
search resources. The site tagline is “learn about relationships, your body,
and your future.”

Boys had clearly expressed needs for information on health, rela-
tionships, and reproductive health
Content, characters, and the direct-to-consumer platform were codesigned
and implemented with and for young men.

Youth lacked access to trusted, nonjudgmental information in ac-
cessible language they could understand
Characters were designed with youth to represent trusted personas for
young men, women, and parents. A webcomic format was introduced to
deliver information in a compelling, locally relevant way, focused on
addressing key behavioral barriers and social and environmental norms
that stigmatized access to FP/RH services. All content was reviewed by
gender and behavior change and validated by youth. Finally, it was ap-
proved by the National Health Communications Committee to ensure align-
ment with national guidelines.

Young people were primarily concerned with lack of privacy and
confidentiality in accessing information and services
To minimize barriers to engagement and allay fears about confidentiality,
no identifiable data were collected from youth, even though this limited the
ability to track individual user engagement. All data from the CyberRwanda
platform were gathered and stored in compliance with General Data
Protection Regulation guidelines.The shop was designed so that users can
order without supplying personal information, without needing to request
the product in person from the pharmacist. An order code is provided,
which is needed to collect their order, with an optional SMS to their phone.

Given low levels of knowledge on FP/RH, youth often seek help for a
specific problem rather than a specific product
In the shop, we pivoted to include both products for quick access for in-
formed users and added common scenarios as another pathway to access
products on the platform for naïve users or users experiencing a crisis (e.g.,
“I had unprotected sex.”). When a user clicks on those scenarios, they ac-
cess essential information and recommendations of products and additional
services available.

Abbreviations: FAQs, frequently asked questions; FP, family planning, RH, reproductive health; SMS, short message service.

S254

I had a perception that when a girl gets pregnant,
there’s nothing to do other than wait to have a child.
Or when a girl has forgotten to take emergency contra-
ceptive after 72 hours after unsafe sex, I thought that
that it is over; if you attempt to abort, you can die.
—Male secondary school student, 18 years old,
interviewed during the pilot

As young people, we fear being seen by a neighbor at the
shop when you have to buy a contraceptive, you are shy
that you are judged of what you are going to use the con-
dom for.—Male secondary school student, 18 years
old, interviewed during the pilot

Findings from the pilot evaluation revealed
that pharmacists and pharmacy staff needed to be
seen as primary users. By doing so, the team fur-
ther refined CyberRwanda’s role in working with
pharmacists by expanding the focus audience to
not only the head pharmacist in a pharmacy but
also the nurse as young people trusted both but
went to each for different reasons. Additionally,
the team revised the training tools in partnership
with pharmacists to ensure that content and the
training approach addressed pharmacists’ most
common information gaps, was acceptable and ac-
cessible to them, and also leveraged their motiva-
tions to better serve adolescents. The training has
been accredited with continuing professional de-
velopment credits by the National Pharmacy
Council to increase the value of and trust in the
program to participating pharmacists.

Designing Educational Content
Extensive prototyping with a broad range of
young people revealed how to design educational
content for digital inclusion, different learning
styles, and multiple literacy levels. The early and
continued engagement of a spectrum of hetero-
geneous young people regarding digital access,
literacy, educational, and socioeconomic status
informed the development of an inclusive and
accessible intervention. Based on youth prefer-
ences
for
shorter
content,
the
intervention
pivoted to a less text-dependent webcomic for-
mat delivered in both Kinyarwanda and English
to accommodate different levels of literacy and
support visual learners. In response to input
from youth and parents on what makes a trusted
health advisor, characters who deliver the con-
tent through stories were codesigned to represent
clinic providers, aspirational older peers, and par-
ents themselves. Given low levels of understand-
ing about puberty, menstruation, and consent,
additional topics were added.

Finally, there is little evidence on the level of
in-person facilitation needed to implement digital
interventions in school settings. We had found
that youth were familiar with and actively partici-
pated in school health clubs. Therefore, we decid-
ed to compare a facilitated model, building on this
existing school club culture to facilitate group and
peer-driven learning (especially for less tech-
savvy users), with a self-service model that supports
potentially more private, self-directed learning.
During the pilot in 3 schools, a higher percentage of
students reported using CyberRwanda at the self-
service school as compared to the facilitated schools
(95% vs. 45% of students, respectively). Qualitative
interviews with staff and students informed a rede-
sign of the training and onboarding of teachers to
reduce gatekeeping of tablets and improve access
to CyberRwanda in both models during implem-
entation.
Given variable levels of digital access especially
between rural and urban youth, CyberRwanda is
delivered via tablets in schools and youth centers
as well as online, rather than relying solely on
youth access to smartphones. Video instructions
were designed to help youth with low literacy
and low confidence using online ordering to easily
navigate the shop function of the platform.

I was interested by the part called ‘Shop.’ You can order
contraceptive products using this program and get the
products without the people knowing what you ordered.
I like this part so much more than other parts, but I
didn’t order anything. —Female secondary school
student, 14 years old, interviewed in pilot study

Accessing Health Care Services
Design research and prototyping changed the
interventions’ health care access points to cater to
youths’ preferred service delivery points of phar-
macies. In the early design stages, the team’s ini-
tial assumption
had been
that intervention
would refer youth to primary health care clinics
for FP/RH service delivery. However, during de-
sign research, young people shared fears of seek-
ing health care services at the clinic for fear of
being seen by fellow community members,
which clinic staff confirmed.

Youth don’t want to come to the clinic because they are
afraid of being seen by their parent or someone they
know. —Nurse, Kigali

Both pharmacists and youth reported that
they commonly opt to use emergency contra-
ception to prevent pregnancy after an “accident”

Comparing a
facilitated and
self-service model
for in school
settings, a higher
percentage of
students reported
using
CyberRwanda at
the self-service
school.

S255

(unprotected sex), as youth perceive this as
more socially acceptable than admitting to
“planned” premarital sex, which is often stigma-
tized. Pharmacists reported seeing the same
youth return repeatedly for emergency contra-
ception after multiple “accidents,” suggesting
young people are using emergency contracep-
tion as a regular method to avoid provider
stigma. Given that youth can readily access
emergency contraception at a pharmacy with
minimal risk of exposure, they often do not
seek longer-term contraception at clinics. In
fact, youth are so reluctant to visit clinics, they
prefer to pay for products or services (e.g., preg-
nancy tests and emergency contraception) at the
pharmacy that could be accessed for a much
lower cost at the clinic.
Youth had a strong preference for receiving
FP/RH services at the pharmacy, valuing the ex-
pedient, confidential, and private method of ser-
vice delivery. However, pharmacists were often
reluctant to provide contraceptive products to
unmarried adolescents, lacked private spaces for
counseling, and often had inaccurate knowledge
about FP. These findings informed a pivot toward
a direct-to-consumer platform providing stream-
lined access to and online screening for health
products supplied by a network of trained phar-
macists, with signposting to clinics for longer-
acting FP and other RH care.

I struggle to counsel my customers on FP because our
pharmacy has no private space. —Pharmacist

I feel more comfortable prescribing the oral contraceptive
pill to a married woman because waking up to her hus-
band on a daily basis will remind her to take the pill.
Unmarried women don’t have this kind of reminder.
—Pharmacist

Designing for Accessibility
User testing revealed that despite rapid increases
in technology ownership and use, for many
Rwandan youth, especially those with lower
incomes, using a smartphone or tablet is a new
skill. CyberRwanda had to be designed to be acces-
sible and usable for 2 distinct groups: young peo-
ple who had never used a smartphone before
with minimal digital literacy and those with prior
use and greater fluency in using tablets/smart-
phones. User testing allowed the team to observe
where young people became confused or lost in-
terest and allowed them to make design changes
that made the user experience as streamlined and

intuitive as possible. It was critical to engage those
with low or no digital literacy in user testing, as
features and navigations that are often assumed
to be straightforward by young people with great-
er technological capabilities often become stan-
dard design specifications in digital solutions.
Engaging those with lower digital literacy in user
testing allowed the product team to more carefully
integrate user flows that were more intuitive for
an audience with minimal digital capabilities or
experience. In Rwanda, online ordering is rela-
tively new, even for experienced technology
users. For the shop feature, where youth can order
health products, prototyping informed the addi-
tion of written simple instructions to onboard
new users, design elements to make action and
navigation items easily noticeable, progress indi-
cators, and simplification and shortening of the or-
der process overall. In response to youth requests,
we developed 2 instructional videos: one to help
youth understand the CyberRwanda features and
a second to help them navigate an unfamiliar pro-
cess of online ordering and product collection at
the pharmacy.

IMPLICATIONS FOR FUTURE
PRACTICE AND RESEARCH
The HCD process, driven and led by youth, was
used to understand the complex user needs re-
garding FP/RH and promoted the routine testing,
learning, and refinement of initial ideas. It paved
a supported pathway toward implementation and
evaluation by ensuring that the ultimate interven-
tion was desirable among many key stakeholders,
feasible for nationwide implementation and scale.
Some implications for future practice and research
follow.

HCD OFFERS FOUNDATIONAL
METHODS AND MINDSETS TO
SUPPORT CONTINUED ITERATION
THROUGHOUT IMPLEMENTATION
Using an adaptive implementation approach, the
findings from routine user testing and the impact
evaluation will inform iterations to the program
and digital product design throughout the project
timeline. Applying HCD during the implementa-
tion and evaluation stages of the intervention
lends itself well to adaptive learning and iteration;
allowing for new information to be continuously
introduced that promotes rapid and informed de-
cision making about which intervention elements

A shift to a direct-
to-consumer
platform provided
streamlined
access to and
online screening
for health
products supplied
by a network of
trained
pharmacists.

S256

need to be strengthened or abandoned.24 To
achieve these aims, CyberRwanda will operate on
a product release cycle where every 3 months the
team reviews historical data to assess what new
features to implement and how to make improve-
ments. Monitoring data are collected from inter-
vention sites and pharmacies routinely to identify
areas of improvement and correct any issues that
are disrupting site use. Qualitative interviews
with participants are conducted on a routine basis
to understand and supplement data gathered from
quantitative data collection efforts. By taking this
approach, HCD may help to support the long-term
sustainability and cost-efficiency of the interven-
tion by assuming a gradual approach to product
launch and scale and addressing implementation
challenges early and often, rather than relying sole-
ly on endline results.25

Iterative and Equity-Centered Approaches to
Design Can Allow for the Inclusion of New
Technology Users in Digital Initiatives
Digital self-care or direct-to-consumer approaches
like CyberRwanda have the potential to offer the
privacy that young people prioritize in FP/RH ser-
vice delivery, yet require careful design to ensure
usability by a broad range of users.26,27 User test-
ing of early product versions revealed usability
challenges that were addressed and retested in iter-
ative cycles. This iterative approach to design and
testing allowed the team to test assumptions and
observe which features needed improvement to
enhance the user experience and flow. To ensure
digital equity and inclusion, particularly among
those with limited or no access to technology,
the team was intentional about sampling a di-
verse spectrum of participants regarding socio-
economic
status,
educational
status,
social
vulnerabilities, and those from rural, urban,
and peri-urban contexts. Recruitment of diverse
participants was a recurring challenge during
this project, and appropriate time and funding
are needed to support inclusive recruitment.
This article, along with other international digi-
tal health guidance from the World Health
Organization,28,29 offers methods to inform a fi-
nal product design and implementation model
that is inclusive of diverse user groups. The
forthcoming RCT will provide much-needed
data on uptake and sustained use of the plat-
form, disaggregated by age and gender among
diverse youth populations.

Engaging Youth Throughout the Design
Process Requires Special Considerations,
Particularly When Designing for Taboo
Topics
Given the unique set of vulnerabilities and inher-
ent power dynamics present when designing with
youth on sensitive sexual and RH topics, there is a
critical need for design teams to identify and plan
for any risks that would compromise youths’ safe-
ty or compromise the quality of their engagement.
The importance of upholding the continued safety
and dignity of young people in the HCD process
has gained special attention within the adolescent
sexual and RH and HCD community of practice.
Recently, several actors in the HCD community
released a set of guiding principles for the safe
and ethical engagement of youth during adoles-
cent and sexual RH program design.12 In line
with these guiding principles, the team took extra
care to address power differentials between
young people and program teams. Throughout
CyberRwanda’s design phase, the project team
sought to ensure the safety, dignity, and ethical
participation of youth. During the initial design
phases, the project team leveraged gateway activ-
ities focused on popular culture, future aspira-
tions, and leisure activities as gateway topics to
explore more taboo topics. Doing so enabled the
team to provide a safe space for open and genera-
tive conversation with youth participants and
created a foundation to explore sensitive sexual
health topics. The emphasis on safeguarding and
protection of youth was considered essential
throughout all phases of the HCD process to pro-
tect young people’s safety and wellbeing. To
maintain the safe and ethical participation of
youth beyond the design phase throughout im-
plementation, there was a clear need to under-
stand what framing would be acceptable to
parents, as key influencers and decision makers
in
their
children's
lives.
The
visioning
of
CyberRwanda as a guide to future success was
co-created through the sessions with parents
and has been a foundational framing for the proj-
ect to date.

CONCLUSION
Using HCD as an end-to-end approach was instru-
mental in guiding the team to learn, test, and re-
fine the intervention before implementation and
evaluation. It provided a natural approach to cen-
ter young peoples’ needs, aspirations, and per-
spectives into the intervention design by having
youth lead design research, prototyping, and data

HCD may help to
support the long-
term sustainability
and cost-efficiency
of the intervention
by addressing
implementation
challenges early
and often, rather
than relying solely
on endline results.

S257

collection efforts with their peers. The process to-
ward designing and implementing CyberRwanda
has demonstrated the value of supporting youth-
driven or youth-led HCD approaches that shift
decision-making power to young people through
funding, mentorship, and training. Furthermore,
the HCD process provided a structure to integrate
and blend technical and design expertise to ensure
the intervention content was grounded in the ad-
olescent health evidence and best practice, and the
visual and product design was developed with
user needs, access capabilities, and preferences in
mind. Through trial and learning through continu-
ous data collection and iteration, HCD informed a
product and service design model that prioritizes
digital equity. Through continuous learning and re-
finement, CyberRwanda’s hybrid implementation
model was designed to meet the full spectrum of dig-
ital access and literacy and to reach vulnerable youth
without access to technology. CyberRwanda’s forth-
coming RCT will generate critical new data in fields
of digital health for adolescents and social and be-
havior change communication. By assessing the dif-
ference between young people in the self-service
and facilitated arms, findings will reveal the impact
of a digital intervention as a stand-alone (self-service
model) versus that with a person-to-person compo-
nent (facilitated model). These findings will demon-
strate which programmatic components lead to
behavior change and how best to implement digital
interventions for youth.