252

Lessons Learned from a Human-Centered Design of an
Immersive Exergame for People with Dementia

SUKRAN KARAOSMANOGLU, Human-Computer Interaction, Universität Hamburg, Germany
SEBASTIAN RINGS, Human-Computer Interaction, Universität Hamburg, Germany
LUCIE KRUSE, Human-Computer Interaction, Universität Hamburg, Germany
CHRISTIAN STEIN, gamelab.berlin, Humboldt Universität zu Berlin, Germany
FRANK STEINICKE, Human-Computer Interaction, Universität Hamburg, Germany

3
STEP 1: UNDERSTANDING THE NEEDS AND REQUIREMENTS OF PEOPLE WITH
DEMENTIA
The main purpose of the study was to understand the needs and requirements of people with
dementia and to apply this knowledge in the context of VR exergames, thereby providing engaging
experiences. As a secondary goal, we were interested in adapting the HCD approach in this context.
To extract the user requirements, our research team conducted semi-structured interviews [2] and
contextual inquiry sessions [6]. We chose these methods to understand the needs and experience
(for which there are no validated questionnaires) of the participating older adults, which were from
the same senior living facility (Hospital zum Heiligen Geist Hamburg1). The participants of our
study were recruited mainly with the help of the senior living facility. The overall study procedure
is illustrated in Figure 1.
In order to consider ethical implications, we conducted an ethics workshop at the first phase of
our large project prior to the described study in this paper and invited an ethics expert (female,
age=57, ethics in IT) to observe our process. We applied the lessons learned to our study (e.g.,
termination of experience in case of any psychological or physical stress) and closely collaborated
with the senior living facility (e.g., preparation of suitable questions and presence of a caregiver
during each session).

Semi-structured Interviews
with Stakeholders
Plan the HCD process
Contextual Inquiry
Sessions

User Requirements
Analysis

Step 1

Conceptual Design
of the VR exergame

Step 2

Implementation
& Prototyping

Step 3

Evaluation (with fo-
cus groups in a par-
ticipatory process)

Step 4

Clinical Trials

iterations

Fig. 1. In Step 1, we conducted semi-structured interviews with stakeholders and the contextual inquiry
sessions with people with dementia to analyze the user requirements. We further followed the remaining
steps of the HCD approach [24]: conceptual design of a VR exergame (Step 2), implementation of the VR
exergame (Step 3), and evaluation the VR exergame with five focus group sessions (Step 4). We iterated the
findings over requirements, design, and implementation steps.

3.1
Semi-structured Interviews with Stakeholders

We conducted semi-structured interviews with the stakeholders to explore their attitudes towards
VR technology, conditions and needs of people with dementia, the possible physical movements, and

1https://www.hzhg.de/

252:7

game scenarios that can be implemented in VR. As game researchers/developers, the project was
our first experience with this user group, and, therefore, we placed importance on understanding
them and how to interact with them before our first face-to-face encounter. The full list of interview
questions can be found in the supplementary materials.

Participants. The interviews were conducted with 11 stakeholders: three significant others (n=3
female, age: M=61.33, SD=2.89 years), five clinical dementia experts2 (n=4 female, n=1 male, age:
M=43.6, SD=10.55 years), a physiotherapist (male, age: 39 years), and two technicians (n=2 male,
age: M=50, SD=15.56 years).

Procedure. While we followed our interview guideline with pre-determined questions, we ad-
dressed follow-up questions to our participants. All interviews were performed separately with
each stakeholder. The interviews were audio-recorded, except for two participants due to privacy
concerns. In addition to audio-recordings, field notes were taken by the researchers.

3.2
Contextual Inquiry Sessions
In these sessions, the research team aimed to observe people with dementia’s cognitive-physical
conditions, interactions, and attitudes from a first-person perspective (see Figure 2a,b). The followed
guideline for this step can be found in the supplementary materials.

Participants. We included both people with and without dementia to observe a wider interaction
of this age group with the gameplay in VR. While the design requirements of individuals with
dementia are different from those without dementia, they may show some commonalities due
to shared culture, similar age range, and shared aesthetic values. The sessions were conducted
separately for groups of people with and without dementia. We recruited eight participants (7
female, 1 male; n=3 mild dementia, n=5 people without dementia) with an average of 81 years
(SD=6.05). A health professional from the research team (female, age: 51, 26 years of experience
working with people with dementia) also accompanied the players in these sessions.

Procedure. Following the contextual inquiry method, we have enriched the familiar social space
used by older adults for reading, board, or video games (i.e., Kinect games) with VR hardware. We
audio-recorded all sessions.
First, the participants were introduced to the purpose of our project and gave their consent (and
legal representatives for people with dementia) to participate in our study. This document included
information on the planned project, what the player will experience in VR, and the symptoms of
cybersickness. Following that, we observed their experience while they played Kinect games, which
is part of their usual daily routine in this senior living facility. Before the VR session, all participants
were verbally informed about their upcoming experience, warned of possible negative symptoms of
VR, and asked to tell us if they feel uncomfortable or experience any difficulties. The research team
members observed the whole experience to terminate in case of any problems. The participants
first experienced the SteamVR [87] home environment, which shows a large terrace with a view of
mountains, trees, and birds. After some time of familiarization (ca. 5 minutes for each participant),
we used the VR game Tilt Brush [32] to provide a more interactive gaming experience. We observed
their interaction with the controllers in VR while decorating a snowman. We then used the NVIDIA
VR arcade application [82] only for people without dementia (due to time constraints of people
with dementia and the health professional in their daily routine) to see a larger variety in types of
interaction.

2All clinical experts had different specialties: E1 Responsible expert for working with people with dementia, E2 Head of
inpatient and short-term care at a senior living facility, E3 Responsible person for social care at a senior living facility, E4
Head of a senior living facility, E5 Head of nursing at a senior living facility.

252:8

a)
b)
c)
d)

Fig. 2. Impressions from the HCD approach in which we introduced VR technology to people with dementia
(a) and created a social environment between people with dementia, spectators, and caregivers (b). We further
designed a VR exergame for people with dementia using a 3D printed camera controller (c) and included
people with dementia with varying cognitive-physical abilities in these experiences (d).

3.3
Data Analysis & Results

To analyze qualitative data, we transcribed the audio recordings of the contextual inquiry sessions
and the interviews (a total of 13:06 hours). Afterwards, the first author applied the reflexive approach
of inductive thematic analysis, which does not require multiple coders [9–11]; the reflexive approach
of thematic analysis involves deep engagement of researchers and their interpretations on data [10].
Our approach consisted of the steps introduced by Braun and Clarke [10]: familiarization of data,
inductive coding of data, creation of initial themes, iteratively reviewing and shaping the themes,
and final theme generation phase.
We identified four themes through our inductive coding, which serve to determine the user
requirements. We report quotes based on the participants’ specialty, and number: people with
(PPW D) and without dementia (PPW ), the health professional from the research team (PHP), clinical
experts (PE), technicians (PT ), physiotherapist (PPH), and significant others (PS); for example,
PPW D1 represents the quotes from the first player with dementia in the contextual inquiry session.

Theme 1: Novelty effects of VR technology. Only one player reported having prior VR experi-
ence, which resulted in a negative one: “I had to leave the [place] because I got sick”-PPW2. For the
rest VR was unknown, yielding conversations between the research team and players: “[...] iPad, I
play a lot with it, and that is already VR [laughs]”-PPW1. This unfamiliarity created some hesitation
to play VR games for older adults without dementia (e.g., “I don’t even know if I can play it, because I
have a fear of heights and am prone to balance disorder”-PPW2), while people with dementia warmly
welcomed the new technology. Yet, after trying VR games, the majority of participants reported
highly positive experiences: “Oh, how beautiful!”-PPW D1 and “exhausted from the excitement, but it
was positive excitement”-PPW3. Especially after the players experienced and were informed about the
possibilities of VR, they reported two environmental themes they wished to see in VR exergames:
exposure to nature (e.g., beach, sea) and sports activities (e.g., skiing, swimming). Moreover, these
themes were always associated with the players’ memories and outside environments: “I was a
passionate swimmer, was also in the swimming club. [...] We always went to the North Sea”-PPW D1.

Theme 2: The role and requirements of social gaming activities. The results indicated a trend
towards designing social environment-based VR exergames with the involvement of spectators and
caregivers. Generally, the participants saw VR exergaming activities as a potential to create a social
environment among all parties, which can improve psychological well-being (e.g., “These [social
activities] can help to prevent frustration and reactivate skills [...] from the past”-PE5). The experts
reported the group dynamics that emerged from other game activities (e.g., board games, Kinect
games) and how supportive they were to improve the psychological health of older adults: “when
the older adults say that they would like to be better and are on the last places again, the group can

252:9

normally catch them well and cheer them up”-PE3 and “In a game, where all people with dementia can
participate, they are always integrated”-PE2. We also observed these social interactions during our
contextual inquiry sessions: spectators to a player with some vision problems: “But you were great
today!” PPW D1: “Really? Well, that’s how it is, you develop tricks to compensate and that you can see
again”.
However, the stakeholders found shared cognitive-physical conditions, interests, hobbies, and
biographies essential to create positive experiences for people with dementia in a social setting:
“biography work has to be done beforehand to understand which game would be the most suitable one”-
PE1, and “we need [...] to look at what the residents liked to do, right?”-PE2. Otherwise, these aspects
can turn out to be a potential danger, which can impact players’ motivation and psychological
well-being: “You have to make sure that the characters fit together and also the severity of dementia,
because if there are people who can still do it [an exercise] really well and others need a long time
and guidance, then the others may get impatient or make a comment that is not so constructive to
the group mood”-PE3. As a notable challenge, the stakeholders reported reduced social interest of
people with dementia in interacting with family members (e.g., “she is rather apathetic, does not
take part in conversation and is just sitting there”-PS3) and with peers (e.g., “I don’t think she has
contact with others”-PS2).

Theme 3: Challenges due to reduced cognitive-physical abilities. All stakeholders pointed
out how dementia affects cognitive abilities in an increasing way: “she [person with dementia]
always asks the same about relatives. They are all dead [...]. Always the same things and that repeats
every five to seven minutes. [...] at the start, it was 10-15 minutes, but now it gets shorter”-PS2. This
also impacts how people with dementia perceive and react to communication (e.g., “they [people
with dementia] need a moment to understand it, and then it might be better to talk in slow motion. For
them, it is normal tempo”-PE3). These challenges were also observed during the contextual inquiry
sessions. Particularly, we identified differences between people with and without dementia in their
interactions with controllers, the need to give detailed game instructions, and to repeat tasks due
to forgetfulness. We had to remove the HMD for a moment to create an association between real
and virtual hands for people with dementia in VR. Further, we repeated the game details multiple
times for them compared to people without dementia: “Here? [showing the controllers] (Research
team: Yes, there! Just up there, yes? Do you see that?) No.”-PPW D3. However, people with dementia
also showed differences within the group in terms of guidance needed in VR (e.g., instructing them
and turning their chairs to look in different directions in the VEs).
The reduced cognitive abilities affected people with dementia’s physical skills: “the problem here is
the cognitive limitations, because movement always means that I have to instruct someone, right?”-PE1.
However, the conditions of people with dementia can differ within the group: “there are people
who already have problems performing movements. Everyone makes a movement differently [...] and
has their own movement patterns”-PPH. Thus, the physiotherapist explicitly suggested employing
different levels of difficulty (e.g, “I would always do these [exercises] from easy to difficult because
even someone with problems can do an easy exercise well at first, then [...] have the feeling that [they]
can do it well”-PPH.) and seated exercises (e.g., “I [referring to people with dementia] do not have to
use the torso. I can also use my arm while sitting, my body center of gravity shifts”-PPH .) In this way, a
feeling of accomplishment should be given to motivate people with dementia: “If I [physiotherapist]
show them [people with dementia] a little bit of success, that would be an unbelievable psychological
component”-PPH. Yet, one should at first consider the everyday effectiveness “[...] to maintain their
[people with dementia] independence and autonomy and all the things that affect everyday life”-PPH.

252:10

Theme 4: The Priority of Safety. All participants always prioritized the safety of people with
dementia. This important issue was further specified in terms of the technical setup, feeling safe in
company, and psychological well-being.
Regarding the technical setup, the main outcome was to provide a safe environment while players
were performing physical movements in VR: “Fixed installations are preferred”-PT2 and “I would
never use tripods here”-PT1. Particularly, the majority of the participants mentioned the risk of VR
to be an isolating experience due to immersion and thereby losing the association between the real
and virtual world for players: “they wouldn’t realize if a fire breaks out or something else happens
while people with dementia wear the VR headset”-PT2. The safety of the physical world was further
discussed by taking into account the changing cognitive-physical abilities of people with dementia:
“the height of any fixtures, so people with wheeled walkers do not collide with it”-PT1. Wearing an
HMD was discussed on many occasions with the consideration of people with dementia’s reaction
to it (e.g.,“the head is one of our most intimate areas”-PE1), which can potentially create danger.
Nevertheless, we did not encounter any complaints about wearing an HMD from our players in the
contextual inquiry sessions.
Another notable topic was sharing VR exergame play between player and caregiver, which was
partially attributed to a social factor but most importantly to control the gaming experience to
ensure the safety of players: “See, if she [person with dementia] is selecting the game, the program
does not react how she expects and is confused and thinks she is doing something wrong”-PHP and
“they [all participants] can then share what they have experienced or achieved”-PPH. Also, being
alone created some hesitance for the players to play VR exergames: “As long as someone is there,
everything is good! Yes, it gives me support and says: So you stand right or you can not fall down
anywhere. [...] You can’t practically play it alone at home”-PPW2. These concerns were amplified for
people with dementia: “it could happen that they suddenly want to run and get lost in the truest sense
of the word because they have forgotten that they are wearing their glasses”-PPW1.
Finally, a main safety characteristic was preserving the psychological well-being of our partici-
pants. VR holds enormous potentials for creating many VR exergaming activities, but not every
game is suitable for the well-being of people with dementia: for example, rejuvenation effects
(e.g.,“Even though people with dementia often think they are around 30 years old, it would cause a
crisis if they saw themselves young while in a phase of clarity and in knowledge of their real age”-PE1.),
creating completely new encounters (e.g., “That is what is in their everyday life anyway, they always
see something new. With the VR glasses, we would only intensify this”-PE1.), creating unrealistic
experiences (“you have to expect that the person who is in the forest [...] wants to pick up a stone”-PE1.),
and enclosed environments (“[...] in a forest, the path is a natural boundary, but you can still see
into the distance. Also at the beach, [...] a dock should not invite you to step on it [because it could be
dangerous] and rather only be in the distance”-PE1). Likewise, the health professional of the research
team explicitly suggested that “the people with dementia’s experience [exergame and the time before
and after] should follow a predictable procedure when possible, so that the people with dementia keep
a sense of security”-PHP.

3.4
User Requirements Analysis

We discuss below the results of the user requirements analysis and summarize the recommendations
for the VR exergames.

Create social gaming environments with the consideration of shared aspects. Our findings highlight
the need to create a group-based VR exergame experience with the participation of spectators
and caregivers. Most of the participants attributed this mainly to its potential to create social
interaction between and among the parties. This feature was further observed in our contextual

252:11

inquiry sessions as a source of motivation to encourage players. Nevertheless, our results also
indicate the importance of shared cognitive-physical conditions, hobbies, interests, and biographies
among older adults with dementia. This was associated with becoming more insecure and frail
in behavior and loss of interest. Therefore, game designers/developers avoid these potentially
discouraging factors to motivate people with dementia to play exergames.

Support of an inverse game flow channel addressing decline and variance in cognitive-physical
abilities. Our evaluation shows that dementia has an extreme impact on the cognitive-physical
abilities of older adults, which must be addressed when developing game mechanics and concepts.
All players with dementia had difficulty understanding the use of VR controllers. This showcases
that people with dementia have difficulties learning new interaction techniques. This requires
designers consider providing intuitive techniques for this user group to interact with the virtual
world. Second, people with dementia required multiple and detailed instructions to complete
their gameplays due to forgetfulness. Hence, the designers should introduce continuous hints,
explanations, reminders, or narratives into the gameplay.
Dementia can lead to varying cognitive-physical effects on older adults: requiring more repetitions
of instructions or more physical support. Beyond this, every person with dementia can show this
variance in their abilities over time [93]. We suggest game designers to consider the possibility of
creating an inverse game flow channel to support the decline and variance in cognitive-physical
abilities: for example, by creating different levels of difficulty or adaptivity in exergames. These can
help a wide range of people with dementia to become a part of the VR exergame and to provide a
sense of accomplishment.

Provision of a safe VR exergame experience. The results emphasize the importance of creating a
safe VR exergaming play for people with dementia. First, developers must install fixed VR systems
to avoid any physical injury, taking into account the effects of dementia. Second, caregivers should
be part of the users’ VR exergame experience to support them with their possible cognitive-physical
and psychological difficulties; for example, by reacting to situations with empathy in a timely
manner (might be challenging for young developers [19, 25]). Also, for most players, the presence
of the caregiver was the connection to the physical world; they expressed their concerns about
falling while wearing an HMD and performing movements without a caregiver. This indicates the
need for a caregiver and to reduce the risk of falls in VR exergames for people with dementia. Third,
game designers must pay attention to the details of in-game scenarios to preserve the psychological
well-being of people with dementia and avoid creating scenarios that might cause emotional stress
for this user group.

4
STEP 2: CONCEPTUAL DESIGN OF THE VR EXERGAME
Based on the findings of the user requirements analysis, we designed a VR exergame: Memory
Journalist VR. In the early stage of this research, the implementation of the exergame was presented
in [63, 64]. We note that the immersive exergame was designed in the HCD approach as a result
of the iterative design process; we incorporated our focus group findings into the game design.
The improvements and changes applied to the VR exergame prototype through five focus group
sessions can be seen in Figure 5. Below, we report the final conceptual design of the VR exergame.
Prior work showed that VEs have the potential to create reminiscence effects on people with
dementia [83]. We were inspired by this finding and hoped to invoke the past memories of people
with dementia while they were playing the VR exergame: providing both cognitive and physical
stimulation. Therefore, we created Memory Journalist VR in which the player explores a 360◦3D
recording of famous landmarks and their surroundings in a VE. The 3D recordings presented

252:12

a)
b)
c)

Fig. 3. The player explores the game environment with a 3D printed camera (a), communicates with a health
professional to find a landmark in the scene (b), and takes a correct picture of the landmark which is shown
in a newspaper (c).

the capital and city of residence of the older adults to provide a meaningful experience [34] (see
Figure 3).
We aimed to provide an intuitive way for this user group to interact with the virtual world
without them having to learn and repeat how to use new interaction devices. Thus, we chose to
design a 3D printed camera device and mapped this physical version of the device to a virtual
replica in the game.
We enabled the option of playing the exergame as a seated experience to reduce the risk of
falling [65] and to reach more target users with varying cognitive-physical abilities. We created
the recordings with the consideration of the eye level of participants in a sitting position. We also
avoided creating scenarios that could conflict between the participants’ visual and vestibular senses
(e.g., by not including forward movement in the seated VR exergame) [54] or cause emotional
stress (e.g., unrealistic experiences). The players mainly performed torso, arm, stretching, and head
movements that could assist in some of their daily life tasks: grabbing objects, reaching something,
and following someone with their head while holding conversations (see Figure 2d).
To ensure the safety and well-being of the participants, we gave control of the VR exergame to
the health professional/caregivers by building a browser-based application. In addition, we shared
the VR exergame experience of HMD players with the spectators (both older adults and health
professionals) on the TV screen, providing them with the opportunity to communicate and interact
with each other in a social environment (see Figure 2b).

5
STEP 3: IMPLEMENTATION OF THE VR EXERGAME
In this section, we describe the technical equipment used and the final implementation of the
game. The changes applied to the VR exergame prototype through the HCD process can be seen in
Figure 5.

5.1
Technical Setup

Memory Journalist VR was implemented using C# in Unity (v.2018.4.18f1) [84]. To ensure high visual
fidelity, the game was run using an i9-9900 CPU and an Nvidia RTX 2080 Ti graphics card. The
players were equipped with a HMD (HTC Vive Pro Eye [43] or Valve Index [88]: depending on the
availability) and a custom 3D-printed camera to interact with Memory Journalist VR. We created the
3D device based on the size and visuals of a Leica M4 camera [20], which was likely to be known
by the target users. For this, we built a 3D model in Maya [3] and combined it with a universal
Vive tracker and a button (see Figure 2c) to give a realistic feeling of an actual camera.
Furthermore, we used an Insta360 Pro device [44] together with a tripod at 120 cm height to create
360◦3D scenes for Memory Journalist VR. Moreover, an application, Remote App, was implemented
on top of an express (v4) [41] web server running on NodeJS (v8.9.4) [15] (see Figure 4b). We chose

252:13

The memorial is here with me!

a)
c)

Fig. 4. The player meets with the virtual guide (parrot) at the beginning of the game (a). The health professional
uses the Remote App which is shown on a mobile phone (b) and sends a hint using the Remote App (c).

to employ a safety-first approach: therefore, instead of using a tripod, we fixed the VR system’s
lighthouses to the wall and concealed all unnecessary cables.

5.2
Memory Journalist VR
The player has the role of a reporter, who takes photographs of landmarks (see Figure 3). The
game provides an audio-visual interactive introduction of the player role and tasks considering
varying cognitive-physical abilities of the target users (e.g., reduced hearing and seeing abilities).
Afterwards, participants are introduced to the 3D-printed camera controller and are given time to
get accustomed.
At the same time, the Remote App shows eight buttons that allow the health professional to
control the VR exergame experience: Start Scene, Switch Preview, Next Scene, Help Player, Next
Mission (easy), and Next Mission (hard) and two red buttons (soft or hard) to terminate the game
due to urgency (see Figure 4b). Next Mission (easy) focuses on popular landmarks that can be
detected easily by performing head movements, while Next Mission (hard) additionally requires
zooming with the camera by performing arm movements (i.e., stretching out and retracting), or the
rotation of the camera to get an upright photo. This enables to control the difficulty level of the
VR exergame. For example, when players are given the task of photographing a landmark on their
left side, they perform arm, head, torso, and stretching movements to complete the task. While we
note that this game is not a typical exertion heavy exercise game, we focused on physical activities
that people with dementia can perform [53] and tried to tailor the technology to their current
interaction abilities.
After the player is introduced to the game mechanics, the health professional can activate the
missions. Accordingly, the game guides the player by using a parrot as a virtual guide explaining the
missions via a short story (see Figure 4a). Once the explanation is finished, the player is presented
with a yellow sticky note attached to the camera and a text above the view frame of the camera
to remind them of the current mission (see Figure 3b). At the same time, the target locations are
highlighted by using sparkles to make people with dementia pay more attention to the given task.
Additionally, if the player cannot find a landmark or does not know it, the health professional can
send a hint with the parrot using the help button in the Remote App (see Figure 4b). When the
camera is triggered while pointing at the requested landmark, a newspaper article with the image
appears in front of the player to provide feedback on the accomplished mission (see Figure 4c).
However, if the player takes photographs of other areas, the taken pictures will appear without a
newspaper in their view to provide constructive feedback. Further, the health professional can offer
bonus scenes to give the players the possibility of exploration without asking for the completion of
any task. At the end of the VR exergame play, the players and health professionals can review the
photographs taken in each session on the Remote App to share the feeling of success together.

252:14

Fig. 5. The design and implementation changes/improvements applied in Memory Journalist VR through five
focus group sessions.

6
STEP 4: EVALUATION OF THE VR EXERGAME WITH FOCUS GROUPS

We created an iterative design circle for Memory Journalist VR. This demonstrates a robust design
process to present the validity of the VR exergame. Here, we aimed to better observe and address
the needs of people with dementia while they were playing the exergame. Therefore, we tested it
with five focus group sessions to ensure the best player experience.

6.1
Participants

We conducted focus group sessions on five different dates, for which a total of 11 people with (n=10
mild dementia, n=1 moderate dementia; n=8 female, n=3 male, age: M=85.82, SD=9.02 years) and
6 without dementia (n=6 female, age: M=82.67, SD=4.46 years) were recruited. Some participants
took part in multiple sessions. People with dementia and those without did not participate in the
same focus group sessions (but some on the same dates). None of the participants in our focus
groups reported any previous VR experience before our study. The demographic information of
the players can be seen in Table 1.
Based on our findings, we involved a health professional (female, age: 51, 26 years of experience
working with people with dementia) in all sessions (except the last one) as a part of the research
team. The health professional helped by guiding the players through the sessions. In the last session,
three caregivers (n=2 female, n=1 male, age: M=54.3, SD=4.73 years, experience working with
people with dementia: M=12, SD=3 years) were observed in a gameplay with people with dementia.

6.2
Procedure
We chose to test the VR exergame with people with and without dementia (only in the early
sessions) to enrich the data collection due to their shared values. Further, we note that it was not
always possible to recruit large numbers of participants with dementia, due to their established daily
routines (e.g., exercise activities, and doctor appointments). The given feedback from each session
was integrated into Memory Journalist VR. We performed focus groups separately (people with
and without dementia) to ensure group harmony (based on the findings of the user requirements
analysis). Each focus group took place approximately one month after each other. During the
sessions, we made observations and took field notes.

252:15

Focus Group Sessions
Dementia Status
Gender
Age
Duration of Stay
Number of Players
With/Without
Female
Male
Mean
SD
Mean
SD
Participated Before

Focus Group Session I
with dementia
3
1
82
10.23
1.82
1.25
0
without dementia
6
0
82.67
4.46
3.72
3.06
0

Focus Group Session II
with dementia
1
1
74.5
9.19
1.83
2.14
2
without dementia
2
0
78.5
4.95
5.28
4.59
2

Focus Group Session III
with dementia
1
1
91.5
0.71
1.56
0.50
0
without dementia
2
0
78.5
4.95
5.19
4.60
2
Focus Group Session IV
with dementia
4
1
86.2
9.36
0.97
0.89
1
Focus Group Session V
with dementia
3
0
77.3
13.65
1.58
1.83
2
Table 1. The demographic information of the players across five focus groups: status of dementia, gender,
age, and duration of stay at the senior living facility in years. The last column depicts the amount of people
that participated in prior focus groups.

In Focus Groups I-II-III-IV, we started the sessions by creating a relaxed atmosphere and inviting
the players to a table with tea and cake. First, the players were introduced to the HMD and game
concept. They and their legal representatives were asked to sign an informed consent form which
included information on the planned project, what the player will experience in VR, and the
symptoms of cybersickness. Also, all participants were verbally briefed about their upcoming
experience and warned of possible negative symptoms of VR. There was no fixed order in which the
participants played. While one player was playing the exergame, the health professional was at their
side and working with them to complete the objectives. One researcher was taking notes of their
activity, while the second researcher was taking notes and talking with the remaining participants
at the table. The last researcher was responsible for the game experience and instructions The
spectators could follow the gameplay on a large TV screen behind the HMD player. When a
participant removed the HMD, they were able to talk about their experience in a brief interview.
The questions were about the overall gaming experience, enjoyment, scenes in VR, and causes of
discomfort. The overall duration of the study was approximately 30 minutes for each participant,
20 minutes in VR.
In Focus Group V, we aimed to finalize the evaluation of the exergame with the additional
involvement of different caregivers to see the generalizability of the design process and the exergame.
We wanted to observe the usability of the VR exergames for the case of long-term use without
the help of the research team. We observed the interaction between caregivers and people with
dementia while they played the VR exergame together, led for the first time by the caregivers. We
presented an extensive instruction sheet to the caregivers to explain the Remote App, the game
mechanics, and the usage of the HMD3. For each pair, we prepared the caregiver by reading out
the instructions and answering open questions. We also gave them a printed copy to assist the
caregivers during the session. Afterwards, the caregivers were instructed to start and lead a gaming
session with the people with dementia up to completion. The pairs played the VR exergame one
after the other without the other pairs’ presence. During this process, we stayed in the room to
observe the interactions of people with dementia and caregivers. The overall duration of the study
was approximately 60 minutes for each participant, 20-30 minutes in VR.

6.3
Data Analysis & Results

To analyze qualitative data, we gathered field and observation notes taken by the members of the
research team. Here again, the first author employed the reflexive orientation of inductive thematic

3The instruction sheet explained the following points: mounting the HMD, devices in the room, the reason for using the VR
exergame, game flow, Remote App, difficulty level between the missions, and exit strategies.

252:16

analysis [9–11] by following the same steps as stated in subsection 3.3. We derived four themes
through inductive coding. We report quotes based on the participants’ group and number: focus
group players with (FPW D) and without dementia (FPW ), the health professional (FHP), and focus
group caregivers (FC). For example, F5C1 represents the quotes from the first caregiver in the fifth
session.

Theme 1: Player experience in Memory Journalist VR. This theme captures the players’
experience of people with and without dementia using the designed VR exergame. For people
without dementia, while VR and the game initially showed novelty effects, in the long-run, the
game was found to be repetitive: “I liked the recognition value in the scenes, but it gets boring very
quickly”-F2PW1. Particularly, in the third focus group, one of the older adults without dementia
performed the game tasks without waiting for the explanation of the parrot because “it [the
exergame] is boring”-F3PW1. This trend was also observed among the other spectators. Hence, F3PW2
preferred to not play Memory Journalist VR after watching the HMD player; leading us to conclude
the focus groups with people without dementia.
For people with dementia, Memory Journalist VR provided a positive player experience (e.g.,
“Can’t find words right now. It was beautiful”-F4PW D3 and “I enjoy it, all the time”-F4PW D2). Most
players with dementia perceived Memory Journalist VR as an immersive and realistic game play.
For example, people with dementia made attempts to talk with pedestrians and to touch objects
in the scene: “I felt right in the middle of it”-F5PW D3. Particularly, for one player with dementia,
F4PW D5, we observed the plausibility effect of VR; he tried touch the soap bubbles in the VE with
his tongue. These positive experiences were mainly attributed to the opportunity to explore an
outdoor environment in VR. These opportunities were often difficult to reach for people with
dementia: “I found it nice to discover so much, especially the buildings [...] I used to go for walks there.
Since I have been in care here, that does not work so well anymore”-F4PW D3. The players took their
time to discover the buildings and the objects in the scene, which is further supported with adding
bonus scenes to our exergame (e.g., “I like both, special tasks [missions] and the possibility to discover
for myself ”-F4PW D4). However, in some cases, the feeling of autonomy through exploration led
the players to ignore the virtual guide (the parrot) or be angry at it for interrupting the game by
explaining tasks: “Ugly bird, I don’t like him [...]. I don’t want to hear that [the hint]! I don’t need a
helper”-F3PW D4. This led us to switch hints from the automatic time-based version to the need-based
caregiver controlled version, which was found useful for both, the players and caregivers (e.g., “The
parrot was good for help”-F5C1).

Theme 2: Emerging social dynamics. This theme focuses on instances of social interactions
created by Memory Journalist VR. For the majority of people with dementia, the exergame elicited
a variety of social interactions between players and caregivers/the health professional. The effects
of the game were observed both during and after the focus groups.
During gameplays, communications were raised due to familiarity with VEs and the desire to
complete Memory Journalist VR successfully. Since the game includes VEs that the participants often
recognized from their real lives, we observed situations where both the players and the caregivers
benefit from each other’s knowledge (e.g., “girl [the health professional], help me out!”-F4PW D2).
While our game design holds a challenge in case that both, the caregiver and the player, do not
know the landmarks, the Remote App helped both sides by providing hints through the parrot: “Do
you see the arcades? Let’s take a picture of them!”-F5C2. The players shared –when they remembered–
their memories of the places they visited in Memory Journalist VR with the research team, the
spectators, and the caregivers: “I hate that building, way too expensive!”-F4PW D2. Particularly, this
enabled long conversations between parties.

252:17

Furthermore, the need for a sense of accomplishment was observed. After their sessions, most
of the players asked the research team and caregivers how well they completed their tasks. They
shared their success in the application by viewing the photographs they took together: “the shots
are quite good”-F5C1. The players were instantly happy when they received positive feedback. After
the game sessions, some players shared their experiences about Memory Journalist VR with their
relatives, which can be seen as an indicator of the game that enables communication: “The player
proudly told her daughter all the things she had experienced today, that she had been out in town”-F5C1.

Theme 3: Impact of cognitive-physical abilities on the VR exergame. This theme addresses
how the VR exergame and the cognitive-physical abilities of the participants interact with each
other. For people without dementia, the exergame’s tasks were not found to be cognitively
challenging; all the players completed their missions and used the 3D camera without requiring
explanation. Physically, they all preferred to play the game while standing.
For people with dementia, every focus group session showed signs of further improvement in
the game mechanics and design. We encountered two cognitive factors, which required special
attention: forgetfulness and problem-solving. The players’ level of forgetfulness varied. Some
players could not remember the game in the end (e.g., “I took photos?”-F3PW D1), while some recalled
the missions and features of Memory Journalist VR after almost one month (e.g., “Here I am again,
ah parrot!”-F4PW D2. To serve these varying levels of forgetfulness, we created (i) sticky notes fixed
to the camera as a reminder of current tasks (a familiar concept from daily life), (ii) 3D sparkles to
highlight the tasks, and (iii) random sequencing of tasks to avoid repetition.
The players also presented differing degrees in problem-solving skills, with the majority showing
a deficiency. For example, when some received a mission, they could not comprehend the instruc-
tions to find the target (e.g., turning left and right to follow the parrot). Another notable example
was regarding the use of the 3D camera. While we only expected that players would understand
the placement and the use of the button, the affordance of this old timely device prompted the
players to hold the device right to their face, expecting a viewfinder, which was not present. As a
result, players could not see anything and we initially had to ask them to move the camera away
from their eyes. This shows that people with dementia expected all the usual means of interacting
with the device, not only some of the provided affordances with the camera model. To facilitate the
problem-solving process, we introduced (i) the reporting theme gives the player a purpose and to
present the missions in an easily understandable context, (ii) a transparent 3D camera when the
camera is close to the players’ head, and (iii) a Remote App to show hints depending on the needs
of players.
In particular, the Remote App helped the caregivers to easily guide the players without any
interruption from outside. This allowed caregivers to control the game flow dynamically to match
the needs of people with dementia (e.g., frequency of sending help and easy or hard missions). This
also helped the caregivers to enjoy Memory Journalist VR because it was “a good mix of conversation
and guided play in my opinion”-F5C2. As a result, we observed that Memory Journalist VR was
helpful to cognitively stimulate long-term memories of people with dementia: “it was nice by the
water, in the cafe down there”-F5PW D2.
Regarding physical abilities, the players with dementia always chose to play the exergame in
a sitting position. In the beginning, we held our sessions with a fixed chair. However, dementia
showed some impact on the physical abilities of the players. While most basic arm movements
were performed by the players, for torso movements, the research team members had to physically
assist players to turn left and right. Hence, we decided to use a fixable swivel chair. The use of a
swivel chair enabled even people with low physical abilities to explore the 360◦VEs. The zoom
feature was explicitly wished from a player who used to be a professional photographer: “I want

252:18

to get closer!”-F3PW D2. The creation of a level of physical difficulty in this intuitive task was well
conveyed to the other participants. All players intuitively performed stretching out and retracting
movements without a need for instructions. Especially with an adaptation to their individual arm
reach, the players became competent and motivated to perform the zooming tasks: “she makes a
physical effort for zoom”-F5C1.

Theme 4: Encountered barriers for the use of VR and the VR exergame. This theme outlines
the potential challenges observed in the use of VR and Memory Journalist VR for people with
dementia and their caregivers.
Regarding technical aspects, some caregivers reported concerns about the HMD’s weight, but we
encountered only one occasion where the HMD caused neck pain for the player (F4PW D2), leading
us to terminate the experience immediately. Despite using a fixed swivel chair, we did not observe
any safety issues other than stretching the HMD cable, which was controlled by the research team.
For caregivers of people with dementia, the usability of the system was “overwhelming at the
beginning but later quite interesting”-F5C2. The reasons were explained as the required time to
become familiar with the VR technology (e.g., placing the HMD, sharpening the view of the players
in VR) and understanding how the players interact with Memory Journalist VR (e.g., sending the
parrot for help). Nevertheless, all caregivers were able to complete the exergame without requiring
any help from the research team.
Although Memory Journalist VR was found to be an immersive experience, this sometimes led
to isolation from the real world. A player accidentally touched the foot of the caregiver who was
around the player since the beginning of the experience, but the player got irritated (“who’s on my
foot”-F4PW D2). Using the 3D camera as an intuitive way to interact with Memory Journalist VR was
well received by our players. People with dementia did not require an explanation on the purpose
of the device or how the 3D camera would be used to photograph landmarks. However, in a few
cases, some players had difficulties finding the camera button to take pictures, creating a feeling of
insecurity for them.

7
OVERALL DISCUSSION

We first discuss our findings by focusing on our research questions. Then, we refine our preliminary
implications described in subsection 3.4 based on the emerged nuances in the focus group sessions.

7.1
RQ1: Does the designed VR exergame provide positive and good player
experiences, usability, and accessibility for people with dementia?
Overall, the findings show that it is feasible to develop VR exergames for people with dementia
and integrate them into their daily life and routines. The VR exergames can provide positive and
good player experiences, usability, and accessibility when game mechanics, aspects, and concepts
are specifically targeted to the needs and abilities of this user group. This is in line with studies
that emphasize the importance of understanding the abilities of this user group and how they
interact with the designed systems, rather than seeing dementia as a barrier to interacting with
technology [23, 53, 91].
In terms of player experience, our results highlight how changes in cognitive-physical abilities
of older adults can affect the needs and requirements of VR exergame design. First of all, Memory
Journalist VR was no interesting experience for adults without dementia, whereas it was highly
enjoyable for people with dementia even after multiple sessions. We attribute this mainly to the
exergame not offering a good game flow for older adults without dementia [14]; the game tasks
simply were too easy and their skill level was too high. Inversely, the exergame provided a good

252:19

game flow for people with dementia by offering them a concrete clear goal (i.e., photographing),
which matches their cognitive-physical abilities (e.g., arm, head, and torso movements) [4].
We further observed novelty effects of VR. This positively affected the experience of both player
groups. Although the exergame became repetitive for the players without dementia, interestingly
the novelty effects did not disappear for the majority of people with dementia; they were always
excited to play. VR game designers should consider the power and implications of this effect and
explore this while creating novel VR experiences/games for people with dementia.
The enjoyment of people with dementia was associated with the possibilities of exploration of
outdoor environments. Our results reflect on Tabbaa et al. [83]’s work on the use of outdoor VEs
for people with dementia living in psychiatric hospitals. Further, we build on their work by creating
a 360◦VEs-based exergame and supporting this with a meaningful experience (e.g., focusing on
reminiscence) [34]. This exploration concept of the game demonstrated that this user group still
holds the need for autonomy [70] and when violated this can lead to frustration. Therefore, game
designers should ensure that the player feels autonomy to avoid a potential conflict of people with
dementia with the designed games.
While Memory Journalist VR did not explicitly require any communication between both parties,
the game elicited a variety of very well received social interactions between people with dementia
and their caregivers/the health professional; they helped each other and shared their long-term
memories, relating to people with dementia’s need for relatedness [70]. We attribute these to our
design choice to integrate the shared biographies of our end-users and even caregivers into a
VR exergame. Despite the risk that players and caregivers might not know these landmarks, this
became an opportunity for further discussion and exploration, as it offers common ground for
both sides. Thus, it might be in the interest of game researchers to explore social potentials of VR
exergames (similar to exploration of social potentials in video-based exergames [85, 86]).
People with dementia showed several signs that Memory Journalist VR was a realistic and
immersive gameplay due to the high visual fidelity achieved through the 3D 360◦videos. The
players showed both place and plausibility illusion effects of VR [75] by trying to interact with
people, and touch and taste objects. Interestingly, on some occasions, this user group was immersed
in VR so much that they lost their connection to the physical world (in contrast to typical users [75]).
While it may be considered a good aspect of the game, VR researchers should keep in mind that
illusions of place and plausibility can lead to potential ethical concerns and dangers in the experience
of people with dementia. For example, places should not show the past (e.g. their hometown in
their 20s) but reflect the present, and any depiction of the individuals using the device should
reflect reality. If a mirror is used in VR, it should show the user exactly as they are, not younger
or in different attire since this could disrupt the sense of reality for the people with dementia. In
particular, seeing a false reality of something they may have experienced before can have negative
psychological consequences (e.g., anxiety), thus it can be unethical.
With respect to usability and accessibility, wearing an HMD was not physically demanding
for people with dementia except for one player in the short-term exposure. VR controllers were
simply too complex to use; the layout of the buttons on the controllers and the instructions on
how to use them were cognitively too demanding. We argue that it is difficult to teach new game
interaction techniques in VR exergames to people with dementia due to their decline in cognitive
abilities. Our results indicate that with the use of the 3D-printed camera, the participants were able
to interact in the game without requiring high cognitive demand yet they expected all affordances
of the camera (i.e., viewfinder). We recommend using or creating interaction devices that they are
familiar with from real-life use. Also, game designers should consider providing all the affordances
of the device or offer solutions to overcome familiarities that people with dementia may not find
on the device (e.g., by making the camera transparent).

252:20

We had to use a fixed swivel chair to increase the accessibility of the exergame. This allowed the
game to be explored with a wider user group, whereas reducing the intensity and effectiveness of
body movements. The accessibility of VR games is also related to the usability of the system by
caregivers. In this regard, our results are the first step (to our knowledge) towards understanding
the possibility of caregivers using VR exergames for people with dementia in hospitals without
any help from the game development team. The caregivers’ experience highlights that novelty
effects [50] of VR may occur due to the first use of the new technology, which can be overwhelming.
Nevertheless, the results indicate that caregivers can use the VR exergame in their daily routine
without support if given proper instructions.

7.2
RQ2: Which aspects of the HCD approach should be adapted in the context of VR
exergames for people with dementia?
Our findings demonstrate that standard HCD approaches [24] should be adapted to the specific
situation of developing novel innovative technology for people with neurological diseases, which
limit their cognitive as well as physical abilities.
Classical HCD approaches emphasize the benefits of including end-users and other stakehold-
ers [24, 37]. However, for developing VR exergames for people with dementia in a clinical setting it
is essential to include a variety of stakeholders. First of all, while the players must be included in
the HCD approach, they could be limited in expressing their thoughts, needs, and feelings [49]. Our
results support this assumption by showing that they cannot always explain the rationale behind
their reactions. For example, some players did not like the parrot without being able to specify the
reason for it. Thus, making it crucial to include stakeholders, who can add comments, and translate
thoughts and feelings of people with dementia.
Considering our experience throughout the design process, we as game designers/developers
realized how little we knew about the effects of dementia, and the daily life and routines of people
affected by it. In fact, based on the stakeholders’ involvement with semi-structured interviews,
we had to change some of the traditional tools for the game design; for example, we always
provided positive feedback and did not implement unpredictability and challenges involving
cognitive-physical mechanics [8]. Thus, we suggest including stakeholders such as significant
others, clinical dementia experts with different specialties, physiotherapists, and technicians to
gain a better understanding of this specific user group.
Furthermore, people with dementia in clinical settings pose significant challenges for the suc-
cessful development of VR exergames. Especially, conducting contextual inquiries is of major
importance because they as well as the involved stakeholders typically follow strict routines to
organize their daily work and life. For example, we could not complete the planned gameplays
in the contextual inquiry due to time constraints of people with dementia and caregivers in daily
work. However, a successful setup into the daily life of people with dementia requires (i) caregivers,
who play exergames together with this user group, (ii) technicians that install and maintain the VR
technology, and (iii) physicians who organize the physical training program with consideration
of the amount and intensity of the VR exergames. Therefore, to identify the potential constraints
(e.g., daily routine, ethical, and legal issues), we recommend game designers conduct contextual
inquiries.
Our focus group findings show the importance of involving a caregiver in VR exergames to avoid
potential safety issues. For example, reacting in a timely manner when players are faced with the
psychological consequences of VR games: feeling insecure due to the inability to perform tasks or
loss of connection with the physical world. Similarly, when players encounter problems that could
threaten their physical health (e.g., cable problems due to the use of a swivel chair). Yet not only for
those but also for positive effects: to give a feeling of competence to the players by supporting them

252:21

with positive feedback [70] and help to transfer their thoughts to young game developers who
might have a lack of empathy to understand older adults easily [19, 25]. Therefore, stakeholders
must be involved in the user requirements analysis step. However, even after the initial analysis,
especially formal or informal caregivers must also be incorporated in the remaining iteration steps.
We argue that the inclusion of stakeholders and contextual inquiries are not optional aspects of the
HCD, but should be mandatory for the development of VR exergames for people with dementia.

7.3
Revisiting the Initial Implications for Design
Here, we visit our initial implications and discuss them by lensing through the results of focus
groups.

Create social gaming environments with the consideration of shared aspects. The findings partially
support this initial implication. The VR exergame can create a social environment for people
with dementia with their caregivers/the health professional, but we did not observe any increased
social interaction among older adults with dementia. We speculate that this might be due to the
feeling of insecurity to initiate conversations and the loss of interest in socially interacting with
peers [74]. However, future research should explore whether and how all people with dementia
can be integrated with each other in such a play environment. For example, positive results are
increasingly reported for creating multiplayer games and employing asymmetries to promote
communication between players [35, 46]. While creating interdependent asymmetric games can
be considered promising (among players with dementia or between these users and caregivers),
this research may also face some challenges in providing positive experiences for all users due to
differing abilities.

Support of an inverse game flow channel addressing decline and variance in cognitive-physical
abilities. Contrary to traditional games, one cannot always expect an improvement or learning
effects during the phase of gameplay, when people with dementia are involved, especially in
such short-term games. In fact, we observed reoccurring novelty effects during the process. Also,
researchers should not forget the progressive nature of dementia, which over time further affects
abilities [93]. These can impose some changes to known elements of the game design (e.g., challenge
and introducing new concepts with the progress), which are often based on game flow concepts in
which the difficulty of the game increases over time when users improve their skills [4, 14]. We
recommend that the cognitive-physical difficulty of VR exergames (like other games involving
people with dementia) should be adaptable to the abilities of this user group, which declines over
time so that the games are still playable and enjoyable for them. The findings emphasize that
we supported the inverse game flow in our exergame by introducing the Remote App; caregivers
were able to control the game’s tasks at certain difficulty levels to tailor the exergame to the needs
of players. For short-term use, this helped caregivers to address the decline and variance in the
cognitive-physical abilities of the users. However, this leaves a research gap for future studies
to explore dynamic inverse game flow adaptivity in VR exergames for people with dementia, in
particular for long-term use.

Provision of a safe VR exergame experience. Our study strongly emphasizes the importance of
safety in VR exergames. While we always preferred the safety-first approach (e.g., using wall-
mounted systems and involving a health professional in the entire design process), we also faced
some difficulties related mainly to the technical setup to ensure the safety of the participants. For
example, we used a fixed swivel chair and this did not cause serious problems, but we speculate that
it could happen. Yet, following the concerns of our caregivers about the weight of HMDs, we chose
not to use wireless HMD systems for people with dementia. However, we also observed a player

252:22

having neck pain due to the weight of the VR-HMD. This was also shown as one of the discomfort
factors of using VR technology in a recent study [39]. We recommend that experimenters and
relevant healthcare professionals observe players during the experience and immediately terminate
the experience if they encounter or suspect any problems (e.g., physical and psychological). Future
VR research should test the possible use of wireless HMD systems and commercial companies
should consider providing accessible VR hardware solutions for this user group.

7.4
Limitations

We performed our study with a small number of participants (n=11). While our results serve as the
first attempt to understand the needs of people with dementia in VR exergames, future work should
test, verify, and demonstrate the long-term results of this using a higher sample size. However, one
should be aware that the possibilities of reaching such user groups with specific needs (e.g., due to
legal, ethical, and social issues) is limited in overall accessibility research.
We were only able to reach participants in the same senior living facility. Also, these participants
had previous experience with Kinect games. We speculate that these could bias the findings in two
ways: (i) enabling more social interaction among players and (ii) having positive attitudes towards
the use of emerging technology.
While our focus was on the process and design of VR exergames for people with dementia, we
also note that we did not compare this designed game across different technologies. Future work
should consider evaluating and comparing the applicability of different technologies with this user
group (e.g., augmented reality).
In our research, we did not use surveys to evaluate player experiences and usability. This may be
considered as a limitation, however, prior work [31] suggests that using common testing approaches
might not be suitable for people with dementia. Also, there is currently no validation of the use
of these questionnaires (e.g., Player Experience Inventory [1], Nasa-TLX [36], System Usability
Scale [12]) for this user group. Finally, we note on the reflexivity [5, 57] of qualitative findings; the
main researcher has a background in psychology, cognitive systems, and VR gaming experience,
which might introduce bias into interpretation of the results.

8
CONCLUSION
This work explored the feasibility of an immersive exergame for people with dementia following
an HCD approach consisting of four steps. First, we conducted (i) semi-structured interviews with
several stakeholders and contextual inquiries with people with dementia. Based on the analysis of
user requirements, we (ii) conceptually designed, (iii) implemented Memory Journalist VR, and (iv)
evaluated this exergame with five focus group sessions involving our research team members (i.e.,
a motion scientist, game designers/developers, and a health professional) through the processes.
The results indicate that VR exergames can provide positive and good player experiences (e.g., en-
joyment, presence, and social interaction), usability, and accessibility for this user group, especially
when the interests and abilities of people with dementia are considered. The lessons learned also
strongly emphasize the necessity to adapt the standard HCD approach to design VR exergames for
this specific user group by including the stakeholders and contextual inquires. Finally, we provide
design implications for future work: (i) creating social gaming environments with the consideration
of shared aspects, (ii) the support of an inverse game flow to address the decline and variance
in cognitive-physical abilities, and (iii) offering a safe VR exergame experience. Thus, this work
provides important insights for game designers by demonstrating a solid design process in the
development of VR exergames for people with dementia.

252:23