Supporting Teams with Designing for Dissemination
and Sustainability: the Design, Development, and
Usability of a Digital Interactive Platform

Maura Kepper 

Washington University In St Louis: Washington University in St Louis https://orcid.org/0000-0002-

5971-9189

Allison L'Hotta 

University of Colorado School of Medicine: University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus School of
Medicine

Thembekile Shato 

Washington University In St Louis: Washington University in St Louis

Bethany M. Kwan 

University of Colorado School of Medicine: University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus School of
Medicine

Russell E. Glasgow 

University of Colorado School of Medicine: University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus School of
Medicine

Douglas Luke 

Washington University In St Louis: Washington University in St Louis

Andrea K. Graham 

Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine

Ana A. Baumann 

Washington University in St Louis School of Medicine

Ross C. Brownson 

Washington University In St Louis: Washington University in St Louis

Brad Morse 

University of Colorado School of Medicine: University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus School of

Medicine

Research Article

Methods

Overview and Guiding Design Framework

A participatory design approach engaged users and an expert panel in a mixed methods (qualitative and
quantitative) iterative user-centered design process starting from discovery to design and testing (Figure
1). We utilized common design principles throughout this process that focused on: 1) being person

centered; 2) communicating visually and inclusively; 3) collaborating and co-creating; and 4) iterating.(23,
24)  We conducted five 90-minute design sessions conducted over Zoom from September 2022 to

February 2023 (Table 1). All design sessions were conducted using Mural(25) or Figma(26), collaborative
platforms that allowed users to contribute written artifacts (i.e., responses) during the session. FigJam,

a tool in Figma, was used to draw collaboratively during design sessions using an online whiteboard.
Following design sessions, qualitative data were summarized and merged with written artifacts (e.g., a

sticky note contributed on the mural board) from design sessions or survey results. Weekly team
meetings were used to reach consensus on design impacts (i.e., how we would incorporate user
feedback into design features of the D4DS planner). 

Once a working-version prototype tool was created, usability testing was conducted with a separate
group of users who were not familiar with the tool and expert panel members using a combined think-

aloud and survey-based approach. The prototype was revised and usability was re-assessed by the same
users.  Details on the methods for data collection, analysis and results for each design session and

usability testing are presented below in the Design Process and Results section. The project was
approved as an exempt study by the Washington University in St. Louis Institutional Review Board

(#202207165).

Participants and Recruitment

Users included researchers with experience conducting a health-related project, including academics

(e.g., researchers, students, project managers) and clinical and public health practitioners (e.g.,
clinicians, health department employees). Using purposive and snowball sampling, we recruited 14 users
(71% academics and 29% practitioners) to participate as co-designers. Email invitations sent out to

users included a brief description of the project goals and D4DS principles. Each co-designer was asked
to participate in at least two design sessions. Co-designers reported varying levels of D&I knowledge
prior to starting the design sessions, with 21% (n=3) reporting below average, 43% (n=6) reporting
average, 36% reported above average knowledge. 

The expert panel consisted of academic faculty members (n=6) who are leaders in D&I science, including
the developers of the F2C Framework, across three academic institutions. Collectively, the expert panel
focuses on public health research in both clinical and community settings and has expertise in the

development, implementation, and evaluation of digital health tools. The expert panel members were
engaged separately from users in a subset of the design exercises and usability testing. 

Design Process and Results: 

Design Session 1: Discover

This first design session engaged 6 co-designers to identify the need and demand for key issues this tool
should address and explore potential features that will address these needs. We started this design

session with a brief overview of D4DS principles and then conducted five design exercises (DE). Co-
designers started the session by adding sticky notes to free list: 1) how the tool could benefit and
empower users (DE 1.1) and 2) who might benefit from using this tool (DE 1.2). Next, we conducted a
persona creation and value proposition generation exercise (DE 1.3). Personas are archetypes of

different users who could use the tool and has been used in design to ensure diverse perspectives are
accounted for in product design. Therefore, in our sessions, we asked co-designers to consider the
perspectives of other potential users (listed in DE 1.2) using a template value proposition stated (i.e., I’m
a (user type), who uses the D4DS web tool to (use case) to define (impact)).  We then asked co-designer
to free list potential features (i.e., ways a user may interact with the content and experience learning in

the tool (DE 1.4). Free listing features is a fast way to generate a lot of ideas in a short period of time.
(27) Lastly, co-designers placed the listed features into a prioritization bullseye and discussed their ideas
by giving 2 minute presentations on their favorite ideas (DE 1.5).

Results: Design Session 1 

The overall design impact of the first design session was that the tool should increase the transparency
of D4DS and accessibility to multiple audiences, and foster collaboration. The tool is intended to help
users plan their research and have D4DS as a key principle in their research from the start. To provide
education, users suggested the tool contain a repository of key references and resources for individuals
engaging in D4DS work. Users felt the tool should provide methods and strategies for engaging

community partners in D4DS work. When asked who would benefit from the tool (DE 1.2), there was an
emphasis on providing resources not only for people with D&I background, but also the people they
partner with, whether that’s a site champion, an individual implementing an intervention, or a software
developer designing materials for dissemination. While co-designers felt the primary users were

researchers (with various level of D&I knowledge/background), they felt strongly that the tool would
facilitate conversation with other partners. Other users may include community members and
organizations, practitioners (e.g., clinicians, public health), policy makers, commercial partners, and
funders. The main impact of the tool (DE 1.3) was described as: 1) enhancing co-design processes, as
well as dissemination and implementation research; 2) increasing understanding of D4DS for multiple

audiences; and 3) improving the design, effectiveness and sustainability of research products. The users
free-listed (DE 1.4) 35 features that were grouped into 5 categories: grant proposal resources,
methods/tools, dissemination resources, educational materials, and general format ideas. The research
team combined similar features to generate a final list of 25 features (Table 2), which was used as input

for the next design session to prioritize features.

Design Session 2: Ideate

The second design session focused on further exploring and prioritizing features. Using information
from design session 1, we utilized the Kano Model of Customer Satisfaction exercise for prioritization for

the 25 features (Table 2).(28, 29) The Kano Model classifies features as Must-have (i.e., I expect it and
would be dissatisfied without it), One-dimensional (i.e., I expect it), Attractive (i.e., I like it), and Indifferent
(i.e., I’m neutral). Co-designers and expert panel members completed the Kano as an electronic
(REDCap) quantitative survey during or outside the session (DE 2.1).(28) After completing the Kano

survey, the 3 zoom participants performed an exercise to free list any other feature ideas and identify
their favorite feature from the Kano survey (DE 2.2). Co-designers then grouped features into content
areas for learning (DE 2.3) and prioritized the most important content areas to identify which ideas are
most important to users (DE 2.4). 

Results: Design Session 2 

A total of 17 participants completed the Kano survey. Table 2 lists the features in order of prioritization
according to the Kano survey responses. We identified 1 Must-have feature, 17 Attractive features, and 7
Indifferent features. The Must-have feature was URL links to other content that falls within the
discipline/field of D4DS, especially dissemination and sustainability. The number of Attractive features

was a promising finding give the many potential opportunities to delight users (a key goal of design),
with a relative low risk of dissatisfaction if the feature was not integrated at all. As for the Indifferent
features, these features would not yield either satisfaction or dissatisfaction for our users. As a result,
the Indifferent features occupied the bottom of our development prioritization, and ultimately were not
incorporated into version 1.0 of the web tool.     

Design Sessions 3-5: Wireframing

                The next 3 design sessions focused on iteratively envisioning and creating wireframes of the
features that were prioritized in the previous design session. Wireframes are illustrations of a product
that are not yet built and typically lack functionality but represent the interface and its intended features

and functionalities. The iterative design process allowed users to draw and give feedback on design
options (e.g., wireframes) in successive versions. During design session 3, 4 co-designers ideated and
drew 1) account creation, 2) a questionnaire that would allow users to set-up a project and guide them
on how best to use the tool, 3) a roadmap or visual process that walks the users through the D4DS
process, 4) and the landing page. In design session 4, 4 co-designers provided feedback on two versions

of the roadmap and sketched a final version of the roadmap. We also discussed which features co-
designers wanted to be present on each page that derives from the roadmap and sketched the layout of
a single page. In design session 5, co-designers provided comments on a refined version of the single
page sketch, sketched the layout of the education hub and spent time discussing the name of the tool

and each feature. 

Results: Design Sessions 3-5 

Co-designers felt that users should have the option to use the tool as a guest or with an account, making
it clear to users the benefits of having a login (e.g., saving data, returning later to update work).
Discussion identified that the login should be simple but make users feel that the information they add

into the tool is secure. A major focus of our prototyping sessions was brainstorming and drawing the
feature of a roadmap that would help users walk through a D4DS process. The wireframe of this iterated

in each session (Figure 2), with co-designers realizing they did not want this to feel like a linear process.
Co-designers were critical in the process of developing easy to understand, action-oriented language to
communicate different features of the tool (e.g., D4DS Planner, action planner, action item, cue to
equity). 

Usability Testing: D4DS Planner Prototype 

Following all design sessions, our team delivered low-fidelity wireframes and features to a software
development company (HICAPPS, https://hicapps.com) that has expertise in developing health-related
tools. Our team collaborated with HICAPPS on an iterative build of a prototype of the D4DS Planner to
ensure that all feedback from design sessions was incorporated.

In the usability phase, test users were asked to use the D4DS web tool on a laptop computer in a private
space in-person or via zoom. The test users were given a general description of the web tool but were

not given explicit instructions on how the web tool operated or how it was designed to be used for
developing a dissemination and sustainability plan. Test users were asked to carry out two out of a
possible three heuristic tasks, including: 1) familiarize yourself with the web tool and figure out the
purpose and function of the web tool, 2) create an account, and 3) set up a project to create a D4DS
action plan. 

To assess the heuristic usability data, an affinity grouping (30, 31) exercise was conducted in Mural, an
online collaboration software app, by four team members (MMK, BM, TS, AL) who were integrated into

the design and development of the web tool. The research team analyzed internal notes taken during the
usability sessions and re-watched recordings of users navigating the tool. Summary phrases were
extracted and typed on Mural’s “sticky notes” and mapped together based on similarities in relation to
four categories and the collaborator type, e.g., researchers, practitioners, and leadership. The four
categories were as follows: (1) What works well in the D4DS web tool? (2) What is not working well, or

what are the significant pain points, in the D4DS web tool? (3) What changes do users want to see in the
D4DS web tool? (4) Other comments that pertain to the usability of the D4DS web tool. At the end of the
usability sessions, test users completed the ten item System Usability Scale (SUS) to quantitatively
measure perceived usability of the tool.(32) Usability results were used to refine the prototype tool.

Usability was retested on the refined version one of the D4DS planner among the same users who
participated in the first round of usability testing. During this round of testing, five questions (reported on
a 5-point Likert scale) about the usefulness and appropriateness of the tool were added to the survey. 

Results

Usability Results

Usability testing on the prototype tool was conducted with a separate group of 11 users (55% academics
and 45% clinical and public health practitioners) who were not familiar with the tool using a combined
think-aloud and survey-based approach. Five members from the expert panel assembled at the start of
the design process also participated in the think-aloud testing only. The affinity grouping synthesis of

qualitative usability data is presented in Table 3. Overall, users across the three groups (academics,
practitioners, and experts) expressed that the prototype web tool had a professional “look and feel” and
contained action-oriented content not often considered when planning for dissemination and
sustainability. Users scored the prototype tool a 66 using the SUS, which is slightly below the standard
cut-point of 68 to indicate above average usability.(33) While the web tool contained a lot of high-level

content, some users felt that there were too many words on the screen. Our main challenge was to
provide the user with enough information, while not over-burdening the user who might become reluctant
to use the web tool because of its relative complexity. In general, these results were helpful in allowing
our team to identify areas of the prototype web tool that needed to be revised to achieve a balance of

providing guidance and not overly saturating the interface with directions and jargon. We curated a list of
changes that were communicated to the developers of the web tool (Supplementary Material 2) and
made several wording changes to content to reduce complexity and breadth. Some of the major changes
included: 1) the addition of instructional videos and a guided tour that show users the key features of the
tool upon first logging in; 2) reduction of text and simplifying language; 3) simplification of the login and

project set-up; and 4). Following these updates, usability was reassessed on the first version of the D4DS
Planner (presented below) by 7 of the 11 users (57% academics and 43% practitioners) who participated
in the first round of usability testing. After refinements, usability scored 71, which was a 5-point increase
in the score moving the tool to be perceived as above average for usability. Overall, users felt the tool

was useful and appropriate with a mean score of 4.1 (SD 1.1; Table 4).

The D4DS Planner

The D4DS Planner is a digital platform designed to help users collaboratively apply D4DS principles and
methods to a research project to maximize the potential of their work. The D4DS Planner has two main
components: 1) the Education Hub (i.e., a searchable platform with literature, videos, websites, etc.) and

2) the Action Planner that can be accessed from the homepage (Figure 3; d4dsplanner.com).

The Education Hub is available to users without logging in and includes resources (e.g., websites, journal

articles, presentations and videos) to educate users on D4DS principles and methods. The Education
Hub has search and filter functionality that allow users to find materials related to each D4DS step
(called action items) and materials that provide methods, case examples and cues to increase focus on
equity. The Action Planner allows users to interact and collaborate with a team in real-time or
asynchronously. Users are required to create an account before setting up a project so that all

information is saved and can be downloaded as a D4DS Action Plan. The D4DS Action Plan is a detailed
document outlining users input from each activity that can be used to support D4DS and application of
the F2C Framework. Supplementary Material 1 provides an example of a D4DS Action plan. It includes

information specific to the team’s project that can be used to develop a grant proposal, communicate the
value of your work, and justify funding.

The Action Planner (Figure 4) is composed of 7 “Action Items” based on the Fit to Context Framework’s
conceptualization and design phases (5) that guide users through the D4DS process. Each action item

includes an instructional video, interactive activities, educational content, and cues to equity. The cue to
equity section prompts users to be intentional about how they are conducting their D4DS activities with
the goal of developing equitable products (e.g., those that meet the needs of marginalized populations)
that can be equitably accessed by the intended population over time. Examples of cues to equity,
include: 1) “Consider who is present and, perhaps most importantly, who is absent in your studies and

research team;” 2) “be attentive as to how you ask the questions and attend to issues of power, and of
the implicit and explicit assumptions of your questions;” and 3) “think about ways to share information
that reflect the values and cultures of your partners.” Each cue is relevant to the activity the team may
conduct within the action item and provides further educational materials to help them operationalize

the cue.

Although the tool was built for researchers and research teams, critical to D4DS and strongly valued by
co-designers were features that facilitated the engagement of community-based partners, including

community members, practitioners, public health organizations, policy makers, etc. The tool invites users
to brainstorm and invite relevant partners in the “Identify Partners” Action Item (Figure 5) to log-in and
collaborate with them through the process. The tool includes features such as the ability to assign team
members specific tasks with a due a date and chat features that foster collaboration. As suggested by

co-designers, this process does not need to be completed in it’s entirety or linearly, although some steps
do build from others. The tool includes a guidance questionnaire that was co-designed to help users
identify which action items are most relevant to their project. The 7 Action Items are:

Identify Partners: This Action Item challenges users to think broadly about partners that are critical
to the dissemination and sustainability of their product using the 7 P’s Framework for stakeholder
identification in outcomes and effectiveness research.(34) Partners can be individuals, groups or
organizations who have an interest in the research product, or affect or are affected by its

outcomes. As started above, the Action Item allows you to select partners you will engage in your
work and invite partners to collaborate with you in the D4DS action planner.

Empathize and Outline the Problem: Users will engage partners to understand the problem from
their perspective and generate a Value Proposition that clearly communicates how their product
meets the needs of their target audience. In research, a value proposition can be used to

communicate the value of our research to our partners, funding agencies, and the general public.

Understand The Context: This Action Item includes key questions to help users think broadly about
characteristics of the people, relationships, product, organization, and environment that may
influence the ability to reach the target audience and sustain impact. The goal is to help users
consider the multilevel nature of how context can impact how they share, adopt, use and benefit

from the product over time.

Confirm and Co-design Your Product:This Action Item allows users to select methods for co-
designing their product and packaging it for use in real-world settings. Using co-design methods to
engage key partners in the design of a product increases the likelihood that your product will be
perceived as feasible, acceptable, useful and equitable.

Develop a Dissemination Plan:This Action Item helps users generate a plan for how to share their

product with key audiences, especially those outside of academia. In this action item, the team and
their partners will brainstorm all the possible ways they may share about their product, prioritize
which methods are the most feasible and will have the most impact, and generate a plan.

Plan For Sustainability: This Action Item helps the team discuss and prioritize what is needed to
sustain their product over time and create a practical action plan. The goal is for the team to think
early and actively plan for sustainability to enhance the long-term impact of their work.

Evaluate Iteratively: This Action Item helps users evaluate their use of D4DS and develop plans for
evaluating dissemination and sustainability. In this Action Item, the tool helps users develop

evaluation plans to maximize the intended impact of their dissemination and sustainability plans.

Evaluation should be conducted iteratively, and users should return to this Action Item as needed to
revise their plan.

Discussion

The public-access D4DS Planner (d4dsplanner.com) is the first digital tool that supports transdisciplinary
research teams in learning about and applying D4DS principles and the Fit to Context Framework in their

work. Developed through a participatory design process, the two main components of the tool are the

Education Hub, which contains resources to help users learn about D4DS, and the Action Planner, to
support the application of D4DS principles and the conceptualization and design phase objectives of the

F2C Framework.

The use of a participatory design approach engaged users in co-designing a D4DS Planner that

incorporated users’ experiences and met researchers and practitioners’ needs and preferences.(23)
Users indicated that the tool would be helpful in improving understanding of D4DS, enhancing co-design

processes with partners, and ultimately would improve the effectiveness and sustainability of their

products. Not surprisingly, features prioritized by the users were those that support learning about D4DS
as this is a new and expanding area, including links to resources, and the process of engaging and

collaborating with partners, including a roadmap tailored to a specified project to guide users in

conducting D4DS. Overall, users liked the visual presentation of the tool and the actionable content that
allows for developing a plan for dissemination and sustainability. The relative complexity in navigating

the tool and having too many words in some sections were areas that users recommended modifying to
enhance usability. While the participatory design approach was time intensive, the D4DS principles were

new to users and time was necessary to solidify how our planner would be useful to end-users. Through

this process, we learned that inclusion of users throughout the prototype build phase would have been
beneficial, rather than waiting until the end to gain feedback on usability. This more iterative approach

may have saved us time and financial resources by reducing the number of changes necessary after
usability testing.

The D4DS Planner is designed for researchers to engage key partners throughout the process of
planning a research initiative which is critical to ensure that products are designed to match contextual

characteristics (i.e. priorities, needs, resources) of partners.(5, 6). Community engagement is critical to
improving dissemination and sustainability by better aligning research activities with the priorities,

needs, and assets of the intended users and local context.(5, 35) Several tools have been developed to

guide conducting community-engaged research;(36) however, to our knowledge none have focused on
engaging related to product development, dissemination, and sustainability.(37–40) Engaging the

intended audience, particularly marginalized populations, in product design may promote health equity
by developing interventions and products that meet the needs of historically marginalized populations

and account for the their context. Intentionally selecting partners that do not create, reinforce, or

maintain existing inequities is important if the process is intended to promote health equity. (41) When
done well, co-creating ways of sharing and sustaining the intervention may increase reach, adoption, and

sustained impact among diverse populations and marginalized groups. Our goal was to support teams in
using the interactive features of the tool and D4DS methods with intention and equity in mind, with the

goal of improving dissemination and sustainability outcomes and impact.

The D4DS Planner web tool has several potential uses for projects in different phases from

conceptualization to sustainability. This tool supports users and their collaborators to deepen their

understanding of the issue and work together as a team to identify and refine the solution (i.e., product)
that effectively addresses a health problem that is important to the intended audience. Additionally, this

tool can serve a crucial role in formulating comprehensive dissemination and sustainability plans. Early
and ongoing planning for dissemination and sustainability enables the consideration of the intended

audience and capacity and resources of the implementers and their contexts to enhance translation and

utilization of research products in practice.(6) Further, the Action Plan generated from the D4DS tool can
support the development of grant proposals and grant dissemination plans.

There are several limitations to this work. The target users for the D4DS Planner are research teams
conducting clinical and public health-related research including researchers, practitioners, and

community-based partners. However, we did not include community-based partners in our design
sessions or usability testing. Subsequent usability testing will elicit perspectives from community-based

partners to refine and tailor the tool to further support engagement with community partners. We also

did not test the tool with collaborative teams (i.e., a researcher and community partner reviewing the tool
together) which limited our ability to assess the tool’s features and functions that were designed to

facilitate collaboration and engagement.

Usability testing was conducted on key features of the tool, but users did not comprehensively test the

entirety of the tool to develop a D4DS action plan. Additionally, while our cues to equity were developed
within the participatory design process, the ability of teams to easily use the cues in their research

projects, whether cues have the intended impact on how the D4DS process is conducted, and the impact
on health equity outcomes has not been tested. Future work will focus on usability testing among

research teams, including community partners, and examine whether the tool and cues to equity were

used as intended, as well as the impacts of using this process. The tool is limited to the English
language, which will limit the use of the tool globally. Future iterations of the tool will consider building in

a translation feature to broaden access to diverse populations.

Participatory design is an iterative and ongoing process.(23) The D4DS Planner is in its early iteration,

and we are committed to refining the tool based on feedback from users representing diverse
backgrounds, including researchers in non-academic and low resource settings and community-based

partners. These varied perspectives are crucial, aligning with the tool's primary goal of engaging a broad

spectrum of partners in dissemination and sustainability planning to enhance product-context fit and
ultimately promote health equity. To evaluate the tool's impact, we will assess its reach and engagement

using google analytics (e.g., number of users who access the tool, duration of use, completion of tasks)
and its effectiveness and context-dependent implementation through user case examples. We will also

design studies to test whether facilitation strategies are needed to support use of the tool; with a

particular focus on understanding whether research teams without a D&I scientist are able to effectively
use and complete the tool without facilitation.

Conclusions

Dissemination and sustainment are critical to maximize the impact of research on health and well-being.
The D4DS Planner can help research teams apply the Fit to Context Framework for dissemination and

sustainability, facilitate partner engagement in research initiatives, and enhance the overall impact of

their work. To our knowledge this is the first tool of its kind that facilitates engaging partners in product
development, dissemination, and sustainability.