Kim et al. 
BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making          (2022) 22:206  
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12911-022-01945-z

RESEARCH

Mobile health platform based 
on user‑centered design to promote exercise 
for patients with peripheral artery disease

Mihui Kim1, Yesol Kim1 and Mona Choi2* 

Methods
The software development process was based on iterative 
development using a user-centered design approach to 
promote behavior change, which involves the following 
three phases: analysis, design, and implementation  [28, 
29] (Fig. 1).
This iterative development process is continued until 
the software reaches a prespecified satisfactory level 
indicated in the system requirements specification, and 
teamwork is emphasized to develop, test, modify, and 
retest periodically during the process for high-quality 
software [29]. In the user-centered design approach, it is 
important to accurately assess the end-users’ needs and 
develop systems that focus on meeting their require-
ments  [27, 28]. Therefore, this study included patients 
with PAD in the development process (Phases 1 and 3), 
accurately assessed their requirements and priorities 
with regard to smartphone apps for behavior change, and 
evaluated the usability of the smartphone app.
In total, 173 participants were involved in the devel-
opment process: Phase 1 involved 153 patients; Phase 
2 involved nine participants (three authors, two app 
developers, three exercise experts, and one Korean 
language expert); and Phase 3 involved 16 participants. 
The authors of this study participated in all three 
phases and played the roles in conducting the study,

Page 3 of 12
	

designing the prototype, producing videos, and devel-
oping automatic text messages.

Phase 1: analysis
Literature review
The authors had previously conducted a systematic 
review and meta-analysis to assess the effectiveness 
of mHealth interventions in patients with PAD. The 
details of these methods have been published else-
where  [12]. The results of the review identified the 
important and commonly used features and additional 
necessary functions in mHealth intervention.

Needs assessment
End-user involvement is critical in smartphone app 
development [30]. To assess the practical needs for the 
HOBBIT-PAD platform, a semi-structured interview and 
a questionnaire-based survey were conducted on patients 
with PAD. The inclusion criteria were aged above 19 years 
old and diagnosed with PAD. Patients who met the eligi-
bility criteria for the study were recruited with the help 
of medical staff at the cardiovascular outpatient clinic 
of a tertiary hospital in Seoul, Korea. Outpatient nurses 
informed authors when they identified visiting patients 
who met the eligibility criteria, and authors explained the 
purpose and process of this study and obtained written 

Fig. 1  Description of the mHealth app development process. a Peripheral artery disease, b SMArtphone’s uSability Heuristics, c System usability scale

Page 4 of 12

consent from patients who voluntarily agreed to partici-
pate in this study.
The semi-structured interviews were conducted on 15 
participants using purposeful sampling from February 
to July 2020. The interviews were conducted in an inde-
pendent space within the hospital, and the data were col-
lected through voice record and field notes. The main 
interview questions were “What do you think is the most 
important part of exercising by yourself?”, “What is the 
greatest difficulty in exercising by yourself?”, and “What 
would be the most important functions of a smartphone 
app developed for patients with PAD?” The recorded 
interviews were transcribed verbatim and analyzed using 
content analysis.
For the questionnaire-based survey, 138 patients were 
recruited from June to October 2020. The seven ques-
tions derived from the interviews assessed the level of 
information needed related to exercise, diet, smoking, 
alcohol, and information resources related to PAD, essen-
tial functions of a smartphone app to be developed, and 
intention to use a developed smartphone app for PAD. 
The data were analyzed and are presented as mean and 
standard deviation or frequency and percentage.
Based on findings from interviews and questionnaire-
based surveys, the requirements of the HOBBIT-PAD 
platform were identified. These requirements, including 
patient expectations, consisted of the specifications for 
the design and content of the platform.

Phase 2: design and development
Prototype
The initial prototype was constructed based on the users’ 
requirements for a smartphone app for behavior change 
based on user-centered design, and the app develop-
ers undertook the HOBBIT-PAD platform development 
based on the prototype design. An initial version of the 
platform was built and tested to ensure it was bug-free 
by the authors. A smartphone app was developed on the 
Android operating system (version 4.4 or higher).

Contents
In-app videos related to exercise and PAD were created 
to provide exercise-related information to patients. The 
exercise video files were made by exercise experts, and 
videos related to disease management were made by the 
authors according to results from the patients’ needs 
assessment.
A text message library based on the behavior change 
wheel (BCW) framework was developed to motivate 
patients to exercise  [31]. The BCW allows the selec-
tion of interventions according to the analysis of target 
behaviors that need to be changed. The target behavior 
of this study was set to induce a change from sedentary 

to walking behavior, and the barriers to performing this 
change were identified as leg pain, poor physical condi-
tion, forgetting to exercise, unwillingness to exercise, bad 
weather, and lack of time. As a strategy to overcome these 
barriers, the authors linked them to seven interventions 
(training, enablement, education, persuasion, incentivi-
zation, coercion, and environmental restructuring) that 
can be applied to the development of in-app automatic 
text messages. In-app text messages were automatically 
delivered via app notifications to encourage exercising 
according to the individual exercise barriers ascertained 
from the daily ecological momentary assessment (EMA) 
survey, as described in a previous study [32].

Phase 3: implementation
Heuristic evaluation
The heuristic evaluation of the smartphone app was per-
formed by four experts with majors in computer sciences 
and nursing informatics and with experience in mobile 
app development and design. They evaluated the smart-
phone app based on 12 heuristics items according to the 
Korean version of the SMArtphone’s uSability Heuristics 
(SMASH) [33]. Each heuristic item was rated on a Likert 
five-point scale ranging from 0, “No problem” to 4, “Usa-
bility catastrophe”  [34]. Since the smartphone app was 
developed on an Android operating system, app develop-
ers built the web version to test it in the same environ-
ment as the smartphone app. The experts evaluated the 
app individually after using the web version.

Modification
Among the 12 heuristic items, items that received a rat-
ing of 3, “important to fix, so should be given high prior-
ity”, and those receiving 4, “imperative to fix this before 
the product can be released”, were modified. The feed-
back on the evaluation was incorporated into the smart-
phone app’s functions after discussions between the 
research team.

User evaluation
User evaluation was performed by four nurses and three 
patients with PAD. Nurses with more than five years of 
experience in caring for PAD and patients with PAD who 
used an Android smartphone were recruited. Nurses 
were provided with a web version of the app to evaluate, 
while patients were provided with the smartphone app 
with a wearable activity tracker and asked to use them 
daily for seven days.
The user evaluation was conducted using the system 
usability scale (SUS) and additional open-ended ques-
tions on the app. SUS is a valid and reliable question-
naire [35] and this study used the Korean version of the 
SUS [36]. In the SUS, odd-numbered items are positive

Page 5 of 12
	

statements, and even-numbered items are negative state-
ments so as avoid response biases. Each item is rated on a 
five-point Likert scale ranging from 1 (strongly disagree) 
to 5 (strongly agree). “Strongly disagree” with a negatively 
worded item is equivalent to “strongly agree” with a posi-
tively worded item. The total SUS score is calculated by 
multiplying the weight and ranges from 0 to 100. The 
higher the SUS score, the higher the perceived usability. 
Based on the SUS score, usability was classified as “best 
imaginable, excellent, good, OK, poor, or worst imagi-
nable”  [37]. Through open-ended questions, additional 
opinions on the app were collected from users. The fol-
lowing three questions were used: “What were the good 
points about using this app?”, “What was the inconven-
ience of using this app?”, and “Do you have any improve-
ments or suggestions for this app?”.

Results
Phase 1: analysis
Literature review
In our prior work [12], seven randomized controlled tri-
als on mHealth intervention for patients with PAD were 
reviewed, and all included studies used wearable activity 
trackers to measure daily steps. The intervention func-
tions of included studies consisted of recording and dis-
playing the number of steps through a wearable activity 
tracker, providing feedback regarding goal attainment, 
and issuing reminders to remain active. Real-time inter-
vention, an advantage of mHealth, was not applied to 
monitoring and feedback on individually set goals and 
symptoms. A total of six studies included in the meta-
analysis showed that mHealth-based exercise interven-
tions at home improved pain-free and maximal walking 
times and the 6-minute walking test distance compared 
to the usual care group. Additionally, it was reported that 
mHealth technology would help maintain adherence to 
exercise goals in home-based interventions.
Based on findings from the literature review, the HOB-
BIT-PAD platform consisted of a smartphone app paired 
with a wearable activity tracker and a web-based portal 
to enable real-time feedback, monitoring, and record-
ing of patients’ daily steps, symptoms, and goal attain-
ments [12]. The recorded data were used to provide daily 
reminders and feedback to maintain exercise based on 
whether the individually set goal was achieved.

Needs assessment
A total of 15 patients aged 32–82 years (11 males and 4 
females; median age: 74 years) participated in semi-struc-
tured interviews. A key finding was that all participants 
were aware of the importance of exercise and exercise 
programs for disease management.

“There are educations for diabetic patients on how 
to manage diet and other things, but there is no pro-
gram for patients with peripheral artery disease who 
underwent revascularization. (Participant 6)”
“At first, I liked to stay at home without walking. I 
think it’s better to walk now. That’s the best and the 
easiest. (Participant 11)”

The participants answered that the most important 
part of the exercising by oneself was lifestyle modifica-
tion, and the most difficult part was exercising alone 
without supervision and reverting to their previous 
lifestyles.

“I couldn’t exercise a lot… I want someone to lead 
me. (Participant 5)”
“Because there is nothing wrong with my body, I 
have gradually forgotten about exercising. (Partici-
pant 2)”

Participants’ expectations of the smartphone app 
included availability of tailored exercise prescriptions 
based on their condition, display of daily activities, provi-
sion of educational information related to PAD, regular 
and timely exercise reminders, provision of emotional 
support, and use of easy-to-understand terms.
A total of 138 patients participated in the survey, with 
an average age of 69.04 (± 10.94) years; 91.3% were male. 
Patients expected to receive information on exercise 
(73.9%) and diet (64.5%). Most patients (84.8%) obtained 
PAD-related information from doctors or nurses. Partici-
pants expected the smartphone app to include details of 
PAD management (78.3%), exercise (75.4%), diet (60.1%), 
and health status records (35.5%). Approximately 85% of 
the patients were willing to use a smartphone app if it 
were developed.
Through the interviews and survey, the functional 
requirements of the HOBBIT-PAD platform based on the 
IMB model were summarized (Table 1). In addition, the 
functions of the platform were mapped to 12 techniques 
among the 26 behavior change techniques [38] to provide 
effective intervention.

Phase 2: design and development
Prototype
The authors designed a comprehensive HOBBIT-PAD 
platform based on user-centered design to provide infor-
mation and motivation through functional requirements 
(Fig.  2). The smartphone app was synchronized with a 
wearable activity tracker, the Fitbit Charge 4 (Fitbit Inc., 
San Francisco, CA, USA). Its menu included the follow-
ing: displaying steps, activities, daily goals, videos, goal, 
and message. The web-based portal used by the authors 
included the following features: participant management,

Page 6 of 12

monitoring (exercise and survey), and goal settings for 
each patient.
The menu and functions of the apps used by patients 
are shown in Fig. 2. The “Steps” menu displayed the num-
ber of daily and weekly steps paired with the Fitbit charge 
4 worn by patients; the “Activities” menu recorded daily 
exercise. In the “Daily Goals” menu, one could check the 
attained daily target steps set in the “Goal” menu. In the 
“Videos” menu, videos on exercise and disease manage-
ment were included. In the “Message” menu, the patient 
could record whether to exercise, exercise barrier, and 
lower extremity pain level through daily app push and 
receive an automatic text message to encourage exercise 
according to the selected exercise barrier.
The main menus of the web-based portal used by the 
authors were Monitoring of Exercise and Survey. The 
“Monitoring of Exercise” menu displayed the individual 
goals and steps paired with the Fitbit charge 4 for all 
patients. In addition, the “Monitoring of Survey” menu 
was also monitored by the authors for individual daily 
survey results that patients recorded in their app’s “Mes-
sage” menu.

Contents
A total of five in-app exercise videos were produced by 
exercise experts with a playback time of approximately 5 
to 14 min. These videos were used as a visual demonstra-
tion with music and explained how to perform each exer-
cise: a warm-up and cool-down exercise, walking, and 
muscle-strengthening activities. All videos were reviewed 
and checked by the authors.
A total of four in-app videos related to PAD manage-
ment were produced by the authors based on a literature 
review focused on easily understandable content. These 

videos covered disease prognosis, lifestyle management 
(hypertension, diet, and smoking), and the importance of 
exercise.
A text message library with 120 messages and EMA 
based on the BCW framework was developed in a previ-
ous study [32] and used for in-app automatic text mes-
saging to encourage participants to exercise.

Phase 3: implementation
Heuristic evaluation
Four experts (one male and three females; aged 
31–42 years) conducted a heuristic evaluation using the 
Korean version of SMASH. They were one nursing pro-
fessor with a nursing informatics major, one computer 
scientist, and two with experience in mobile app devel-
opment and design. Among the 12 heuristic items, six 
items scored 3 or 4 points from experts and thus required 
modification (Table 2). The other items were scored from 
0 to 2. In all, 40 feedbacks were received from experts on 
features of the smartphone app that needed improve-
ment and specifically described in the modification part.

Modification
The results of the heuristic evaluation were divided into 
errors and modifications. Experts who majored in design 
mainly suggested extensively revising the design aspects 
of the app, such as graphic presentation and color. 
Through discussion, the authors prioritized items that 
required modifications. Finally, all errors were corrected, 
and the selected modifications were made (Table 3).
The final version of the web-based portal was con-
nected through a URL (Fig. 3), and the smartphone app 
(Fig. 4) could be installed by scanning a QR code or via a 
URL.

Table 1  Functional requirements of the platform

Category
Function
Content
Behavior change technique
mHealth platform

App
Wearable 
tracker
Web-
based 
portal

Information
Visual display
Personal graph of exercise
Prompt self-monitoring of behavior
◯
◯
◯

Reminder
Exercise time
Prompt practice
◯
◯

Education
Exercise, disease management
Provide information about behavior-health link 
and others’ approval and consequence, Model or 
demonstrate the behavior

◯
◯

Motivation
Self-monitoring
Daily/weekly exercise
Prompt self-monitoring of behavior
◯
◯
◯

Goal setting
Assigning tailored step count goal
Prompt specific goal setting, Set graded tasks
◯
◯

Goal attainment
Reward depending on achievement
Provide contingent rewards
◯
◯

Feedback
Automatic text messages
Prompt intention formation, Provide feedback on 
performance
◯
◯

Recording
Activities, pain level
Prompt self-monitoring of behavior, Prompt barrier 
identification
◯
◯

Page 7 of 12
	

User evaluation
Four nurses (all females; aged 30–32  years) and three 
patients with PAD (all males; aged 62–69 years) partici-
pated in the user evaluation. The mean SUS total score 
for nurses was 75.63, indicating “excellent”. The mean 
SUS total score for patients with PAD was 57.50, indicat-
ing “good”. The overall SUS total score ranged from 32.50 
to 82.50 with an average of 67.86, which indicated “good” 
(Table 4).

After using the developed app, the users’ opinions 
were collected through open-ended questions. First, the 
responses to the question on the good points of the app 
were as follows: uncomplicated and simple design, easy 
functions, ease of use, and encouragement for exercise 
through goal visualization, messages, and videos. Sec-
ond, the responses to the question on the inconvenience 
of the app were as follows: need time to understand each 
item, simple and monotonous function and design, and 

Fig. 2  Prototype of the HOBBIT-PAD platform

Table 2  Heuristic evaluation of smartphone application

a  SMArtphone’s uSability Heuristics

0 = No problem: I don’t agree that this is a usability problem at all, 1 = Cosmetic problem only: does not need to be fixed unless extra time is available on the project, 
2 = Minor problem: fixing this should be given low priority, 3 = Major problem: important to fix, so should be given high priority, 4 = Usability catastrophe: imperative 
to fix this before product can be released

The Korean version of SMASH a
Expert 1
Expert 2
Expert 3
Expert 4

1. Visibility of system status
1
1
0
3

2. Match between system and the real world
0
2
0
0

3. User control and freedom
2
2
0
2

4. Consistency and standards
1
0
1
2

5. Error prevention
2
0
0
4

6. Minimize the user’s memory load
0
0
0
2

7. Customization and shortcuts
0
1
0
1

8. Efficiency of use and performance
1
1
0
3

9. Esthetic and minimalist design
0
1
1
4

10. Help users recognize diagnose, and recover from errors
0
2
0
0

11. Help and documentation
3
2
0
4

12. Physical interaction and ergonomics
0
0
0
4

Page 8 of 12

Table 3  Modification of smartphone application according to a heuristic evaluation

Menu
Contents
Before
After

Main screen
Modifying the graph and text due to overlap 
with the “steps” menu, - Deleting of the “Exercise 
program” banner at the bottom of all screens

Activities
Combining activities in one button as a graphic 
for simplicity

Daily goals
Adding buttons to jump to another month on 
the calendar

Automatic text-message
Changing the title to the “Research team” who 
sent the message and the color of the messages

Page 9 of 12
	

the possibility of a decrease in the interest over time. 
Last, the opinions on improvement or suggestions for the 
app were as follows: upload additional videos regularly, 
add a description and guide for each item, add functions 
to motivate when logging in, provide positive feedback 
to the responses about doing exercise in the survey, and 
insert color or intuitive pictures to the background in the 
survey.

Discussion
This study performed the iterative development pro-
cess using user-centered design approach to develop the 
HOBBIT-PAD platform to support exercise behavior in 
patients with PAD, based on the IMB model [20, 28, 29]. 
The HOBBIT-PAD platform consisted of a smartphone 
app synchronized with a wearable activity tracker and a 
web-based portal to provide intensive interaction cou-
pled with various functions and contents. The contents of 
this platform focused on providing motivation and infor-
mation to improve behavior skills and promote behavior 
change based on the theoretical foundations.
The HOBBIT-PAD platform was developed with ade-
quate consideration of the user’s needs and preferences 
through a user-centered design approach. The mixed 
methods were used to accurately assess user require-
ments for a smartphone app. The user requirements were 
designed with respect to each smartphone app screen, 
keeping in mind the ease of use for patients with PAD, the 
prevalence of which is rising with age. The smartphone 
app had minimum essential functions and attempted to 
increase the intuition of use through a simple design that 
could contribute to its willingness to use  [39]. In addi-
tion, these essential functions were provided along with 
the behavior change techniques  [23, 38] based on the 
users’ requirements.

Linking the theory and intervention content improves 
the efficacy of the intervention by identifying the con-
structs to be targeted and the mechanism of behavior 
change [38, 40, 41]. Therefore, the platform incorporated 
12 behavior change techniques to provide effective inter-
vention. Furthermore, to optimize the effectiveness of the 
mHealth platform, its contents were consisted accord-
ingly to provide information and motivation for behavior 
change on the basis of the IMB model. The HOBBIT-
PAD platform consisted of information delivered by vis-
ual display, reminders (exercise time), education (in-app 
videos), and motivation given by self-monitoring, goal 
settings, goal attainment, feedback, and recording.
As a result of the heuristic evaluation of a smartphone 
app by experts, 6 out of 12 items needed modifications. 
The priorities and feasibility of these items were also 
considered and modified. The modified smartphone app 
has enabled system improvements and a convenient and 
easy interface for older adults. As a result, the finding of 
usability evaluations of the modified smartphone app was 
rated to have good acceptability to users.
Through the HOBBIT-PAD platform, patients with 
PAD accomplished self-monitoring and received real-
time feedback, and the authors could accurately monitor 
patients’ activity and pain levels. Therefore, it may replace 
a supervised exercise program by providing assistance 
and support to patients with PAD transitioning from in-
person, supervised exercise programs to an independent 
home-based exercise program. In other studies, mHealth 
platforms have been developed for exercise-based cardiac 
rehabilitation [26], Parkinson disease management [25], 
and HIV care  [24] that can effectively support patients 
or caregivers and healthcare providers with consistent 
involvement. The HOBBIT-PAD platform can be an inte-
grated system that monitors and stores data in real time, 

Fig. 3  Screenshot of the web-based portal

Page 10 of 12

Fig. 4  Screenshots of the smartphone app

Table 4  System usability scale mean scores

a  Each item is rated from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree)

b  Negative statement

Items a
Nurses (n = 4)
Patients (n = 3)
Total (n = 7)

1. I think that I would like to use this system frequently
3.75
3.67
3.71

2. I found the system unnecessarily complex b
1.75
2.33
2.00

3. I thought the system was easy to use
2.75
3.00
2.86

4. I think that I would need the support of a technical person to be able to use this system b
2.00
2.67
2.29

5. I found the various functions in this system were well integrated
4.00
4.00
4.00

6. I thought there was too much inconsistency in this system b
1.25
2.67
1.86

7. I would imagine that most people would learn to use this system very quickly
4.50
3.00
3.86

8. I found the system very cumbersome to use b
1.25
3.00
2.00

9. I felt very confident using the system
4.25
3.00
3.71

10. I needed to learn a lot of things before I could get going with this system b
2.75
3.00
2.86

Total (Range: 0 ~ 100)
75.63
57.50
67.86

Page 11 of 12
	

and offers feedback with minimum effort. Therefore, by 
providing exercise intervention to patients with PAD 
using the platform, it can be expected that the behav-
ior skills and exercise adherence rate may be improved 
through information and motivation, ultimately inducing 
a change in the targeted behavior.
This study has several limitations. First, the smartphone 
app was only available for the Android operating system. 
As approximately 80% of people in Korea use Android 
smartphones, and its use increases with age  [22], the 
authors chose to develop an Android smartphone app that 
could be used by more patients, owing to limited resources. 
Secondly, in the third phase, we evaluated the smartphone 
app only. Although the web-based portal was periodically 
tested and retested by authors focusing on technical errors 
during the development process, the portal needs to be 
evaluated by experts or healthcare providers to determine 
the usability. Finally, the smartphone app was developed to 
synchronize with Fitbit Charge 4. Therefore, an additional 
development process is required when synchronized with 
other commercial wearable activity trackers.

Conclusions
The HOBBIT-PAD platform was designed and devel-
oped to provide a system for patients with PAD and their 
healthcare providers. This platform may promote behav-
ior changes in patients with PAD in their everyday lives 
and easily provide patients’ status to healthcare provid-
ers. The user-centered and safe smartphone app synchro-
nized with a wearable activity tracker may be possible to 
promote exercise in patients with PAD. The HOBBIT-
PAD platform with real-time interaction can be applied 
to patients with PAD, and further evaluation of its effec-
tiveness and acceptability is expected.