RESEARCH ARTICLE
Open Access

Home blood pressure data visualization for
the management of hypertension:
designing for patient and physician
information needs

Richelle J. Koopman1*
, Shannon M. Canfield1, Jeffery L. Belden1, Pete Wegier2,3,4, Victoria A. Shaffer5,
K. D. Valentine6,7, Akshay Jain8, Linsey M. Steege9, Sonal J. Patil1, Mihail Popescu10 and Michael L. LeFevre1

Methods
Approach
To identify and satisfy patient and physician information
needs for hypertension management, with special atten-
tion to the growing evidence for including home blood

pressure data, we employed a user-centered design
process to incorporate patient home blood pressure data
into the clinical EHR and improve data visualization for
the care of hypertension. User-centered design is an it-
erative process that involves understanding user infor-
mation needs for their work, designing for those needs
using known design principals, analyzing if needs are ef-
ficiently met by the design, and iterating design with fur-
ther understanding of needs [34–37].

Interface design
To create initial candidate designs, our multidisciplinary
team used a deep dive approach, incorporating princi-
ples of data visualization, graphic and health literacy, hu-
man
factors,
health
psychology,
the
tenets
of
the
Chronic Care Model, and usability best practices, as well
as the views of two important user groups, patients and
their primary care physicians [38–40]. Our team brought
together experts from diverse disciplines and multiple
institutions, including Family Medicine, Human Factors
Engineering, Informatics, Psychology, Computer Science
and Public Health. Foundational underpinnings of these
diverse disciplines guided our team’s work to dually de-
sign for patients and physicians, creating a blood pres-
sure data visualization that might promote a shared

understanding of blood pressure data and trends, and fa-
cilitate decision making between patients and physicians,
especially during the primary care patient visit [41, 42].
Informed by known visual display concepts and evi-
dence from our literature review, we first designed sev-
eral candidate data visualizations that included a data
table of BP values, and an aligned medication timeline
(Fig. 2) [23–37, 42]. Concurrently and in parallel, a series
of online cognitive perceptual experiments with patients
with hypertension also informed our design, including a
smoothing algorithm to improve patient judgments
about variable blood pressure data [10]. The conduct
and results of online perceptual experiments are detailed
elsewhere [10]. We concluded iterations when our de-
signs met the user identified information needs, with sat-
isfaction of needs dually determined by focus group
participant feedback and multidisciplinary team judg-
ment that the design met expressed needs.

Patient and physician focus groups
We iteratively tested and refined the visualization in a
series of 7 formative design focus groups, with 5 itera-
tions to reach the final prototype (Fig. 3). Design phase
focus groups alternated between patient and physician
participants, with separate focus groups for patients and

physicians (Fig. 3). After iterating to a final prototype
(Fig. 4), we conducted three confirmatory focus groups
and a key informant interview as a member check. Con-
firmatory focus groups included participants from the
initial patient and physician formative focus groups, with
review of the final prototype data visualization for fit
with their needs as a member check as well as questions
about how they would use the new visualization in their
hypertension decision making. We sought to include 5–
7 participants in each focus group [43].

Participants and recruitment
Family medicine and general internal medicine physi-
cians and their patients age 18 years and older with a
diagnosis of hypertension were recruited from eight
community-based practices. Prior to the focus groups,
we educated physicians about the evidence for home
blood pressure use in clinical care in a voluntary grand
rounds-type
seminar.
Physician
participants
were
emailed with information about the opportunity to par-
ticipate; we conducted focus groups at times and places
convenient for the physicians, such as lunchtime in the
practice conference room.
Patient participants were patients of these practices
age 18 and above with a diagnosis of hypertension. We
used the EHR hypertension registry to create lists of pa-
tients, asked their physicians to eliminate those with

cognitive impairment or serious mental health diagnoses,
and mailed recruitment letters to remaining patients
asking them to call the coordinator to enroll. The study
coordinator confirmed hypertension diagnosis, screened
for cognitive impairment, and described the focus group
procedure. Eligible patients were invited to the focus
group. At the start of the focus group, patients were pre-
sented with a waiver of documentation of consent, in-
cluding both the written waiver and a verbal discussion
of the study focus group procedures. Patients were given
the opportunity to ask clarifying questions about the
study to confirm understanding and withdraw if they
preferred. Patients received $30 fair compensation for
time and travel. A similar consent process occurred at
the beginning of physician focus groups. The University
of Missouri Health Sciences Institutional Review Board
reviewed and approved this study and its human sub-
jects’ participation and consent process.

Focus groups conduct
All physician and patient participants completed a pre-
focus group survey to characterize sample demographics
and typical data collection, data use, and decision mak-
ing based on clinic and home blood pressure readings.
Beyond characterizing sample demographics, the short
attitudes and behaviors survey addressed research ques-
tions (see Table 1) that benefited from a quantitative

characterization. For example, patients were asked to re-
port on frequency of home blood pressure measurement
behaviors and physicians were asked to report how they
most often interpreted and recorded home blood pres-
sure data supplied on paper.
Experienced focus group facilitators SMC and RK led
the focus groups; at least two other authors observed
and recorded field notes for each focus group. Focus
group data collection also included written comments by
participants on a series of paper versions of the visuali-
zations. Focus group questions and prompts were in-
formed by research questions (Table 1) and were
designed to elicit broad feedback regarding usability and
preferences.
Participants were presented with candidate designs,
with iteration of designs between each focus group. Data
visualizations presented in focus groups varied in both
1) design element options and 2) the pattern and trend
of blood pressures to represent common blood pressure
“stories”, e.g. increasing blood pressure trend, addition
of new medication and resulting decrease in blood pres-
sure, or a gap in medication adherence associated with
blood pressure rising and then returning to goal. Be-
cause we were aiming for an intuitive design, focus
group participants were challenged to construct meaning
from the data visualizations with little to no orientation
from the facilitators and to construct stories about the
patient represented in the data visualization. For ex-
ample, the visualization in Fig. 4 was used during a con-
firmatory focus groups with patients. Participants were
asked to “First take a moment to view this image and jot
down a few notes. We’d like you to describe how this
patient is doing managing their hypertension.” After dis-
cussing impressions participants then were asked: “A
doctor and patient view this image during a clinical visit.
Imagine and then describe that conversation to the
group”. Physician participants were also asked to use the
visualization in role-plays discussing blood pressure re-
sults with a patient in an effort to help us understand

any barriers/advantages to using these visualizations dur-
ing patient visits.

Analysis
We analyzed patient and physician surveys using de-
scriptive statistics to examine demographics, attitudes
and behaviors about blood pressure (self-) management.
Analysis of focus group qualitative data took place in
three phases: an immediate team debrief, preliminary
rapid qualitative analysis immediately following each
focus group, and final thematic analysis of compiled
data. Rapid qualitative analysis is a process where re-
searchers review transcripts and identify key aspects of
the data answering research questions relevant to the it-
erative design process. We used this method after each
focus group to quickly identify participant responses to
design features, to confirm our designs or identify a need
to iterate design features, and to quickly develop a
preliminary understanding of remaining unaddressed
patient/physician information needs and preferences
[44–46]. Our final qualitative analysis phase was a more
comprehensive and traditional thematic analysis [47].
Our approach to thematic analysis included a deductive,
realist approach to the data using a theoretical frame to
identify key themes across the dataset in response to
predefined research questions. Both RJK and SMC are
experienced with qualitative research, with RJK a family
physician researcher and SMC a long-time project dir-
ector with a public health, diversity, and patient needs
perspective [48–53]. First, researchers RJK and SMC be-
came familiar with the data by reviewing and checking
accuracy of verbatim transcripts. Next, using Dedoose©,
RJK and SMC individually coded transcripts and then
worked together to develop a coding framework based
on research questions (Table 1), then conducted consen-
sus coding, and held frequent meetings throughout the
process to identify emerging themes and ensure accurate
representation of the data [54]. Findings were organized
into main and subthemes and shared with the larger

team for reaction and refinement. Final names and de-
scriptions were established representing the story of the
themes. The analysis of both survey and focus group
data (both spoken and written comments) as well as the
examination of two stakeholder perspectives, patients
and physicians, facilitated convergence and triangulation
of these data for the investigators. Finally, our confirma-
tory focus groups served as member checks.

Results
Survey
Focus group participant demographics are reported in
Table 2. Most patients (75%) took blood pressure at
home, but only half shared that data with physicians.
Only two patient participants were aware that their doc-
tor graphed the blood pressure measures using the exist-
ing EHR graphing feature. Among physicians, 92% felt
graphing blood pressure data was helpful although less
reported using graphs in their work. All physicians indi-
cated receiving measures in paper form; 75% via patient
portal, and 50% by phone. Most typically, patient home
blood pressure data was recorded as a gestalt estimate of
the average recorded in a clinical note (88%).

Qualitative results
Our rapid qualitative analysis method, occurring after
each focus group, informed our iterative design process by
identifying and clarifying information needs for physicians
and patients, stimulated design iterations to satisfy those
needs, and allowed us to check if participants indicated
that our design iterations satisfied those needs. Identified
needs and design elements to satisfy those needs are pre-
sented in Table 3. Our subsequent, more in-depth the-
matic analysis revealed the following themes:

Data visualization to enable engaged, activated patients
and prepared, proactive physicians
Focus group findings highlight the importance of accur-
ate, practical, and time-relevant information that pro-
motes understanding of the blood pressure story so that
patients are engaged and activated and physicians are
equipped with the information they need to be prepared
and proactive, as suggested by the Chronic Care Model
[38, 39]. Both patient and physician participants indi-
cated easily understanding the visualization (Figs. 3 and
4). In cases of confusion, a simple explanation from the
facilitator was sufficient. Patients and physicians agreed
that both home and clinic blood pressure measures
should be included on the data visualization and intuited
home blood pressures should be emphasized for general
accuracy and to encourage patient engagement. Patient
responses indicated visualizations created engagement
with blood pressure data and a feeling of preparation
and readiness to act, an idea echoed by physicians.

“It [data visualization] would make me feel like if
it’s important enough to her to bring it up to me, it
ought to be doggone important to me and I should
pay close attention to it … I mean, blood pressure is
the silent killer...I need to know how I’m doing,
where I stand, ‘Girl, you are in trouble, you’re on a
collision course. You need to make some changes.
Snap out of this, or we’re gonna be increasing meds
or adding some.’”
— Patient, Design Round 5

“I think it’s useful to know the values of home ver-
sus office and how we’re making decisions on that
… I think it will incentivize the patient to do [home
monitoring] because we’re making treatment deci-
sions on that … So I think that’s therapeutic.”
— Physician, Design Round 4

Patients and physicians advocated for the addition of con-
textual information to aid in decision-making. Examples
of such information include behavioral/lifestyle change,
weight, stressors, and significant clinical events. For this
reason, we designed also for the ability to annotate the
visualization with this contextual information (Fig. 5).

“Maybe I would reflect a little bit about my lifestyle,
you know … but I would reflect back on oh, yeah,
that’s right, I was good and watching my salt intake
and it’s, you know, kind of relaxed a little bit or, or
maybe forget to take your medications, you know.”
— Patient, Confirmatory Round

“Well, the whole system sort of implies that the only
way to treat blood pressure is with medication and
so there’s nothing about weight, there’s nothing
about, there’s no others … especially
for our
learners, [annotations] would sort of imply “Hey,
these are other things that you address besides just
prescribing medications.”
— Physician, Design Round 4

“So, I have in the annotation that I stopped the
over-the-counter NSAIDs … and then we’re seeing
the drop in the blood pressure from that interven-
tion that wouldn’t show up in your med timeline. It
pointed out that they were off their meds because
they lost their job that year and couldn’t afford their
meds.”
— Physician, Design Round 2

Data visualization features
Goal ranges indicated by colored bands were well re-
ceived, rarely questioned for meaning, and physicians

appreciated them being set by clinical guidelines. Both
groups expressed that clear targets would help them
frame their discussion about blood pressure control.
Physician
participants
did
indicate
the
desire
to
customize
the
default
goal
range
for
appropriate
patients.

“I like those little bands [goal ranges] because you
can very quickly determine whether your patient is
within the designated range … and in addition what
proportion of blood pressure measurements are

really within that range compared with just looking
at a bunch of numbers.”
— Physician, Design Round 2

“For
the
frail
older
adult
there’s
discrepancy
about whether 150 is really the right goal, and
some would say 160 if you’re not trying to pre-
vent adverse effects in the long term is fine …
for me to wiggle that person up to 180 and I’d
be happy with that.”
— Physician, Confirmatory Round

The design team presented visualizations of annotations
that were either physician entered, patient entered, or
automatically generated (Fig. 5). Both physicians and pa-
tients indicated that the inclusion of informative annota-
tions such as “Lisinopril stopped due to cough” would
eliminate repeated searching through the chart and
dredging memory for information. Both groups also
wanted to be able to annotate the visualization with in-
formation that might influence blood pressure control
such as “started exercise program” or “increased stress
due to father’s illness and daughter’s wedding”; patients
and physicians saw great promise in associating this in-
formation with blood pressure data to learn the effects
of life and lifestyle, similar to the advantage of having
the medication timeline as part of the visualization.

However, physicians indicated a concern that their
personal
effort
expenditure
for
physician-entered

annotations might outweigh the benefits of entering an-
notations manually. They preferred drop-down list op-
tions
within
their
existing
workflow
or
automated
population of relevant data. They were also concerned
about
the
potential
for
voluminous
patient-entered
annotations.

“I like the home entering idea very much, but then
like for the few patients that check in like three
times a day and put comments on all of them, what
do you do about that, I guess? … I get all this infor-
mation overload and it’s hard to interpret what to
do in terms of next steps.”
— Physician, Design Round 4

Sensemaking and understanding the blood pressure story
Taken together, the data visualization with goal ranges,
medication timeline, and data table allowed physicians
and patients to see a snapshot of the patient’s history of
hypertension, and promoted a fuller shared understand-
ing of the story of the patient’s medications and blood
pressure control.

“Neato … It’s really just creating a story where you
see what the blood pressure was, when the medicine
was started, where it changed.”
— Physician, Design Round 4

The medication timeline allowed both groups of
participants to derive meaning about how changes
in medications correlate with changes in blood pres-
sure in a way that might reduce cognitive load. Phy-
sicians found the medication timeline to be helpful
and mostly user-friendly and they appreciated its
flexibility and intuitive nature; both groups believed
the tool would alleviate the need to rely on memory
or dig through the EHR for historical/contextual
notes.

“It shows clearly that when you add, the Hydrochlo-
rothiazide … and then when you added the add-
itional Lisinopril, that looks like the combination of
those … made the blood pressure come down.”
— Patient, Design Round 1

“I’ve been through that. My doctor’s like ‘Well, let’s
try this one. No, we took you off of it. Do you

remember why we took you off of it?’”
— Patient, Design Round 5

In particular, both patient and physician participants
were able to construct a story of a gap in adherence
based on the data visualization shown in Fig. 6, making
the connection between the gap in adherence and a rise
in blood pressure.

“I mean, it’s doing great … [and then he] quits tak-
ing the medication, it’s just out of control.”
— Patient, Design Round 5

Physicians commented that complex medication stories
involving other prescribers and transitions of care would
be simplified by the medication timeline.

“Some of my patients who are coming in and out of
the hospital who are perhaps following with a cardi-
ologist or the nephrologist, sometimes we don’t
understand why was this person’s regimen changed
and, you know, what led up to that … for people
who are, who are, you know, elderly who are having
problems or multiple physicians involved with their

care it’ll be much more straightforward to see why
were these changes made.”
— Physician, Design Round 4

Shared understanding of control and goals
Patients and physicians felt this visualization would help
them come to consensus on the status of blood pressure
control and would better enable them to make treatment
decisions. Physicians began to envision how they would
use the data visualization in their discussions with
patients.

“It’s really not me setting the goal. This is enhancing
shared decision making so it’s the patient and I sit
down, we define what our goals are, we set those
goals, and it’s evidence-based and, and then I define
it, and then I continue to say ‘Have we met that
goal?’ Just empowering shared decision making ra-
ther than me saying I’m setting it.”
— Physician, Confirmatory Round

“I think it’s important for me as a patient to be
more intentional and more in, participating and not
be so passive with my healthcare.”
— Patient, Confirmatory Round

Workflow
Patients and physicians were concerned about workflow,
especially collecting and transmitting home blood pres-
sure data from the patient to physician. Use of patient-
generated home blood pressure data in the visualization
increased the patients’ sense of importance for pro-
viding home blood pressures to portray an accurate
picture of hypertension control. Physicians anticipated
using this data in decision-making at appointments.
Both groups suggested that Bluetooth data uploaded
from home monitors would ease the patient’s report-
ing burden.

“What’s really handy for a month or so before you
come see me if that’s when you can start tracking
your blood pressures again and bring that data be-
cause that’s what you’ve done most recently is prob-
ably more important.”
— Physician, Confirmatory Round

“The home numbers, are they put in by the phys-
ician or is it something that we will put in track as
we go?...I take so many blood pressures and my ma-
chine only holds so many and then they get wiped
out … It would be so convenient just to log into
that [patient portal] and type my numbers in once a
week or every few days, you know, whenever I do it

while it’s fresh on my mind so it’s on there.”
— Patient, Confirmatory Round

Both groups wanted to know more about the flow of en-
tered home blood pressure data and what members of
the care team would manage patient home blood pres-
sure
data.
Both
patient
and
physician
participants
expressed concerns with home blood pressure data qual-
ity and proper measurement technique. Patients and
physicians recognized integration of home blood pres-
sure data into a treatment plan would require a new ap-
proach in patient care, one that included activated
patients and workflow adaptations to accommodate re-
mote monitoring.

“There should be a trigger or something that sends
a message to the doctor and it’s just not on the
graph and the doctor never sees it until the patient
finally comes in again … It’s just sitting there on a
graph somewhere in a database and the patient’s
getting ready to die (laughs), they’re getting ready to
have a serious episode and then when they’re in the
ER in the crisis they’ll see all of this and it’s like why
didn’t we see a doctor, well, nobody told me.”
— Patient, Confirmatory Round

“I kind of like the idea of having the flag in terms of
the [in-person] discussion … but from a population
perspective there needs to be something that trig-
gers somebody looking at the data if it has gotten
significantly out of line.”
— Physician, Confirmatory Round

Discussion
We have gained an understanding of primary care phys-
ician and patient information needs about blood pres-
sure data for use in their decision-making work for the
management of hypertension. We have paid special at-
tention to their needs for home blood pressure informa-
tion, how they would like to send and receive this
information, and their aspirations for using this data in
their shared work. Employing a user-centered design
process, we synthesized our multidisciplinary expertise
with evidence-based knowledge, including cognitive per-
ceptual experiments, and these discovered information
needs
to
create
an
intuitive
and
well-received
visualization that combines clinical blood pressure data,
home blood pressure data, goal ranges, a smoothing al-
gorithm, and a medication timeline [10, 42]. This inte-
gration of information would likely increase situational
awareness for patients and physicians and has the poten-
tial to improve the quality of hypertension care [55]. Eli-
citing
these
information
needs
is
a
significant
contribution to the hypertension, decision support, and

EHR design literature, as is our creation and implemen-
tation of a user-informed data visualization that includes
home blood pressure data in the clinical EHR.
While there is growing evidence for use of home blood
pressure data for hypertension decision making [12–18],
it is also evident that there are questions about how best
to incorporate these data into clinical work, and the
physician and care team electronic workflow [19]. While
we have created a data visualization as a partial solution
to the home blood pressure data problem, work remains
to define the flow of home blood pressure data to the
care team, including possible alerts for high and low
values, but without creating alert fatigue for the clinical
team [56, 57]. Defining this data flow and notifications
will require significant work and further understanding
of user information needs.
While we were inclusive of both patients and physi-
cians, the primary users of these blood pressure data, we
did not include another significant stakeholder group,
nurses and other members of the patient’s health care
team. In addition, our information needs and design
work takes a primary care perspective, and we have not
considered the needs of specialty physicians. Our ration-
ale for this sampling framework was that the majority of
hypertension management occurs in the primary care
setting [58]. We have focused on adults with hyperten-
sion; pediatric blood pressure data visualization is a
more complex design problem as younger children have
norms based on both age and height [59]. These current
limitations all represent fertile areas for future work.
Additionally, patients and physicians attended separate
focus groups. We considered the alternative of combin-
ing patients and physicians in confirmatory focus groups
to create interaction around the designs, however, in
addition to being logistically prohibitive among these
returning participants, we were also concerned that the
presence of physicians in mixed focus groups might ef-
fectively diminish the voice of the patient participants,
especially if logistics did not allow matching of patients
with their own physician.
As a result of this work, we collaborated with our EHR
vendor to implement this visualization into the clinical
EHR, including patient portal functions that improve pa-
tient upload of home blood pressure data and allow it to
be represented in the clinical EHR. Thus far, we have
not
been
able
to
incorporate
annotations
to
the
visualization. Work remains for us to identify ways to
add annotations that fit into physician workflow, creat-
ing opportunities for physicians to add meaningful infor-
mation easily in a way that will add value to their work.
Additionally, we need to understand the best way to add
patient annotations, whether to create standardized cat-
egories of annotations, and how to deal with a high
density of patient annotations. We also need to add

Bluetooth capability for home blood pressure devices to
the patient portal. Our algorithms are equipped to han-
dle large amounts of blood pressure data, but it is inevit-
able that Bluetooth upload from devices will introduce
new challenges.
A significant next step is to evaluate the ongoing pa-
tient and physician use of these tools, not only how
much they use these tools, but also how the tools affect
the quality and process of care. We will also evaluate
how the visualization that includes home blood pressure
affects how patients and physicians work together during
the outpatient clinic visit to manage hypertension, exam-
ining differences between care with and without the
visualization with comparison to paper lists of home
blood pressures.
Use of these home blood pressure EHR tools will be
augmented by two new environmental factors. First, the
January 2020 introduction of new Medicare-reimbursed
current procedural terminology (CPT) codes for home
blood pressure management activities could drive adop-
tion [60]. Second, the significantly increased use of tele-
health due to the COVID-19 pandemic can leverage the
home blood pressure data visualization into an oppor-
tunity to maintain quality of care for patients with
hypertension during a time of social distancing and in-
creased reliance on home blood pressure data [61].

Conclusions
Our blood pressure data visualization that includes
home blood pressure data is a significant innovation that
has potential to improve the quality of care for patients
with
hypertension,
both
through
a
better
patient-
physician understanding of blood pressure data, and in
creating new ways for patients and physicians to interact
around these data in their decision making process dur-
ing outpatient visits. The patient’s active participation in
generating these data might better engage them in the
management process and be more convincing for those
who resist blood pressure medication intensification by
facilitating the “prepared patient and proactive health
care team” that are at the heart of the productive inter-
actions that lead to improved outcomes in the Chronic
Care Model [38, 39].

Abbreviation
EHR: Electronic Health Record