Original Paper

A Uniquely Targeted, Mobile App-Based HIV Prevention
Intervention for Young Transgender Women: Adaptation and
Usability Study

Lisa M Kuhns1,2, MPH, PhD; Jane Hereth1,3, MSW, PhD; Robert Garofalo1,2, MPH, MD; Marco Hidalgo4, PhD; Amy
K Johnson1,2, PhD; Rebecca Schnall5, MPH, RN, PhD; Sari L Reisner6,7,8, ScD; Marvin Belzer4, MD; Matthew J
Mimiaga6,8,9,10, MPH, ScD

Methods

Overview

Extensive formative work to develop the LifeSkills intervention
content was completed together with YTW [9]. Thus, our
approach in this study was to adapt the original content to a
mobile app. The adaptation of the LifeSkills Mobile app is based
on best practices for the adaptation of evidence-based
interventions and user-centered design [9,34]. Although focused
primarily on new populations or settings, recommended
adaptation strategies for evidence-based HIV prevention
interventions include iterative processes, multiple methods and
informants, and the preservation of core intervention
components [35-37]. Thus, our adaptation process sought to
preserve the components of the original intervention (ie,
empowerment, information, motivation, and behavioral skill
building), add biomedical prevention content (PrEP and TasP),
and maintain its look and feel (eg, stories and scenarios of YTW)
and unifying themes (ie, House of LifeSkills), while using an
iterative, multimethod process with input from various key
sources.

In this study, we adapted the in-person, group-based LifeSkills
to mobile app and tested it in 3 phases: (1) prototype
development, (2) design sessions and app development, and (3)
usability testing (Multimedia Appendix 1).

The institutional review board at Ann & Robert H. Lurie
Children’s Hospital of Chicago approved all study procedures,
and written consent was obtained from all study participants.

Prototype Development

In the first phase of the adaptation process, we translated the
group-based intervention curriculum, which consisted of 6
sessions (4-5 activities each), into a paper-and-pencil app
prototype with input from our group of 6 investigators and the
study coordinator, who have extensive expertise in transgender
health, 
youth-centered 
intervention 
development, 
HIV
prevention and related behavioral intervention development
efforts, and app development and informatics. In addition, 2
former facilitators of the group-based LifeSkills intervention
served as community consultants to the project to inform the
translation of the behavioral activation components (eg,
activities, games, and scenarios) and look and feel to mobile
app format. The development of the prototype occurred
iteratively, with each draft reviewed in monthly meetings with
the advisory group. The primary focus of prototype development
was to maintain the core themes and activities of the original
intervention, to draft interactive mobile activities to replace
group-based activities, and to create engaging characters (to
replace group facilitators). The end product was a
paper-and-pencil prototype, which served as a blueprint of
content for building the app.

Design Sessions and App Development

The draft paper-and-pencil prototype was provided to our
software collaborator, One Cow Standing, as the first step in
the app-building process. Wireframes were developed by One
Cow Standing based on the prototype and the draft images of
app characters and scenarios.

The draft prototype and images were then presented to the end
users during the design sessions. Participants were identified
and recruited from a registry of participants in previous studies.
Individuals were eligible for design sessions based on (1) age
between 16 and 29 years, (2) self-identity as transfeminine, (3)
a history of condomless anal or vaginal sex, and (4) English
speaking. We divided the prototype content into 3 subsections
(of approximately equal length) and asked participants to review
one-third of the content activity-by-activity, such that each
subsection was reviewed by at least two participants. For each
activity, we asked participants a set of semistructured questions
focusing on user-centered aspects of adaptation to mobile, for
example, whether they found the mobile app activities engaging
(if so, why, and if not, why not), whether they understood the
activity content (ie, wording, phrasing, and instructions), if they
found it effective (ie, did it raise your awareness, motivate you,
and introduce new skills), perceptions of the images and
graphics, coverage of topics (ie, missed anything important),
and any additional feedback or suggestions. Feedback from
these sessions was recorded in extensive written notes for
analysis. Data were rapidly analyzed for key actionable themes
(eg, content to remove, revise, and add) [38], which were
translated to modifications in the prototype.

We then implemented the app build in a series of design sprints
over a 5-month period. Design sprints are time-constrained,
phased periods in which specific programming work is
completed, reviewed, and revised. In each sprint, programming
of content was followed by testing of functional components
and review of graphics and images by an abbreviated team of
4 alpha testers (LK, JH, and 2 community consultants), followed
by discussion in weekly meetings with One Cow Standing. This
process was facilitated by overlaying the test version of the app
with BugHerd software (Splitrock Studio) [39], which was used
to pinpoint functional bugs and areas in need of design
improvements or modifications, with items placed in action
queues to track completion. The final review was conducted by
the entire advisory group of investigators in the last sprint with
feedback and revision. The end product of this phase was a beta
version of the app ready for usability testing.

Usability Testing

We performed usability testing on the beta version of the app
to identify violations of usability principles and any potential
obstacles to use. Eligibility for this phase of testing was the
same as for design sessions; individuals who had participated
in design sessions could also participate in usability testing,
which provided an opportunity for feedback on the execution
of design suggestions. Usability testing is an iterative process
that involves testing the app and then using results to change
the app to better meet users’ needs. The usability testing phase
was guided by the Health Information Technology Usability
Evaluation Model (Health-ITUEM) to evaluate mHealth

technology [40], which includes a focus on quality, perceived
usefulness, perceived ease of use, and user control.

We planned to execute at least two rounds of usability testing
to identify potential problems and then correct and test the app,
with rounds of testing added as needed to resolve all issues.
Through a think-aloud protocol [41], each participant was asked
to perform tasks that closely mirror the intended end use of the
app. We used Morae software (TechSmith Corporation) [42] to
record the interview audio and screenshots of the problem areas.

Participants completed a brief demographic and technology use
survey and then rated the app’s usability using validated
instruments, including the Health Information Technology
Usability Evaluation Scale (Health-ITUES) [43,44] and
Post-Study System Usability Questionnaire (PSSUQ) [45]. The
Health-ITUES evaluates tasks or expectations relevant to our
usability dimensions, including impact, usefulness, ease of use,
and user control. The PSSUQ measures accessibility and
satisfaction. Both scales were rated on a 1- to 5-point scale,
with higher scores indicating higher usability. We also measured
satisfaction using the Client Satisfaction Questionnaire (CSQ)
[46], which includes questions on overall quality and
expectations. We measured acceptability with questions related
to the use of language and the appeal of activities and artwork.
These ratings were analyzed using measures of central tendency
and dispersion.

Qualitative Data Collection and Analysis

At the end of the think-aloud session, we asked for additional
open-ended feedback on perceptions of the app in a brief,
semistructured interview. Interview data were analyzed using
a thematic analysis approach [47,48] to identify key themes
related to our usability dimensions, particularly perceptions of
information quality, intention to use the app, satisfaction with
the content, and potential impact of HIV risk reduction.

Results

Prototype Development

The original LifeSkills intervention consists of 6 group-based
sessions (4-5 activities each), which were shortened and
consolidated and then translated to a paper-and-pencil prototype
consisting of the following 4 app-based modules: module 1:
TransPride; module 2: Breaking Down Barriers; module 3:
Educating Yourself, and module 4: Protecting Yourself. For the
mobile app, we consolidated 2 modules in the original
intervention (communication and respect, which introduces
assertiveness skills training, and skill building, which applies
these skills) into 1 mobile module, Breaking Down Barriers
(module 2), which includes both training and application and
eliminates some redundancy in the original intervention. Table
1 lists the general themes and intervention targets reflected in
each module and the associated theoretical constructs. In
addition, a unifying concept used in the original intervention,
The House of LifeSkills, was maintained in the mobile version.
This theme incorporates the language and symbols of the urban
house and ball communities. The house and ball communities
developed organically among largely gay, transgender, and
gender-nonconforming youth of color in response to
homelessness and family rejection, as a means of support as
well as self-expression in the form of dance and other forms of
performance art. The house and ball communities provide
alternative family support in the face of the marginalization
experienced by many urban transwomen [49,50]. In the
LifeSkills intervention, the house and ball communities are a
point of reference, as an example of the role of mentorship,
community, and friendship within the transgender community.
Symbols and language are used (sparingly) to contextualize the
LifeSkills intervention as providing similar mentorship. All the
primary themes, intervention targets, and theoretical constructs
from the original LifeSkills intervention were maintained in
LifeSkills Mobile.

Table 1. LifeSkills Mobile themes, intervention targets, and constructs.

Theoretical constructs
Intervention target
Theme
Module

Empowerment and motivation
Self-concept, self-esteem, and sense of self in the
context of societal marginalization
TransPride
1

Skill building (effective communication and gaining access
to resources)
Communication in the context of discrimination
and violence
Breaking Down Bar-
riers
2

Information (HIV and sexually transmitted infection risk
and injection risk) and skill building (condom and needle
use)

Risks and benefits associated with sexual behavior
and gender transition
Educating Yourself
3

Motivation (attitudes, norms, and intentions for safer sex)
and behavioral skills (discussing sex and condoms with
sexual partners and negotiating sexual safety, the context
of drug and alcohol use, and sex work)

Social context, experiences of abuse and violence,
sexual risk, and substance use
Protecting Yourself
4

Design Sessions and App Development

Design Sessions

The prototype was reviewed in design sessions by 8 members
of the target population of YTW (age: mean 24 years, SD 3
years; range 21-28 years; racial or ethnic minority: 7/8, 88%).

The sessions lasted 75 minutes on average. User-specific themes,
including engagement, understanding, effectiveness, perceptions
of the images and graphics, and coverage of topics, are presented
in detail below, with representative comments from participants.

With regard to engagement, participants were largely in
agreement that the gaming approach with stickers and trophies

was fun, with one participant, a 24-year-old Black woman (D1),
noting that they motivated her to keep going through the
activities. In terms of understanding the content, participants
described scenes and scenarios as realistic, relatable, and
accurate. To improve understanding, participants suggested the
use of street names for some of the illicit drugs in addition to
the use of formal names (eg, T and Tina for methamphetamine
and leaf and weed for marijuana). In terms of perceived
effectiveness, participants commented that the salience and
resonance of the content increased its effectiveness. For
example, a 21-year-old woman who identified as gender
nonconforming (D7) noted that the focus on content related to
hormone use and other transition-related treatments would
address common misconceptions. In addition, two participants,
a 27-year-old multiracial woman (D5) and a 21-year-old White
woman (D8), recommended that indicators of unhealthy
relationships (in addition to the content on indicators of healthy
relationships) be added because of the direct threat they
represent to some transgender women (eg, abuse and physical
violence) to increase its effectiveness. The perceptions of images
and graphics were largely positive. Participants liked the images
of characters and the artwork. For example, participants had
mostly positive comments about the inclusiveness of gender
expression depicted among characters (eg, early transition,
gender variant, and feminine). In terms of coverage of topics,
participants had positive comments about the addition of
information on PrEP and PEP, noting that basic and accurate
information on these topics is needed. In terms of additional
comments and suggestions, one recurring theme was the
perception that the app would improve the accessibility of the
intervention to the target population of YTW. For example, a
25-year-old Black woman (D3) stated that the app “would be
good for those who might not be comfortable coming to a
group...Now I’m looking at a screen, I can go back to it...It’s
going to be dope.”

A 21-year-old multiracial woman (D4) shared that the app would
reach young women who did not know about the original
LifeSkills groups or other resources. She stated:

Everyone is on their phone. So [the app] can reach
people that didn’t even know that any of this was
going on.
Overall, the findings from this phase suggested successful
adaptation of the content to the mobile prototype with some
suggestions for improved language and additions to content.
The prototype was updated with these changes to inform the
full development of the alpha and beta versions of the app.

Design Sprints

LifeSkills Mobile is a web app developed for mobile use (ie,
not a native app intended for distribution through app stores).
The decision to develop a web app was based on the higher cost
of developing native apps and the additional complications
posed by native apps, including distribution rules through app
stores that change frequently. A web app is cross-platform and
does not require platform-specific modifications, thereby
increasing flexibility. Although browsers cannot use all the
native features of a mobile device, they can present rich and
engaging content and use device features, such as the camera

(which is used in module 1). There are also no design elements
in LifeSkills Mobile that require native app features. Finally,
because it is not platform specific, it can reach a wider audience
as all modern mobile devices have web browsers and are not
limited to mobile phones for use; it can be accessed via a tablet
or desktop computer.

The LifeSkills Mobile intervention was designed using
JavaScript as the underlying programming language for both
the client and server portions of the app. JavaScript is a
cross-platform language that runs on all major operating
systems. It is also the de facto programming language of the
World Wide Web. This allows the code to be uniform and
consistent as well as to easily make updates and modifications.
The server component consists of a representational state
transfer app program interface developed in Node.js (OpenJS
Foundation) [51] using the Express framework. The database
is MongoDB (MongoDB Inc) [52]. The web client interface
was developed using the Vue.js (Vue.js) [53] framework.

Table 2 lists the final set of activities associated with each
module in the beta version of the app. Module 1: TransPride
sets the tone for the entire intervention and is devoted to
empowerment themes. It includes transgender-specific success
stories and a structured activity to create a participant’s own
aspirational story (Icon Promo) and finally a goal setting activity
that is updated throughout the intervention. Module 2 focuses
on 
effective 
communication 
to 
meet 
basic 
needs
(Communication Styles) and applies it to a scenario of escalating
violence (Assertiveness Under Pressure), an activity to
deconstruct and activate basic aspects of communication (both
verbal and body expression), and a second scenario in a clinical
care setting in the context of transspecific discrimination (Health
care Barriers to create awareness of situations, triggers, feelings,
and actions). Similarly, module 3 includes activities to raise
awareness of sexual, injection, and other risk and practice correct
steps for condom and injection use. Module 3 also includes
information and resources specific to PEP and PrEP as well as
HIV transmission, HIV care, medication adherence, and TasP.
In module 4, specific contexts of risk are addressed, including
relationship contexts (eg, power dynamics), challenges to skill
building (eg, disclosure, substance use, commercial sex work,
and partner selection and negotiation), and ending with an action
plan to activate goals set and reviewed throughout the
intervention.

The intervention activities, which consisted of scenarios,
educational material and games, and role plays, were adapted
to a mobile format using automated responses, drop-down
menus, comics, and gamification to engage participants. For
example, the app allows the user to input their own goals via
drop-down menus, which differ based on personal experience
and circumstances; these goals are challenged throughout the
intervention by scenarios that differ between individuals (eg,
substance use and involvement in sex work). Gamification is
the use of game-like rewards and incentives to increase
motivation and sustain intervention engagement over time [54].
We used two elements of gamification: (1) educational games
and (2) persuasive games [55]. Education games are small games
or minigames that use elements such as drag-and-drop, speed,
and memory. Simulation was used for role-playing, in which

participants had to envision themselves in different roles and
choose the correct actions and dialogs to solve a task [56].
Persuasive games are used to motivate participants; participants
have a tally bar (Multimedia Appendix 2) and supportive
messages to motivate them to complete LifeSkills. Participation
is incentivized with stickers for each activity and trophies for

completion of modules. The YTW characters represent diverse
gender presentations, racial or ethnic backgrounds, and HIV
statuses. Similar to the group-based version of LifeSkills, these
characters present scenarios to open each session and motivate
participation in the next session.

Table 2. LifeSkills Mobile app modules and activities.

Activity title
Activity number
Module

Welcome to LifeSkills Mobile
1
Welcome

Icon Promo (Pride)
2
TransPride

Why LifeSkills? (Risk and Protection)
3
TransPride

Get Your Life! (Setting Goals)
4
TransPride

Communication Styles
5
Breaking Down Barriers

Assertiveness Under Pressure
6
Breaking Down Barriers

Health care Barriers
7
Breaking Down Barriers

Jeopar-T (Transition)
8
Educating Yourself

HIV True False
9
Educating Yourself

Bucket List! (Low, Medium, High Sex Risk)
10
Educating Yourself

Condom Use Steps
11
Educating Yourself

Safer Injection Steps
12
Educating Yourself

Healthy Relationships
13
Protecting Yourself

Disclosure
14
Protecting Yourself

What are Your Boundaries
15
Protecting Yourself

In The Mix (Alcohol, Drugs)
16
Protecting Yourself

Sex Work and One Night Stands
17
Protecting Yourself

Setting Good Boundaries
18
Protecting Yourself

Red Flag Green Flag (Partner Negotiation and Selection)
19
Protecting Yourself

Action Plan (Accomplishing Goals)
20
Protecting Yourself

Usability Testing

The beta version of the app was completed, and usability
evaluation was conducted among end users (n=10; age: mean
24 years, SD 3 years; range 21-28 years; racial or ethnic
minority: 8/10, 80%; ever traded sex: 6/10, 60%; ever homeless:
10/10, 100%; General Educational Development/high school
diploma or less: 7/10, 70%). Of 10 participants, 7 completed
the design sessions. Of 10 participants, 9 indicated they use the
internet almost constantly, and the same number (9/10)
participants reported using the internet via smartphone or
handheld device. A total of 5 participants completed the first
round of usability testing, followed by an additional 5
participants who completed the second round of testing.

Usability ratings were in the good to excellent range
(Health-ITUES: mean 4.59, SD 0.86), including on subscales
for impact, usefulness, ease of use, and user control. Satisfaction
and accessibility on the PSSUQ was also strong (mean 4.63,
SD 0.90; range 1-5). On the CSQ, half of the participants rated
the overall quality of the app as good and half as excellent. In
total, 9 of the 10 participants indicated that they would definitely
refer a friend to use the app.

No functional bugs were identified in either round of testing,
and all activities were deployed as expected. Small errors in
grammar, language, or image placement were identified by
participants in the first round of testing, which were corrected
for redeployment in the next iteration of usability testing. In
addition, although there were no functional bugs identified, 2
activities, activity number 10 (Bucket List!) and number 17
(Sex Work and One Night Stands), caused confusion during
completion in round 1 of testing. For activity number 10, items
describing sexual acts are categorized by participants as low,
medium, or high risk; however, participants reported confusion
about how to categorize some risk behaviors. Brief definitions
of each risk category were added for clarification. For activity
number 17, strategies to protect oneself in contexts of
commercial sex work are matched to risk contexts; however,
participants expressed difficulty making matches because of
perceived overlap in strategies. For this activity, redundancy in
strategies was eliminated, and language was edited for clarity.
With these changes, the intervention was redeployed with
subsequent participants in round 2 of testing, with no further
reports of problems understanding and completing the activities.

Qualitative Findings

The analysis of substantive feedback and suggestions from
participants in usability interviews formed 5 major categories
related to (1) the House theme and characters, (2) the language
and tone of the intervention, (3) the content and features, (4)
the audience, and (5) how they might engage with the app. We
review each of these themes in detail below, with representative
comments from the participants.

House Theme and Characters

Most women responded positively to the House theme and look
of the characters. In addition to making it more engaging and
interesting, women also stated that they thought the characters
looked realistic and relatable and that drew them in. A
26-year-old Black woman stated:

I like the characters. I like the words they’ve chosen
to use. It’s like, I feel like they’re speaking out to me...
I feel like it gets me. Yeah, I like the connection of
this app. [U4]
A 23-year-old Black woman (U10) stated about the
housemother: “she reminded me of myself.” Although most
participants expressed positive feedback about the House theme,
several noted that for YTW who were not familiar with the
house and ball communities, it might be confusing.

Language and Tone

Women offered positive feedback regarding the language used.
Many participants stated that they liked that the app used terms
and phrases they used and that it had a casual, conversational
tone. Regarding using slang terms for sexual acts, a 25-year-old
Black woman stated:

I actually like that because it’s giving me the real
deal...It’s kind of like we all talk, you know...So to
actually see this on the app, it makes it more exciting.
Like, “Oh, now it’s talking my language.” [U3]
A 29-year-old Black woman (U1) stated that the language “made
me feel real. It made me feel like I could connect to it.”

Regarding using language that is specific to the transgender
community, a participant stated:

I love how they talk about the T a lot. “Girl, watch
the T.” [U4]
Overall, women shared that the tone and relatable language
made them feel comfortable and affirmed. A participant stated:

I haven’t seen an app that was dedicated to us that
actually felt like was for us. This actually feels like
it’s for us and it actually felt like somebody is listening
to us, they’re hearing us, and they want to get our
thoughts on how we can better ourselves. They want
to help us better ourselves. That’s what it feels like
when I was doing the lessons in this app. [U4]
Participants shared that they also appreciated that the app talked
openly about sex work because it was realistic and would make
people who were engaged in sex work feel more comfortable.
A 21-year-old person who identifies as gender nonconforming
stated:

I like the fact that you all have a client—like the sex
workers and stuff. [U7]
They went on to state:

I guess that making people feeling more comfortable
about talking about stuff like that...You all know
what’s really going on and stuff like that.
Regarding an activity related to drug use, participants shared
that they thought the tone came across as nonjudgmental and
informative. A participant stated:

I thought you were just like informative and
educational. You didn’t make it seem like it was bad
to do drugs. It’s okay to do them, but you informed
us on the effect that it have on the body and stuff like
that. [U4]

Content and Features

In general, women shared that they liked the app because they
learned something new. A participant said:

This is just one level that I’m on, and you’ve already
hit me somewhere because I’ve already seen three
things that I can apply to my everyday life. [U4]
Women shared that the content was very important for
transgender women. A multiracial 27-year-old woman stated:

I actually think you guys are touching a lot of topics
that we don’t, in the community ourselves, don’t talk
about sometimes... Just like discrimination period. I
don’t see a lot of young people having those
conversations... But it’s teaching you that you can
overcome it and it’s giving you more positivity and
helping you to understand your life personally. [U2]
Participants also shared that they liked the features and
interactive nature of the app. Participant U2 stated:

It’s actually really interactive and fun. I like it. I could
see me playing it.
Participant U4 said:

I really like everything about the app. It’s interesting
and I find it fun. It’s like a game I’m playing, but
educational. You can play a game, and you can learn
at the same time. So, I like it.
Many also shared that they felt motivated by earning stickers
and trophies, and they liked how they looked.

Negative feedback about the content included that there was
too much text on each page, suggesting that textual content
should be edited or broken up into separate pages. They also
suggested the inclusion of images of the characters or other
images on every page to hold the user’s interest. In addition,
several participants suggested that having audio of the
housemother’s voice would be more engaging.

Audience

Women shared that they thought the app would be helpful for
younger transgender women, including women who were still
in high school or aged less than 18 years. Participant U9 said:

There are a lot of different things that would have
been very, very good for me to know when I was
younger that I did not that were in here.
A 24-year-old Black woman (U6) stated that, to her, the app
seemed too juvenile, but that it would be good for younger girls.
U10 shared that she thought the app would be especially helpful
for younger girls who are just transitioning and coming out and
are more impressionable. She stated:

I really think it would have a bigger effect from 14 to
age 18.

App Engagement

Participants in this study only completed portions of the app;
several stated that they would do it in chunks, whereas others
said they might complete the entire app in one sitting. Participant
U2 stated:

I’d do like, four or five [activities] at a time and come
back later on, like in an hour and do four or five more.
A 21-year-old multiracial woman (U5) said that she would only
spend 30 minutes at a time but would return to it throughout
the day. Participant U9 stated:

I’d probably go through the whole thing in one sitting,
and then just want to be able to reference things in
the future.

Discussion

Principal Findings

In summary, in the usability testing of the LifeSkills Mobile
app, we found no functional bugs, and all mobile activities
deployed as expected. Participant feedback in the usability
interviews indicated very good salience of the intervention
content for the focal population.

To adapt the intervention, we used multiple methods and
informants, including input from substantive experts,
transgender women who had previous experience in the delivery
of the in-person intervention, and members of the target
population. This expertise was critical to reducing the length
of the intervention for mobile deployment while also
maintaining the core intervention targets, activities, and themes.
The success of the development of the initial prototype, with
fidelity to the original intervention components, was reflected
in the largely positive comments from design session
participants, who had relatively few critiques of its content and
structure.

The process of building the app, characterized by intensive
design sprints with iterative development and testing sprints by
members of our advisory group and consultants, led to a bug-free
beta version of the app, as demonstrated by the findings of the
usability trial. Among testing by 10 YTW, we found no
functional bugs and high usability ratings. Substantive input
from YTW included improving the clarity of language and
reducing the amount of redundancy in 2 activities, which
resulted in improved performance.

The LifeSkills Mobile app is characterized by user-centered
design features. The advantages of mobile delivery include

standardized delivery of content, which increases fidelity, but
also flexibility to tailor content to subgroups, giving control of
some aspects of content to the user. These features allow more
flexibility in the delivery of content than was possible in the
in-person group-based intervention.

Taken together, qualitative and quantitative findings suggest
that the LifeSkills Mobile app met the usability expectations of
the Health-ITUEM [40] for quality, perceived usefulness,
perceived ease of use, and user control. In general, feedback
from participants in the usability interviews was largely positive
and validated the app themes, intervention content, engagement
strategies, and language and tone. Perhaps most importantly for
engagement and uptake of the app, comments and feedback
from semistructured interviews regarding the app activities and
content, conducted as part of the usability trial, indicate
resonance and salience among YTW. This indicates the success
of the app in reflecting the real-life contexts and scenarios faced
by YTW. It is important to note that the use of terms and their
understanding, particularly slang terms, may differ by group
(eg, age, race, and ethnicity) and may also change over time.
Thus, it is important to monitor any problems with
understanding and relevance and update the app as needed for
future use.

In addition, participants reported positive impressions of the
gamification approach, and the House theme of the app was
generally well received. We recognized that this theme might
not be applicable or relatable to all YTW. Although a unifying
theme, as in the group-based LifeSkills intervention, it is used
subtly and mostly symbolically as a tool to communicate the
idea of positive mentoring; therefore, direct involvement in or
even knowledge of the house and ball communities is generally
not necessary to understand its meaning.

LifeSkills Mobile is among the first mHealth interventions that
have been developed to meet the specific and unique needs of
YTW to reduce sexual risk for HIV acquisition and transmission.
It joins other such mHealth initiatives, focusing on transgender
women, which are in the development or testing phases [57-60].

Limitations

The LifeSkills intervention content was developed with and for
a largely ethnic minority YTW at high risk for HIV acquisition
or transmission; thus, the LifeSkills Mobile app may not appeal
to YTW at lower risk. In addition, the app may be particularly
effective for younger transwomen, as noted by users. The
reasons for this are that the app includes transition-related topics,
including access to medical care and tips for safer hormone
injections, which are especially important for those who are
still in the process of gender transition. However, these tips are
important at any age, even after transition, particularly in the
context of HIV prevention because of the risk associated with
needle use. YTW aged between 16 and 20 years were recruited
for this study but were not included in our final sample. The
lack of inclusion of YTW aged between 16 and 20 years limits
our ability to generalize with confidence to this younger age
group. The small sample size limits generalizability. However,
the original intervention content, which forms the core of the
mobile app, was developed and tested among transgender
women aged between 16 and 29 years in 2 previous studies

[7,10]. Dynamic app content, including audio, video, and
animation, have not yet been added to the app because of
resource limitations but are planned for a future iteration.
Similarly, the next version of the app will include the
implementation of security features, including usernames and
passwords, necessary for log-in and browser time-outs. We plan
to test the efficacy of LifeSkills Mobile in a future RCT.

Conclusions

Overall, the adaptation and usability findings indicate that the
LifeSkills Mobile app is a highly usable and engaging mobile
app to address HIV prevention and related mechanisms of risk
among YTW.