RESEARCH ARTICLE

User‑centered and theory‑based 
design of a professional training program 
on shared decision‑making with older 
adults living with neurocognitive disorders: 
a mixed‑methods study

Moulikatou Adouni Lawani1, Yves Turgeon2, Luc Côté3, France Légaré4, Holly O. Witteman1, Michèle Morin5, 
Edeltraut Kroger6, Philippe Voyer7, Charo Rodriguez8 and Anik Giguere9* 

Methods
Study design and approach
This was a convergent, parallel, mixed-method study in 
which three HCP subsamples participated in the tailoring 
of a professional training program. A first subsample helped 
tailor the first component of the program (the e-learning 
activity), whereas the second and third helped tailor the 
second component (a series of five evidence summaries). 

We used user-centered design approaches for tailoring 
each component, by improving user experience of the pro-
totypes during several iterative evaluations that each com-
prised both quantitative and qualitative data collection 
[39].

Professional training program on shared decision making
Details on the training program are reported elsewhere 
[40]. Briefly, the training program included two modali-
ties: (1) a self-directed e-learning activity on SDM, and (2) 
five evidence summaries, decision boxes (DBs), to support 
decision-making at the point of care with older adults liv-
ing with neurocognitive disorders and their caregivers. The 
self-directed e-learning activity covered the use of patient 
decision aids to implement SDM. It lasted about one hour, 
could be completed in several sittings, and was not specific 
to any clinical area. It was interactive and used narrated 
slides, videos, and interactive exercises. It also offered an 
asynchronous forum to discuss any question with an expe-
rienced moderator.
The second modality of the training program consisted of 
a series of five evidence summaries describing the options 
available to older adults living with neurocognitive disor-
ders who face five important and frequent decisions that 
we identified in a previous study [41]. These decisions were: 
(#1) choosing a support option to decrease caregiver bur-
den; (#2) choosing a non-pharmacological treatment to 
manage agitation, aggression, or psychotic symptoms; (#3) 
deciding whether or not to stop driving following diagno-
sis; and (#4) choosing an option to improve quality of life; 
and (#5) deciding whether or not to prepare a power of 
attorney (called a “protection mandate” in Quebec, Can-
ada) covering health, property, and financial matters;. The 
evidence summaries followed the decision box (DB) tem-
plate, which aims to provide stakeholders with evidence 
in a format that supports them in SDM [42, 43]. Biefly, 
these summaries met several of the standards set by the 
International Patient Decision Aids Collaboration [44]: (1) 
they described the health condition for which a decision is 
required; (2) they explicitly stated the decision to be taken 
into consideration; (3) they described all the options availa-
ble for this decision; and (4) they described the positive and 
negative characteristics of each option. Their content was 
developed from rapid reviews and then revised by clinical 
experts, as described earlier [45]. The studied summaries 

are available at www.decis​ionbo​x.ulava​l.ca/en/ (Series on 
Older Adults – Problems with Thinking or Memory).

Population and recruitment strategy
We recruited convenience samples of HCPs from any 
profession (e.g., family physicians, nurses, and social 
workers) who practiced in family medicine clinics or 
homecare services in the province of Quebec, Canada. 
Of the primary care settings invited to participate in 
the project (46 clinics and 8 homecare services), 20 
agreed to participate (16 clinics, 4 homecare services). 
Figure 2a, b describe the sample distribution for each 
training component. We carried three or four evalua-
tions/tailoring rounds, with at least five HCPs during 
each round. These numbers respect human factors vali-
dation testing [46].

Design process of the e‑learning activity
E‑learning activity evaluations
At study entry, all study participants completed a ques-
tionnaire on their sociodemographic and professional 
characteristics. The study participants assigned to eval-
uate the e-learning activity also completed a question-
naire before and after exposure to the activity, to assess: 
(1) their preferred role in decision-making using the 
Control Preferences Scale [47, 48]; (2) their perception 
of the usefulness and ease of use of the program based 
on TAM-2 [49]; (3) their level of intention to adopt 
SDM, and the factors influencing that intention using 
the CPD-REACTION instrument [50]. To allow calcu-
lating means for each of the studied factors, we added 
three items to the original CDP-REACTION instru-
ment, giving it three items per domain.
These participants also assessed the e-learning activ-
ity during a semi-structured think-aloud session that 
was screen-captured and audio-recorded using Flash-
back (Blueberry Software). One of two trained mod-
erators (DC, YT) conducted these sessions. After each 
section of the training, the moderator asked partici-
pants about their perceptions on the content and learn-
ing strategies used, and recorded any usability issues. 
At the end of the session, the moderator also asked 
participants to comment on the main benefits and 
inconveniences of SDM, which allowed us to describe 
the factors influencing participants’ beliefs about the 

consequences of using SDM, one of the components of 
the theoretical framework guiding this work (Fig. 1).

E‑learning activity tailoring
Inspired by Susan Michie’s mapping approach, we 
modified the e-learning activity by adding/enhanc-
ing behaviour-change techniques targeting the factors 
likely to limit the adoption of SDM at each round [51, 
52]. To this end, we initially imported the transcripts 
of the think-aloud sessions as source documents using 
NVivo coding software (QSR International, version 12). 
Two researchers (DC, AMCG) conducted a deductive/
inductive thematic qualitative analysis of the factors 
likely to limit adoption of SDM [53]. More specifically, 
we initially used the theoretical domains framing the 
questionnaire as themes, and then added new themes 
as needed. We identified the weaknesses and strengths 
of the e-learning activity within each theme. We inter-
preted qualitative and quantitative data together and, 
following this analysis, the coders (DC, AMCG), mod-
erators (DC, YT), principal investigators (AMCG, FL), 
and a human factors expert co-investigator (HOW) 
discussed the functionality of the tutorial and modifica-
tions to improve functionality and modify the program 
accordingly.

Design process of the decision boxes (DBs)
Decision boxes evaluations
The study participants assigned to evaluate the DBs 
received emails with a link to access a web-based ques-
tionnaire to evaluate each DB, at a rate of one per week 
for five weeks. The DBs were also available on a website. 
The questionnaire served to (1) explain the purpose of 
the DB; (2) allow participants to access the DB under 
evaluation by clicking on a link; and (3) ask a series of 
questions about what they thought of the DB.
Congruent with the theoretical approach adopted, we 
used two questionnaires to assess the psychological con-
struct ‘intention’ and its potential determinants. We used 
the CPD-REACTION questionnaire, which is based on 
the integrated framework described above and was cre-
ated as a routine assessment of the impact of continuing 
professional education on practice [50]. We also assessed 
the usefulness and ease of use of the DBs, based on the 
TAM-2 [49]. For each of the CPD-REACTION and 
TAM-2 items described above, participants rated their 
perceptions using Likert items ranging from 1–7 (with 1 
being the lowest). If ratings fell below four for any item, 
we then asked the HCPs to explain the reason for their 
rating in an open-text field, to allow us to understand 
the barriers they perceived to adopting SDM. At the 
end of the questionnaire, an open-text field also invited 

participants to include any additional feedback on the 
DB.
We sent two weekly reminders to participants who had 
not completed their evaluations.

Decision boxes tailoring
After each round, we used descriptive statistics to sum-
marize participant ratings. We also imported the quali-
tative comments made in the open-text fields of the 
questionnaire into a specialized software program 
(NVivo), and two researchers (MAL, AMCG) analyzed 
them using a thematic deductive/inductive qualitative 
analysis approach [53]. We initially used the theoreti-
cal domains framing the questionnaire as themes, then 
added subthemes as needed [53]. We identified the 
weaknesses and strengths of the DBs within each of the 
theoretical domains, then broke them down further into 
emerging themes, to describe the weakness or strength. 
We resolved any disagreement by consensus between the 
two researchers.
An interdisciplinary expert panel subsequently met 
to review the qualitative and quantitative findings, and 
identified strategies to improve the DB, so as to limit the 
identified weaknesses. The panel consisted of a graphic 
designer (JB), a human factors engineer (HOW), an epi-
demiologist (MAL), and four knowledge-translation 
researchers (AMCG, HOW, MAL, DC). The experts 
started by prioritizing each of the problems uncovered. 
Then, we determined the most appropriate solutions 
by considering the magnitude, frequency, and sever-
ity of these problems, and modified the DBs so that 
HCPs could explain the pros and cons of health options, 
as understood from the DBs, to patients and their 
caregivers.
We used the same evaluation/tailoring process again in 
two more rounds, with new participants each time.

Final quantitative analyses
We used descriptive statistical analyses to summarize 
participants’ characteristics, their interest in each DB 
topic, their level of intention, and the potential predicting 
determinants of their intention. We used SAS (Version 
9.4, copyright 2002–2012, SAS Institute Inc.) to conduct 
these descriptive statistics, and a significance level of 
0.05.

Integration of quantitative and qualitative findings
After the entire series of evaluation/tailoring rounds, we 
integrated the quantitative and qualitative findings to 
generate conclusions on the factors influencing inten-
tion, and on the changes in users’ intention as the rounds 
progressed.

Results
Study population
One hundred and six HCPs from 20 clinics and home-
care services located in 13 cities, agreed to participate in 
this study. A first cohort of 16 HCPs was assigned to help 
design the e-learning activity, a second cohort of 36 dif-
ferent HCPs helped design the DBs in a three-round eval-
uation process, and a third cohort of 54 helped design 
the DBs by providing comments in a fourth evaluation 
round. These cohorts are represented in Fig. 3.
In the three cohorts, 78% of participants were women, 
60% were physicians, and 57% had fewer than 20 years of 
practice (Table 1).

Tailoring of the training program
The data that was used to tailor the training program is 
presented in this section and summarized in the Fig. 4. 
In the following two subsections, we successively report 
participants’ perceptions of the e-learning activity and 
decision boxes, and the strategies used to solve the 
problems discovered during the evaluation. In the third 
subsection, we present how participants’ perceptions of 
SDM supported the tailoring of the training program.

Tailoring of the e‑learning activity based on user experiences
Participants expressed their appreciation of the content 
and design of the e-learning activity on numerous occa-
sions, and in every section (Table  2). They especially 
liked the narrated slides, the quiz that informed them 
of actual patient numeracy levels, and the film depict-
ing a simulated patient encounter during which SDM is 
implemented.
User-centered design initially allowed discover-
ing several weaknesses of the e-learning activity. The 
approach then made it possible to remedy these weak-
nesses and then evaluate the impact of the changes 
made during the next evaluation round. For example, 
participants mentioned several elements lacking clarity, 
either in terms of the training component or the con-
tent (Table  3). We therefore systematically corrected 
the most specific issues (e.g. an acronym is undefined, a 
source is not cited) and they were not mentioned again 
by the participants in the following rounds. However, 
for the more general elements lacking clarity (e.g. the 
availability and content of the DBs, the main principles 
of SDM), we added an introductory video after Round 
#2. In Round #3, participants all mentioned appreciat-
ing this introductory video.

Several other types of issues were corrected system-
atically, such as usability issues, or features perceived as 
irrelevant or less valuable such as the videos with avatars, 
the introduction, or the training module explaining the 
evaluation of evidence quality. We either removed these 
elements, or made them optional for people interested in 
learning more.
We received several comments on the inapplicability 
of some of the examples across professions. Therefore, in 
the final version we diversified the professions displayed 
in the examples offered.
The activity required participants to extract the ben-
efits and harms of patient decision aids from a scien-
tific abstract of the Cochrane systematic review on their 
impact. Participants found the exercise difficult. We 
chose to try to improve the format of the exercise first, 
to make it easier. We therefore simplified the text of the 
abstract as much as possible, added pictograms and smi-
ley faces to help identify the benefits and harms, and 
translated it into French, to further understanding of the 
information. We received no further negative comments 
from participants on this exercise thereafter.

Tailoring of the decision boxes based on user experiences
Participants reported general interest in the topics cov-
ered in the decision boxes (DBs), with an overall mean 
interest of 80% (± SD 11%). The DB perceived as least 
interesting concerned the power of attorney (67% ± SD 
29%), and the one perceived as most interesting covered 

non-pharmacological treatment to manage agitation, 
aggression, or psychotic symptoms (88% ± SD 11%). 
Participants mentioned that they liked the visual design 
of the DBs, because it facilitates their use in practice, 
especially the tabular format presenting risks and ben-
efits/harms (Table 4). Several participants also expressed 
their satisfaction with the informational content of the 
DBs, especially the information about the options. Some 
mentioned that the DBs helped make them aware of the 
options, or found that the options were relevant. One 
person appreciated the fact that the DB was available to 
support older adults in realizing, on their own, that their 
driving might be dangerous. They thought this might 
help maintain their relationship with patients.
The limitations reported by study participants on the 
decision boxes allowed enhancing them to improve user 
experiences. Some of the modifications made were quite 
extensive. For example, several participants reported 
lower beliefs about their capabilities to use the DB to 
explain the pros and cons of health options to patients, 
because of the lack of accessibility to the services 
described in the DB (Table 5). We judged this a critical 
flaw, as if it remained unresolved, HCPs would not use 
the DB and adopt SDM. Therefore, to resolve this aspect, 
we added a section with a list of contact information for 
professional and community services available to imple-
ment the options offered in the DB, such as massage ther-
apy, music therapy, and physical activity. Another critical 
flaw was that several participants perceived that they 
might not have enough time to use the DB. We there-
fore added some content describing the situations where 
SDM should be prioritized. We also added information 
about the possibility to delay decision-making to a subse-
quent consultation, and thus limit the time needed to go 
through the complete SDM process.
In some cases, we chose not to attempt to resolve the 
issues raised. For example, some participants felt the 
statistics were too hard for patients and their family 
caregivers to understand. Since probabilities in numeri-
cal formats are required to understand risks, we chose 
not to change the risks presentation in the DBs. Instead, 
we modified the e-learning activity by adding a module 
describing best practices to communicate risks to people 
with lower numeracy skills.
Similarly to the e-learning activity, many of the par-
ticipants’ comments were specific and easily addressed. 
For example, participants mentioned that the informa-
tion was too dense, the terminology challenging, or some 
usability issues. We therefore adjusted the content of the 
DBs to reduce their length and complexity, and thereby 
limit the time needed to understand them, without com-
promising their meaning. We kept the use of jargon to a 
minimum, and added a glossary where we were unable to 

find simplified terminology. We also synthesized the sci-
entific information on the pros and cons of the options in 
summary tables where possible. When there were more 
than two options for a given clinical situation, we added 
a table setting out the potential options for the decision 
at hand on the first page, including the estimates of the 
probabilities of impacts for each option, as well as the 
corresponding page detailing the impacts.
A few physicians reported that the topic covered by 
DB #5 (Power of Attorney) was irrelevant to their pro-
fessional role. In an earlier Delphi study [41], we identi-
fied a need in primary care practices for decision support 
regarding this topic. We consequently attempted to 
improve DB #5 by making some of the legal aspects of 
the power of attorney easier to understand so that HCPs, 
especially physicians, can take ownership of the content 
and become more comfortable discussing it with their 
patients.

Tailoring content based on participants perceptions of SDM
We explored participants’ beliefs about consequences, or 
usefulness of SDM process after completing the e-learn-
ing activity. Participants’ descriptions of the benefits and 
inconveniences of SDM (Table  6), were very useful to 
appraise participants knowledge after training, and tailor 
the content to improve knowledge. Several of these com-
ments pointed to known barriers to adopting SDM. We 
added specific content to the existing modules to address 
each of these concerns. Overall, these comments led us 
to describe several strategies for adopting SDM in diverse 
clinical situations, for example, where time is limited, 
when there is an emergency and a decision cannot be 
delayed, when the patients’ preferences go against those 
of the professional, when risk is low, or when there are 
several decisions to be made. We also clarified the role 
of HCPs in situations where the patient’s choice appears 
contrary to public health recommendations.
Some of the participants’ comments after reading a 
decision box also point to a lack of knowledge about 
SDM, for example that DBs are of little use when stating 
their opinion or making recommendations (Table  6). 
To improve understanding of the SDM approach, we 
added an introductory paragraph to all DBs, entitled 
“What’s this document for?” which described the gen-
eral SDM approach. We also added patient stories to 
most of the DBs, usually demonstrating an encounter 
between a patient and a clinician, to demonstrate the 
value of seeking patient priorities. The stories were 
created from testimonies gathered online and were 
validated by the expert panel. These strategies proved 
effective, as we received no more comments suggest-
ing that SDM might not be well understood after these 
changes.

Changes in the level of intention as the rounds progressed
E‑learning activity
Visual examination of the quantitative descriptive 
results suggests that there was no change in participants’ 
intention to adopt SDM after their participation in the 
e-learning activity. Intention was relatively high and 

stable across the three rounds, with a mean level of 6.8, 
on a scale ranging from 1 (low intention) to 7 (high inten-
tion) (Additional file 1). Mean levels of potential factors 
influencing intention were also relatively high, ranging 
from 5.6 to 7.0, on a scale ranging from 1 to 7.

DBs: Levels of intention and the determinants of this 
intention
Participants’ level of intention to use what they learned 
through the DB to explain the pros and cons of health 
options to patients was also relatively high and stable 
across the three rounds, with a mean level of 5.7 for all 
the DBs (Fig. 5a, Additional file 2). Mean levels of poten-
tial factors influencing intention were also relatively high, 
ranging from 4.5 to 6.4, on a scale of 1 to 7. Participants’ 
level of satisfaction was generally positive, with mean val-
ues of 4.2 on a scale ranging from 1 (low satisfaction) to 5 
(high satisfaction) (Fig. 5b–g).

Discussion
In this study, we used theory-based and user-centered 
design approaches to tailor a professional training pro-
gram on SDM to the needs of primary healthcare clini-
cians. This process led to three main findings: (1) the 
use of theory and user-centred design makes it possible 
to tailor the training program to users’ needs, the effec-
tiveness of this approach being better assessed through 
qualitative than quantitative techniques; (2) each of the 
two studied training components appears essential to 
supporting the adoption of SDM; and (3) training should 
be tailored to each profession.

Usefulness of theory‑based and user‑centered design 
approaches
The theory-based and user-centered design approach 
enabled us to identify the strengths and weaknesses of 
the two training components, and to improve their con-
tent, design, navigation, and usability, while solving any 
technical issues.
The theory-based approach allowed focusing on the 
known determinants most likely to influence partici-
pants’ intention to adopt SDM, a strategy previously rec-
ommended in the Behavior Change Wheel Model [52] 
and in a systematic review of the effectiveness of tailored 
interventions [54]. Légaré et al. also recommend that the 
development of Continuing Professional Development 
activities be based on behaviour change theories, to equip 
HCPs with the skills needed to change their practice, and 
ultimately improve clinical performance for the benefit 
of patients [55]. The use of theory also has the potential 
to systematically highlight the influences of individual 
perceptions on the adoption of a targeted behaviour, and 
thus facilitate the comparison of results obtained with 
those of other studies interested in implementation sci-
ence, and ultimately improve the uptake of research find-
ings in practice [56].
Furthermore, the user-centered design approach 
allowed us to focus on the learners’ perspective of the 
problem by validating our interpretation of their assess-
ments during the next evaluation round. Several ear-
lier studies have described the benefits of user-centered 
design to create evidence-based information [30, 31, 57–
61], supporting the adoption of these tools in healthcare 
contexts [62]. However, to the best of our knowledge, no 
other study to date has used assessments of intention and 
its determinants within a user-centered design approach 
to support improvement to tools or training. Future stud-
ies should aim to evaluate whether this type of program 
design improves the adoption of evidence-based practice 
and patient outcomes.
However, although the use of theory within an itera-
tive user-centered design approach makes it possible 
to develop high-quality training, it required consider-
able resources and a continuous commitment from the 
research team, as previously highlighted in another study 
[63]. We also found that the semi-structured interviews 
used during the think-aloud session to optimize the 
e-learning component were superior to the question-
naires used to evaluate the DBs, despite the fact that 
the questionnaires used open-text fields that were also 
analyzed qualitatively. Indeed, the interviews provided 
greater insight into the weaknesses and strengths of the 
training components, and allowed us to better adapt the 
program so as to limit its weaknesses. This coincides with 
the finding elsewhere that interviews are more robust 

and provide greater data quality than open-ended survey 
questions [64].
Findings from this study and from two of our other 
recent study on user-centered design [31, 65], led to the 
observation that our systematic approach consisting in 
modifying a tool every three evaluations is perhaps not 
optimal. Indeed, if a major problem is discovered after 
a single evaluation, then modifying this aspect immedi-
ately before the next evaluation allows conducting a more 
useful evaluation in the following round, and optimiz-
ing the whole process. This ‘organic’ approach is what 
is described in the website design literature from which 
user-centered design originates [66].
The CPD-reaction questionnaire to assess the DBs was 
also limited in that it was already near to the maximum 
after a single evaluation round, leaving very little room 
to measure improvements through subsequent rounds. 
These results are consistent with those of previous stud-
ies that reported a strong intention of clinicians to sup-
port women in breast cancer decision-making [67] and 
a high intention to use DBs in their practice [42]. The 
examination of the determinants of intention across 
rounds was therefore more useful than the study of inten-
tion to support design of the training program.

Each training component is important
Overall, our study revealed that each of the two training 
components was essential for professionals to adopt SDM 
(Table 7). Firstly, the generic e-learning activity provided 
knowledge on the theory and practice of SDM. Then, the 
DBs allowed learners to implement the recommenda-
tions in practice, by providing the practical information 
to discuss specific health matters with their patients. The 
DBs thus enabled learners to apply the knowledge gained 
through the e-learning activity to diverse clinical con-
texts. In the scientific literature, authors are unanimous 
in observing a lack of structured frameworks to guide 
the design of e-learning to meet both theoretical and 
practical needs [68, 69]. DBs, with their simple vocabu-
lary and with their list of services available near to the 
patient’s home, provide a way to bridge the gap between 
general knowledge in SDM and its application in specific 
contexts and for localized populations. In addition, DBs 
include simple vocabulary and definitions to support pro-
fessionals in explaining more complex concepts to their 
patients. They also provide a list of the services available 
near the patient’s home in order to support implementa-
tion of the selected option. This concurs with the find-
ings of a recent integrative review on e-learning to deliver 
self-management support, that show that incorporating 
practice and application opportunities improves training 
effectiveness [68].

Adapting training to each profession and area
Despite the interprofessional context of care, participants 
asked that training be adapted to their specific profes-
sional role. Indeed, both in the evaluations of DBs and 
e-learning activity, professionals asked that the clinical 
examples provided during training match each of their 
professions. This finding is congruent with the observa-
tions that, for continuing professional development to be 
valued, it must meet the individual needs of profession-
als, the populations they serve, and the organizations in 
which they work [70]. This may be because professionals 
find it more useful and optimal to further their knowl-
edge in areas where they are comfortable. It might also 
be because they require more incentive to extend their 
scope of practice, such as a better understanding of the 
relevance of doing so. This finding converges with con-
clusions reported in a recent qualitative study to the 
effect that primary care physicians only read printed edu-
cational materials relevant to their patients [71]. Conse-
quently, it might be better to allow participants to select 
the DBs that coincide with their interests and areas of 
clinical intervention.
We also found that, for clinicians to consider using 
the DBs, they should list the health and social services 
needed to implement the options presented, along with 
the related contact information. This implies that any 
decision aid should be tailored to the area where it is 
distributed.

Determinant of participants’ intention to adopt SDM
In each evaluation round, we observed significant asso-
ciations between intention and two of its primary 
determinants, namely beliefs about consequences (or 

attitude) and social influence. These findings concur 
with those of an extensive review of the determinants 
of clinician behaviours, to the effect that said determi-
nants are among those most related to intention [36]. 
This also confirms previous findings on the influence of 
these primary determinants on HCPs’ intention to adopt 
SDM [72], to engage in an interprofessional approach to 
SDM [73], to participate in a training program in SDM 
[20], and to use DBs in clinical practice [42]. It is of note 
that, despite HCPs’ strong intention and the adaptation 
of tools to users, certain factors external to the training 
program, including the lack of access to services in some 
regions, as well as the lack of time, are difficult to control 
and can still influence the effective use of these tools and 
the adoption of SDM in practice. In addition, although 
intention is a useful approximation of actual behavior 
[74], it may be higher than actual behavior due to a social 
desirability bias.

Study limitations
Despite its comprehensiveness, our study has some 
limitations
The use of a non-random study sample may also have 
affected the results by introduction of selection bias. 
For instance, we may have recruited HCPs with higher 
intentions to adopt shared decision-making compared 
to the overall population of professionals who practice in 
primary care settings. This selection bias could then be 
responsible for the high intentions we observed in the 
participants from the start of the study.
The sample sizes were relatively small for the planned 
quantitative evaluations. Our conclusions were limited 
by the fact that the quantitative scores showed a ceiling 
effect. Nevertheless, the qualitative evaluation of each 

component allowed for a rich description to complement 
the quantitative results.
The literature indicates that professionals’ intention 
alone does not always predict SDM adoption [74] or the 
effective use of SDM tools [75]. It would therefore be 
interesting for future research to evaluate if professional 
training programs encourage SDM adoption directly, not 
only on intention to do so.
We used convenience samples, so the participants who 
accepted to participate may be different from the general 
population.
Most participants were physicians and nurses, and 
none practiced in rural areas. Our conclusions may 
therefore not apply to other types of professionals, or to 
those practicing in rural areas. Moreover, our findings 
may have been different if more social workers had par-
ticipated in the study, especially since the DB topics con-
cerned social aspects of care. We also acknowledge the 
high proportion of participants who were women (78%); 
however, this proportion reflects the overall gender bal-
ance among HCPs in Quebec [76].
Some of the comments received during the evaluation 
of the DBs via the open-text field of the web-based ques-
tionnaire were hard to interpret and would have required 
further discussion with the participants to clarify their 
opinions.

Conclusions
A theory-based design approach for continuing profes-
sional development interventions on shared decision-
making appeared particularly useful to identify the 
most important determinants of learners’ intentions 
to use SDM in their clinical practice. A user-centered 
approach allowed focusing on learners’ perspectives 
of the problem by validating our initial interpretations 
of their assessments during the subsequent evaluation 
round. Participants’ qualitative assessments of the pro-
gramme provided greater insight into the weaknesses 
of the training and allowed us to better adapt the pro-
gram than their quantitative assessments. We also 
observed a complementarity of the two studied train-
ing components, with the e-learning activity provid-
ing knowledge on the theory and practice of SDM, and 
the decision boxes providing the practical information 
needed to discuss specific health questions with older 
patients with neurocognitive disorders and their fam-
ily or friend caregiver. In future research, it would be 
interesting to compare a group exposed to training tai-
lored using such a theory-based user-centered design 
approach, to a group exposed to non-tailored training, 
to assess whether this design approach actually creates 
a more effective training program to increase adoption 

of SDM by health professionals. Further research is 
also needed to evaluate this two-component training 
program and to highlight the barriers and facilitators 
for its completion, in order to optimize its implemen-
tation and ensure effective uptake and use of SDM.