mHealth intervention for carers of individuals
with a history of stroke: Heuristic evaluation and
user perspectives

Elton H Lobo1,2
, Finn Kensing3, Anne Frølich2,4, Lene J Rasmussen5,6,
Patricia M Livingston7, Sheikh Mohammed Shariful Islam8
, John Grundy9

and Mohamed Abdelrazek1

Methods

Study design

The study focuses on using an iterative UCD approach that
uses three general principles: (i) early focus on users and
tasks, (ii) empirical measurement, and (iii) iterative

design.16,17 Initially, the authors understood the needs of
family carers in their daily care activities based on data col-
lected from literature, social media and surveys, reported
and submitted elsewhere.18 Using a grounded theory
approach for interpreting such data,19 the mHealth interven-
tion was developed and evaluated in a real-world setting as
presented in this study.

Intervention

SeCr is a hybrid mobile intervention that provides carers
with around-the-clock information and support. This
mobile intervention technology was developed by under-
standing carers’ needs in their daily care activities as
described above.18 This mobile intervention technology
prototype consists of four key features: (i) information
delivery, (ii) survivor and carer health monitoring, (iii)
social
communication
and
(iv)
task
scheduling
and
sharing, as shown in Figure 1 and are described below:

1. The information delivery feature consists of a persona-
lized recommendation system that uses ontologies con-
sisting of user proﬁles, activities and interests. The
algorithm combines a domain-based inference method
and semantic reasoning method, which provides a
measure of afﬁnity between the user and the item
described by the ontology to provide information
more effectively and accurately.
2. The survivor and carer health monitoring feature
consists of tools to monitor health vitals such as blood
pressure, blood glucose, physical activity, heart rate
and weight. Users have the freedom within this feature
to install the app that best suits their needs. The web
version of the intervention allowed for manual user
data input, while the Android version enabled the con-
nection
to
numerous
off-the-shelf
sensors
using
Bluetooth Generic ATTribute Proﬁle protocols.
3. The social communication feature consists of a social
media wall such as Facebook or Twitter where the
carer could communicate or ask questions to people
living with similar experiences.
4. The task scheduling and sharing feature allow carers
to plan for their day using a calendar function within
the intervention. Moreover, it enables the primary
carer to share tasks with other carers supporting them
in their daily care activities.

Participants and procedure

Two participant groups were included in this study, i.e.
Usability Experts and Carers. Usability experts were
recruited from Amazon Mechanical Turk between 30 July
and 12 August 2021. Amazon Mechanical Turk is a
popular crowdsourcing marketplace that enables a large

2

Figure 1. SeCr intervention mobile technology prototype illustrating (a) information, (b) health monitoring, (c) social communication and
(d) task scheduling and sharing features in use.

Lobo et al.
3

number of people (generally known as ‘Turkers’) to work
on tasks online.20 On the other hand, Carers were recruited
from Carer Organizations in Australia, such as Carers VIC
and Carers QLD between 1 July and 1 September 2021.
These organizations provide a statewide voice for family
carers by representing and providing support in their daily
activities. A purposive sampling approach was considered
for acquiring a range of variations within the sample,
including age, sex, educational qualiﬁcations and experi-
ence. The inclusion criteria for usability experts were
aged 18 years or more with over 1 year of usability experi-
ence, have conducted over 20 similar tasks and can read and
write in English. Furthermore, carers were included if they
were over the age of 18 years, caring for an individual with
a history of stroke in the last 5 years, and reading and
writing in English.
The study employed an iterative testing approach for
intervention reﬁnement, which consisted of four cycles.
Each cycle included ﬁve different participants who per-
formed the following steps: (i) introduction to the
mHealth intervention, (ii) participant performs a set of
tasks and (iii) intervention review and evaluation. The
inclusion of different participants in each cycle was due
to the inability of each participant to commit their time
towards the research project due to other priorities
despite the compensation provided in the form of work
credits (for usability experts) and gift vouchers (for
carers).
The ﬁrst two cycles included usability experts who
would pre-evaluate the intervention to ensure it is usable
for the carer, while the remaining two cycles included
carers. The evaluation was conducted using Likert scales
from 1 to 7, with open-ended questions to understand
user preferences in the design or practices to improve the
overall intervention usability. The feedback received from
each cycle was used to reﬁne the intervention to ensure it
is usable for the carer.
The evaluation survey was delivered in the form of a
custom-built webpage that provides a step-by-step guide
on the evaluation process for each cycle and the anonymous

online survey. Each cycle took approximately 7–10 min to
complete. The study obtained ethics approval from Deakin
University HEAG before its start.

Study instruments

The study survey was adapted from the User Experience
Questionnaire (UEQ-S)21 and the mHealth App Usability
Questionnaire (MAUQ).22 The UEQ-S was used by the
usability expert to evaluate the user experience of the inter-
vention. The UEQ-S includes 26 items on a 7-level Likert
scale that are grouped into six categories. The UEQ-S
instrument highlights user experience based on two dimen-
sions, the pragmatic dimension that assesses perspicuity,
efﬁciency and dependability of the intervention, and the
hedonic dimension that focuses on the novelty and stimula-
tion of the intervention. Additionally, the overall attractive-
ness of the intervention is calculated by combining the
results from the pragmatic and hedonic dimensions as
shown in Figure 2.21 Furthermore, 27 open-ended questions
were included in the survey to gain user feedback regarding
each aspect dimension to improve the experience for the
carer.
The MAUQ was used by carers of individuals with a
history of stroke to evaluate the usability of the interven-
tion. The MAUQ was included as it is a valid and reliable
instrument of 21 items on a 7-level Likert scale. The
MAUQ highlights usability based on three categories: (i)
ease of use and satisfaction, (ii) system information
arrangement and (iii) usefulness.22 In addition to the
MAUQ survey, 22 open-ended questions were included
based on each item to understand user preferences to
improve system usability.

Data analysis

The survey responses from each heuristic evaluation were
extracted in a Microsoft Excel sheet. The data collected
from these responses were divided into qualitative and
quantitative datasets. The qualitative data were analysed
using a grounded theory methodology that considers three
phases: (i) open coding, (ii) axial coding, and (iii) selective
coding.19 Open coding is an analytical process that identi-
ﬁes different concepts, properties and dimensions in the dis-
covered data. Axial coding is the process of relating the
concepts into relevant categories and sub-categories.
Selective coding is the process of reﬁning and integrating
the categories into theory to discover variations among con-
cepts and enrich categories in terms of their properties and
dimensions.23 All phases considered were iteratively con-
ducted by the primary author under the supervision of the
other authors using NVivo 12 for data collected in each
cycle. Furthermore, the quantitative data were divided
into two parts, i.e. the demographic and heuristic data,
which was analysed descriptively using Microsoft Excel
Figure 2. User Experience Questionnaire (UEQ-S) assumed scale
structure.21

4

to highlight the mean overall impression based on individ-
ual domains.

Results

A total of 15 carers consented to participate in the study, of
which 11 (73.33%) used the SeCr intervention, and 10
(66.67%) completed the follow-up questionnaire. The
four carers who did not use the intervention found it difﬁ-
cult to participate due to their care commitments and the
one carer who did not complete the follow-up questionnaire
declined to continue participation as their loved ones fell
too ill. Carers ranged in age from 24 to 61 years (mean =
41.7; SD = 14.2), the majority were female (70%) and
held a tertiary-level qualiﬁcation (80%). On the other
hand, all usability experts (n = 10) who consented to partici-
pate in the study used the SeCr intervention and completed
the follow-up questionnaire. The usability experts ranged in
age from 30 to 49 years (mean = 34.6; SD = 5.8), the major-
ity were male (70%), held a master’s (30%) or bachelor’s
(70%) degree and had usability experience of more than 2

years (90%). Table 1 outlines the fully demographic charac-
teristics of the sample included in this study.

Heuristic evaluation and user preferences

Four iterative cycles of heuristic evaluations and interven-
tion
reiterations
were
conducted
during
a
7-week
(August–September 2021) iterative design cycle, including
10 usability experts and 10 carers of individuals with a
history of stroke, respectively. Users in each cycle were
brieﬂy introduced to the intervention, and were then
instructed to use the intervention for a single day according
to their needs. At the end of the day, users would provide
feedback using an online survey that would be used by
the primary author to reiterate the intervention. On
average each cycle of feedback and design reiteration
took about 1.5 weeks.

Iterative cycle 1. Five usability experts with an average
usability experience of 5.2 years participated in the heuristic
evaluation based on the UEQ-S survey instrument. Three
male and two female usability experts participated in this
cycle, with ages ranging from 32 to 39 years (mean =
34.8; SD = 2.68), as shown in Table 1. The usability
experts in this cycle demonstrated concerns regarding the
text size and users’ understanding of the icons used with
the intervention. Furthermore, some usability experts
described the need to make the social aspect more encour-
aging and motivating and provide features that allow the
carer to track their health progress. Despite these concerns,
the outcomes of the UEQ-S scale demonstrated that the
usability experts rated the intervention highly in terms of
attractiveness, perspicuity, efﬁciency, dependability and
stimulation. However, a majority of the usability experts
have a negative opinion in terms of novelty, as shown in
Figure 3.
Using these ﬁndings, the intervention prototype was
improved in its next iteration. The key modiﬁcations
included: (i) increase in font size, (ii) use of standardized
icons, (iii) separate page for health tracking and (iv) inclu-
sion of likes and comments section within the social media
page to encourage and motivate the user.

Iterative cycle 2. Five usability experts with an average
usability experience of 2.6 years participated in the heuristic
evaluation based on the UEQ-S survey instrument. Most
participants were male (n = 4; 80%), with ages ranging
from 30 to 49 years (mean = 34.4; SD = 8.26), as shown
in Table 1. In this cycle, a majority of the usability
experts were satisﬁed with the intervention. However, one
expert discussed the need to make the intervention unique
from other technologies. This promoted the integration
into the intervention of a feature of ‘MicroApps’ to
provide the carer with the freedom to choose and install
the service that best suits their needs for health monitoring

Table 1. Demographic characteristics of survey respondents (n =
20).

Characteristic
Phase 1
(n= 5)
Phase 2
(n = 5)
Phase 3
(n = 5)
Phase 4
(n = 5)

Participant
group
Expert
Expert
Carer
Carer

Age, years

18–38
4
4
3
2

38–58
1
1
2
2

58 +
-
-
-
1

Sex

Male
3
4
1
2

Female
2
1
4
3

Education

Diploma
-
-
3
1

Bachelor’s
degree
3
4
1
1

Master’s
degree
2
1
1
2

Other
-
-
-
1

Lobo et al.
5

for themselves and their loved ones. The satisfaction of the
usability expert was evident in the outcomes of the UEQ-S
scales, which demonstrated positive results for attractive-
ness, perpetuity, efﬁciency, dependability and stimulation.
However, the usability experts continued to have a neutral
opinion concerning the novelty with a slight change in
the outcomes, as shown in Figure 4.

Iterative cycle 3. Five carers participated in the heuristic
evaluation based on the MAUQ survey instrument. Four
female and one male carer(s) participated in this cycle,
with ages ranging from 24 to 56 years (mean = 38.2; SD
= 13.6), as shown in Table 1. In this cycle, carers discussed

several concerns about the usability of the intervention.
Issues were predominately on the information page. Some
carers debated the issues with the font size, image quality,
and loading times. Others discussed the need to have cat-
egories for each topic to allow easy searching. Other sug-
gestions
provided by the carers include having an
emergency call option for nearby hospitals, knowing if
the user positing or answering content is genuine to
prevent misinformation, and the inclusion of personal
healthcare professionals to communicate their needs.
To address these concerns, the information pages were
updated to present the information more clearly, and
loading times were optimized. Information related to the

Figure 3. User Experience Questionnaire (UEQ-S) outcomes for cycle 1 with mean ranging from 1 to 3.

Figure 4. User Experience Questionnaire (UEQ-S) outcomes for cycle 2 with mean ranging from 1 to 3.

6

nearby stroke clinics was added with the option to call the
clinic should there be an emergency. As the intervention
was a prototype and did not consider user account creation,
it was challenging to provide a feature to determine the
authenticity of the user, and hence was not considered in
this cycle of intervention reﬁnement. In addition to this, per-
sonal healthcare professionals could not be considered in
this cycle as the intervention is in its early stages of devel-
opment. However, the introduction of the mHealth inter-
vention step of iterative cycle 4 was updated to ensure the
participant is aware of the following stages of the research
and the possibility for the inclusion of healthcare profes-
sionals. Similar concerns demonstrated in the user feedback
were evident in the MAUQ survey items, as shown in
Table 2 based on the mean score, while Figure 5 shows
the impact of these concerns on the overall usability.

Iterative cycle 4. Five carers participated in the heuristic
evaluation based on the MAUQ survey instrument. Three
female and two male carers participated in this cycle,
with ages ranging from 28 to 61 years (mean = 45.2; SD
= 14.9), as shown in Table 1. In this cycle, carers discussed
the need for more personalized information, including
nutrition and psychological factors, to monitor to pre-
diagnose an impending stroke. Moreover, some carers dis-
cussed the need to import blood reports and medication. In
contrast, one carer discussed the possibility of having
support functions within the intervention to receive profes-
sional help in case of an emergency. Despite several carers
discussing various needs, the carers were satisﬁed with the
intervention, as shown in Figure 5. The only known usabil-
ity issue within the intervention was identiﬁed by the item
‘the app adequately acknowledged and provided informa-
tion to let me know the progress of my action’ (mean =
5.4; SD = 0.9).

Discussion

This study performed a heuristic evaluation on an earlier
designed prototype for carers of individuals with a history
of stroke and to identify their preferences in technological
design. Our ﬁndings indicate that iteratively revising the
intervention based on expert and user feedback signiﬁcantly
improved the usability and user experience of the prototype.
Further, it is important to note the necessity for including
usability and user experience heuristics in stroke caregiv-
ing, as mHealth apps that support stroke caregiving in the
past have described the inability of designers to consider
user needs and preference in the design, which leads to
reduced acceptance and adherence.15

Another ﬁnding is the similarities in usability experts
and carers opinions in terms of presentation, font size and
image quality. While experts primarily focused on uncover-
ing issues related to the design and presentation, the critical
focus (or discussion) of carers were based on the features
that support information and communication. The differ-
ences in opinions were expected due to the lack of under-
standing of the expert with regards to stroke caregiving.
However, this ﬁnding describes the importance of including
the carer (s) in the design and development process to
ensure improved acceptance, which is rarely considered
as described in the user reviews of previously published
mHealth interventions that support carers of individuals
living with stroke.15

In terms of the carers’ information and communication
needs; several studies in the past have assessed its poten-
tial,10,11,24,25 with carers describing being satisﬁed with the intervention as it supported their demands.10,11,24

However, despite the past studies exploring needs to
support the information and communication needs of
carers, the carers in this study described the need for

Table 2. Critical usability issues based on the usability items in the
MAUQ scale.

Items
Mean

Whenever I made a mistake using the app, I could
recover easily and quickly
4.8

This app has all the functions and capabilities I expect it
to have
4.8

The information in the app was well organized, so I
could easily ﬁnd the information I needed.
5

I feel comfortable using this app in social settings
5

The amount of time involved in using this app has ﬁtted
for me
5.2

I would use this app again
5.2

Overall, I am satisﬁed with this app
5.2

I like the interface of the app.
5.2

This mHealth app provided an acceptable way to receive
health care services
5.2

The app adequately acknowledged and provided
information to let me know the progress of my action
5.2

Using the app, I had many more opportunities to interact
with my health care provider
5.2

I felt conﬁdent that any information I sent to my provider
using the app would be received
5.2

I felt comfortable communicating with my health care
provider using the app
5.2

MAUQ: mHealth App Usability Questionnaire.

Lobo et al.
7

personalized information support and for communication
with their healthcare team, i.e. the individuals who are
aware of their situation. These aspects were not described
in past studies, which could be critical in the carers accept-
ance of the technology.
A further critical aspect that may affect the carers accept-
ance of the mHealth technology is trust In the different
stages of the heuristic evaluation, trust was a key point of
discussion among the carers. The discussion of trust was
based on the information available, user answering and
communicating information, intervention does not fail at
the time of need and safety of their data. Trust is considered
an essential determinant for technology adoption and inﬂu-
ences its acceptance.26,27 Studies suggest that users often
hesitate to share their personal information with unfamiliar
suppliers due to the fear of misuse of data.28 As a conse-
quence, it affects the way users interact with the technology.

Future work

Evans et al.29 argue for the potential of building relation-
ships through co-design practices may facilitate trust
between the various stakeholders and help understand the
problems faced by the target group. Moreover, it will help
develop mechanisms to support their needs and aspirations
over time. The potential of co-design in facilitating user
trust was evident in this study, with carers discussing prac-
tices that the researchers can use to ensure they feel safe to
use the intervention.
Co-design practices can facilitate user trust and form a
partnership between the researcher and the stakeholder to
work together in all aspects of intervention development,
which includes needs assessment, development, pilot
testing, and dissemination.30 The co-design process is rela-
tively new within stroke caregiving literature, and the
concept has the potential to improve technical design and

develop service improvements for carers.31 Hence, the
process needs to be considered by future researchers to
create interventions that are meaningful, actionable, and
feasible interventions for the carer.

Limitations

The study has some limitations. First, the researchers
recruited usability experts from Amazon mTurk based on
deﬁned criteria. However, it is challenging to validate the
authenticity of the usability expert’s credentials within
this platform, and hence the outcomes highlighted by
usability experts need to be considered with caution.
Second, the inability of the researcher to physically
conduct a workshop to monitor stakeholder interactions
and get real-time feedback. This was due to the local restric-
tions required for social distancing to limit the spread of the
disease. Third, the small sample size made it difﬁcult to
draw statistical conclusions, which may have uncovered
several usability issues and bugs that may otherwise not
be evident. Finally, the limited time provided to the carer
to use the intervention. Due to the short duration of the
project, the carer was provided only one day to interact
with the intervention which was not sufﬁcient to conduct
a comprehensive heuristic evaluation. However, as this is
a pilot evaluation, we aim to perform a more comprehensive
future evaluation with real-life interactions and integration
of the intervention in the daily activities of the carer to
determine its acceptance and effectiveness in supporting
carers of individuals with a history of stroke.

Conclusions

mHealth interventions can support carers of individuals
with a history of stroke if it addresses their needs and expec-
tations. Some of the critical needs and expectations

Figure 5. mHealth App Usability Questionnaire (MAUQ) outcomes for cycle 3 and 4 with mean ranging from 1 to 7.

8

identiﬁed in this study include a comprehensive, persona-
lized information platform, communication with their
healthcare teams, and a private system or that the carer
can trust The ﬁndings suggest that there is still room for
improvement, creating a more inclusive environment for
carers through co-design practices to evaluate the interven-
tion based on their needs and identify issues to ensure that
the ﬁnal product developed is usable and meaningful for the
carer.