Methods/change process
An interdisciplinary, participatory design approach was used 
to develop a patient-facing tool targeted at patients with AF. 
As part of a larger project aiming to develop a new care model 
to improve the care of patients with AF, a group of clinicians, 
designers, and researchers from the Health Design Lab at 
Li Ka Shing Knowledge Institute, St Michael’s Hospital and 
the Centre for Innovation in Complex Care at the University 
Health Network, Toronto, Canada, set out to develop this AF 
patient-facing tool. The principle behind this tool is to allow 
patients to determine if their management is optimal accord­
ing to the 2012 Canadian Cardiovascular Society (CCS) AF 
guidelines,15 and if not, to empower them to speak to their 
primary care provider.

Preparatory work
The team conducted stakeholder interviews across the spec­
trum of AF care and reviewed both the medical literature and 

the existing tools on the Internet. Five key gap areas were 
identified: patient understanding of AF; symptom manage­
ment; rate versus rhythm control versus electrocardioversion; 
anticoagulation; and stroke prevention. These care gaps were 
then used as a starting point when the team met for a brain­
storming session to discuss how significant care gaps that 
exist in the management of AF could be addressed.

Given the potential benefits of preventing disability 
and death related to stroke, as well as avoiding the need for 
acute emergency care, the team decided to focus the tool on 
stroke prevention and symptom management. Following the 
brainstorming session, the generated ideas were mapped out 
according to themes, and presented back to the participants to 
confirm the direction that would be taken in terms of target 
audience, key messages, and type of tool to be developed.

Tool design and development
The tool was developed using an iterative process, with 
33 versions created, each of which was cycled back through 
the clinical and design teams with input from stakehold­
ers and end users. Clinical content was developed by an 
interdisciplinary group of clinicians, including pharmacists, 
nurses, nurse practitioners, cardiologists, general internists, 
emergency room physicians, and primary care providers. 
The tool design was created by designers with expertise in 
human-centered design. Both groups met separately as well 
as jointly on a weekly basis to ensure the clinical content and 
design were optimized and complementary.

Usability testing
Usability testing was completed with an early version of the 
quiz (see Figures 1 and 2) with 22 patients of various ages from 
different primary care and cardiology clinics to represent our 
end-user demographic. Testing was completed using a stan­
dardized script and questions developed by both clinicians and 
designers (see the Supplementary material). A user experience 
designer then trained a clinician to complete the usability testing 
interviews with patients. Data from interviews were compiled 
and analyzed by a user experience designer according to con­
sequence, recoverability, frequency of occurrence, and rational 
cause.16 Findings were then used to improve upon the tool.

Results
Findings from usability testing 
and changes made
Finding 1: information was too general
Most users believed that ‘Know Your Colours’ was providing 
them with basic information about AF and the heart. Very few 

participants expressed that they thought this was primarily 
an assessment tool.
Action: We focused on the purpose of tool, removed “What is 
atrial fibrillation?”, “Why should I care?”, and “What can be 
done?” and refocused the introductory content on explaining 
the concept and tool.

Finding 2: participants were not confident 
that their physician would know what the 
material was or what to do with it
Action: We addressed this by developing a physician-facing 
tool that would accompany the patient-facing tool.

Finding 3: there was confusion about what 
the colors meant
Action: The legend for the heart and brain colors was made 
consistently visible throughout the quiz sections.

Finding 4: participants had trouble figuring 
out their score
They were missing the scoring at the bottom and moving 
forward prematurely.
Action: The format of the tool was changed so that parts 1 
and 2 were confined to their own respective pages. Therefore, 
participants could complete the quiz and score without having 
to move to a different page or section of the page.

Finding 5: lack of direction in what to do 
with the results
“You showed me a red so it doesn’t look good for me, but 
how bad is it?”
Action: Information in the results section was changed to 
give more direction to the patient, including how soon they 
should follow up with their family doctor.

Finding 6: participants were not clear on what was 
brain health and what was heart health content
There was too much flipping back and forth between pages, 
and participants had trouble following the arrows. Positioning 
of brain health results on the back was problematic because 
participants were not turning to the back and referred instead 
to the heart health results, which caused confusion.
Action: The format of the tool was redesigned from a bro­
chure format to a booklet format to create a more linear path 
through the self-assessment.

Finding 7: scoring was difficult
Participants had trouble adding up points and sometimes 
did not see them.

Action: Scoring was completely redesigned so that determin­
ing the score required minimal work on the patients’ part.

Finding 8: many participants did not know what 
the term ‘congestive heart failure’ meant
Action: The language in the question was changed from “I 
have congestive heart failure.” to “I have heart failure or I 
have been told I have water in the lungs.”

The final ‘Know Your Colours’ tool has evolved into an 
educational program for patients and providers. It includes 
a self-assessment and educational tool for patients with AF 
designed to capture information on stroke risk, impact of 
symptoms on daily living, unplanned visits to their primary 
care provider and emergency room visits (see Figure 3). 
Appropriateness of management is based on the 2012 
CCS AF guidelines.15 Symptom management, referred to 
as ‘Heart Health’, and stroke management, referred to as 
‘Brain Health’, are scored separately. Based on the responses, 
patients are classified as ‘green’, ‘yellow’, or ‘red’, with 
specific instructions on how soon to follow up with their 
primary care provider based on their result.

The accompanying letter to the primary care provider com­
prises a description of the ‘Know Your Colours’ program and 
its importance on the front page, with a tool to aid clinicians in 
the management of AF on the back page. It includes informa­
tion on diagnosis, medication management, and monitoring 
and is adapted from the Canadian Cardiovascular Pharmacists 
Network Stroke Prevention in AF Pocket ­Reference (www.
ccpn.ca) and the 2012 CCS AF guidelines15 (see Figure 4).

Discussion
‘Know Your Colours’ was designed to allow patients to use it 
easily and enable them to better understand AF and, help them 
assess whether they are being optimally managed based on 
their risk of stroke and general symptoms. Through increas­
ing patient understanding of AF symptoms and management, 
the end goal will be to empower patients to self-assess their 
condition and consult with their primary health care provider 
if they are being sub-optimally managed or have additional 
questions.

Through our team’s interdisciplinary and patient-inclu­
sive approach, we were able to design a tool that incorporated 
many different perspectives and areas of expertise, including 
those of the patients themselves. Traditionally, clinicians 
working in a given therapeutic area develop patient education 
tools based on what they think is important for the patient 
to know. It may then be reviewed by a Patient Education 

Committee that assesses plain language and literacy level, but 
input is not received from the patient until after wide-scale 
dissemination. This approach may result in tools that do not 
meet patients’ needs as effectively.

We found that by engaging end users in the tool-
­development process we were able to identify potential 
problems and opportunities in the early stages of ­development 

to make our tool more effective. By working in a team 
composed of a variety of professional perspectives, includ­
ing specialists, primary care providers, nurses, pharmacists, 
researchers, usability experts, and designers, we could design 
a more holistic tool.

There are several limitations to this work that require 
further research. Although the initial prototype was tested 

with end users and these findings were used to improve upon 
the tool, the final version was not tested again. In addition, 
although we routinely obtained feedback on the provider 
letter and tool from physicians in our working group, as 
well as several external family physicians, the feedback was 
informal and did not follow a standardized script. These 
limitations will be addressed as part of another study that is 
currently underway.

For our next phase of research, the tool will be mailed 
to patients identified with a diagnosis of AF (n = 160) in a 
family practice clinic. The provider letter and tool will also 
be provided to all the family physicians (n = 13) at the clinic. 
The primary objective is to determine if the ‘Know Your 
Colours’ tool improves the proportion of patients receiving 
guideline-concordant care according to the 2012 CCS AF 
guidelines.15 Secondary objectives include usability testing 
from both the patients’ and the physicians’ perspectives and 
to assess if there is improved documentation in the electronic 
medical record. Other methods of dissemination are being 
discussed including having the tool available on a website 
coupled with a public awareness campaign. However, this 
will be a future phase of the work.

This work was promising but can still be built upon in 
many ways. The ‘Know Your Colours’ project serves as an 
example of how patient-centered tools can be developed using 

an interdisciplinary collaborative approach and tested using 
patient input during the development phase.

Conclusion
The ‘Know Your Colours’ project resulted in a useful 
patient tool, largely due to the inter-disciplinary approach 
taken in its development. By incorporating patient input 
and human-centered design with the knowledge, experi­
ence, and medical expertise of health care providers, we 
were able to more efficiently create a tool that addressed 
patients’ needs.