ORIGINAL ARTICLE

User-centered design and enhancement of an electronic personal
health record to support survivors of pediatric cancers

Jordan Gilleland Marchak1,2
& Brooke Cherven1,2 & Rebecca Williamson Lewis1 & Paula Edwards3 &
Lillian R. Meacham1,2 & Michael Palgon3 & Cam Escoffery4 & Ann C. Mertens1,2

Received: 22 August 2019 /Accepted: 20 November 2019
# Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature 2019

Methods

UCD methods were utilized to inform the initial PHR design
(needs assessment) and iterative enhancements (usability eval-
uations) to the PHR. Table 1 provides an overview of the UCD
methods used at each stage for each of the stakeholders.
Figure 1 illustrates the system development timeline and out-
lines the stage in the implementation process in which each
method was used. Our needs assessment was conducted over a
2-year period in conjunction with PHR Design, Build, and
Testing. The PHR was then implemented in two phases:
Version 1.0 Provider Portal (year 3; launched September
2009) provides a virtual library of educational material and
links to reputable informational resources for providers.
Version 2.0 Patient & Family Portal (year 4; launched
September 2010) provides patient and family education, links
to resources, and a PHR with secure data storing and sharing
functionality. Version 2.0 PHR leveraged SQL Server AES-
256 encryption to securely store patient data in the database,
and Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) to securely transmit patient
data between the web server and the web browser. Version 2.0
also included enhancements to the Provider portal by adding
features to support data sharing, allowing patients to share
their SurvivorLink PHR with the providers of their choice.
Following the launch of the Provider and Patient and Family
portals, iterative enhancements have been performed on an
ongoing basis to Evaluate and Enhance the system in re-
sponse to usability evaluations (years 5–10).

Needs assessment

Input from stakeholders was solicited through interviews and
focus groups to understand the needs of potential users as well
as the contexts in which they would use a PHR to enable
ongoing care of pediatric cancer survivors. Researchers with
expertise in qualitative analysis (BOC and PE) reviewed tran-
scripts and/or audio recordings and engaged in memoing to
inform site development and revisions in real time. Data col-
lection was discontinued once the research team believed data
saturation had been achieved (e.g., development questions
were answered with no new information was being obtained
from stakeholders). Transcripts and field notes were re-
analyzed using inductive thematic analysis methods for the
purposes of the current publication. Members of the research
team (BOC and JGM) read transcripts and field notes, devel-
oped open codes, and generated additional memos.
Subthemes and themes related to system requirements were
reviewed, defined, named, and discussed amongst the re-
search team.

Patient and parent focus groups Parents of pediatric cancer
survivors and young adult survivors (aged 18–21 years) were
recruited to share their thoughts on the needs and requirements
of an electronic PHR. Recruitment of actively engaged parents
and young survivors took place through two pediatric cancer
survivor clinics and local community organizations serving
children and adolescents with cancer. The convenience sam-
ple of participants resulted in two parent focus groups (N = 11)
and one young adult focus group (N = 2); a third young adult
completed a structured interview. The focus groups lasted
60 min and were conducted by a health informatics engineer
(PE) and an epidemiologist with expertise in qualitative data
collection (AM). Focus groups and structured interview were
audio-recorded, transcribed, and followed a semi-structured
outline of questions designed to elicit feedback from partici-
pants. Transcripts from parents and young adults were used to
guide the development of the Patient & Family Portal.

Provider structured interviews To incorporate the perspective
of healthcare providers on the development of SurvivorLink,
we conducted structured interviews with 14 physicians includ-
ing pediatricians, primary care providers (PCPs), and subspe-
cialists [4]. Interviews were conducted via telephone using a
structured interview guide consisting of 12 multiple choice
and open-ended questions. Interviews were conducted by a
health informatics engineer (PE). Detailed field notes were
taken during each interview and summarized to guide devel-
opment of the Provider Portal.

Usability evaluations

Think aloud protocol Following the launch of the Patient &
Family Portal, usability evaluations were conducted to solicit
feedback on the site and assess user workflow using a Think
Aloud protocol [31, 32]. In these evaluations, participants
were directed to complete a set of six predetermined tasks to
store healthcare data in the PHR (Register for SurvivorLink
account, Confirm registration via email verification, Set up
Health Record within SurvivorLink) and share health infor-
mation (Select Survivor Clinic, Submit Medical Record
Release, Share Health Record) via the PHR. Per the “Think
Aloud” protocol, the participants verbally shared their thought
processes while exploring each section of the website and
completing the six tasks. Given that three to four participants
typically maximize costs-to-benefits in usability testing [33],
we recruited N = 4 participants from a pediatric cancer survi-
vor clinic to complete “Think Aloud” protocols. Two young
adult survivors and two parents of child survivors who were
new to the SurvivorLink website completed evaluations with a
health informatics engineer (PE) in a private room in the clin-
ic. The interviewer recorded written notes of all comments
made by users and any observed problems with system func-
tionality and ease of use to inform site improvements.

College health provider focus groups When survivors are ag-
ing out of the pediatric system (typically between ages 18 and
25), many go to college where they see a college health pro-
vider to meet their primary care needs. In 2012, the
SurvivorLink team established a network of university
healthcare providers from six universities [34] to serve as pro-
vider stakeholders for young adult primary care. In order to
facilitate collaborative design with these stakeholders span-
ning a wide geographical distance, we conducted a 1-h
phone-based focus group followed by a 3-month asynchro-
nous, online focus group where weekly questions about
SurvivorLink features/content were posted. A research nurse
(BOC) and a physician researcher (LRM) moderated the focus
groups to gather provider input on potential site enhancements
to increase the perceived usefulness and ease of use of
SurvivorLink (e.g., “What are some of the barriers to using
SurvivorLink at your site?”, “What new features and functions
would make SurvivorLink more useful to adult providers?”).
A total of seven PCPs and family practice providers who were
familiar with SurvivorLink and engaged with the young adult
survivor population participated in our focus groups either by
phone (n = 6 from 4 universities) and/or online (n = 6 from 5
universities). Detailed notes of the focus group were taken and
the online group responses were summarized for major
themes and site enhancement suggestions.

Results

Needs assessment: stakeholder focus groups
and structured interviews

Survivors, parents, and providers identified several needs for
functionality and educational components necessary for
SurvivorLink to be useful. Although no participants had prior
experience with a PHR, the idea of a secure website where
they could store and share key health documents appealed to
all groups: “I think that [website] would give her more ammu-
nition to be an advocate for herself because she would have
something to take with her and show them. So absolutely I
think it would be a great resource” (parent). Specific require-
ments for the SurvivorLink system identified in the needs
assessment focus groups and structured interviews included
(1) educational needs for learning about the lifelong
healthcare recommended for survivors of childhood cancer
(learn), (2) secure storage needs for electronically compiling
SCPs and other healthcare records to direct and document
long-term follow-up care (store), and (3) communication
needs to allow survivors to share health documents with pri-
mary and specialty healthcare providers (share). These major
themes, “learn,” “store,” and “share,” were adopted as over-
arching missions and functions for SurvivorLink. Within these
themes, subthemes emerged from the different participant
groups (Table 2).

Learn. Both patients and parents identified the need for
education about survivorship from a trustworthy source.
Providers valued educational resources for the website
that could easily be verified as being from credible
sources. Multiple PCPs and non-oncology specialists
discussed the challenge of staying up to date with pediat-
ric cancer therapy and its impact on long-term health.
Many voiced needs for brief, well-organized, educational
information to inform patient care in a fast-paced clinical
setting. Given stakeholders’ expressed needs for trusted
sources of information, we developed ‘Quick Facts’ in-
formation sheets for providers to provide a quick over-
view and references for clinical topics, as well as a
Resources pages for all users with links to credible infor-
mation on survivorship, childhood cancer, support & ad-
vocacy, and survivor care.
Store. When asked about privacy and security, parents
voiced stronger concerns and hesitations than young
adults. Parents worried more about storing health records
online and cited apprehensions about insurance compa-
nies or other entities accessing their child’s health records
and potential negative ramifications from a privacy
breach. Interestingly, some parents suggested receiving
an emailed copy of their child’s record or storage on
electronic disk, without hesitation about the security of
email or physical storage/viewing of electronic files from
disk or email. The young adults did voice some concerns
about security, but overall appeared more comfortable
with the idea of storing health information online, provid-
ed it was confidential, secure, and they could control who
could view their records.
Share. Young adults discussed the benefits of their pro-
viders having access to health records, especially in an
emergency situation. Providers frequently stressed the
importance of information sharing with oncologists and
survivor specialists. A common topic of discussion
among parents and providers was the importance of the
availability of survivorship care plans to guide surveil-
lance for late effects of therapy. Providers were enthusi-
astic about having access to patient records to ensure
quality survivor healthcare, while parents were eager to
have a resource that would allow their survivors to share
these records with providers outside of oncology to pro-
mote individualized, risk-based surveillance for late ef-
fects of treatment after leaving the pediatric oncology
care setting. To address privacy and security concerns,
user control of who can see or add to survivors’ online
health records became a core guiding principle for design
of the sharing functionality. We also included an access
log so that users can see who viewed and downloaded
information (and when) from their online charts.

Usability evaluation: barriers to use and site
enhancements

During the Think Aloud usability evaluations, all participants
indicated they perceived value in the concept of a PHR.
However, participants encountered several barriers while
attempting to complete the six tasks required for secure health
document storing and health record sharing on the
SurvivorLink website (Table 3). All four participants were
able to register initially for a SurvivorLink account without
assistance (task 1), but two of the four users required
prompting to login to their email to verify their account (task
2) prior to proceeding. Following completion of email verifi-
cation, two out of four users were unsure of next steps to log in
and create their health record (task 3) and required guidance
by the interviewer. Three out of four users were able to find
and select the clinic on where the survivor receives care (task
4) without help. Two out of four users completed the electron-
ic medical record release to allow their clinics to upload doc-
ument on their behalf (task 5), while only one user shared their
record with a medical provider without help (task 6). No user
was able to complete all six tasks without assistance.
Based on the barriers to task completion identified in the
evaluations, several key enhancements to improve the
website’s usability were made. A summary of the patient iden-
tified barriers and recommendations from the usability evalu-
ations and subsequent site enhancements to improve per-
ceived ease of use and perceived usefulness are listed in
Table 4. One key enhancement to improve usability included
the development of a health record “wizard,” as well as a new
streamlined registration process. We created a “wizard” to
streamline and assist users in setting up their personal chart
and sharing it with their Survivor Clinic and other Providers
(tasks 3–6: Set up Health Record within SurvivorLink, Select
Survivor Clinic where patient receives care, Submit Medical
Record Release to allow clinic to upload health documents on
patient’s behalf, Share Health Record with selected medical
providers). Following implementation of the registration wiz-
ard, health document uploading and storage increased by 24%
among PHR users [35].
The college health provider focus groups’ feedback fo-
cused on improving the perceived ease of use and usefulness
from the provider perspective. These suggestions along with
others outlined in Table 4 were integrated into the website.
Two of these updates focused on improving the perceived
usefulness of SurvivorLink included provider upload func-
tionality and development of a provider directory. Providers
emphasized the importance of the PHR being dynamic and
including up-to-date critical health information for individual
survivors. Since not all providers participate in health infor-
mation exchanges (HIE), this means automatically loading
important data from provider EHRs was not available at this
time. Thus, they suggested that any provider whom a survivor
grants access to their chart should be able to upload a health
document to the survivor’s health record. Thus, this feature
was added. Providers highlighted that survivors face chal-
lenges finding primary and specialty providers who are famil-
iar with survivorship. To address this, they suggested adding a
provider directory on the website that could be used by both
survivors and by providers looking to refer their survivor pa-
tients. Therefore, we added a directory of registered providers
to the website which is searchable by provider specialty, loca-
tion, and/or adult versus pediatric practices..
Feedback from providers, patients, and parents highlights
an important design trade-off in PHRs: usability vs. privacy/
security [36]. The following suggestions offered by stake-
holders would likely increase users’ efficiency and/or satisfac-
tion with the PHR, but were not made as they would also
introduce critical security threats and liabilities to the
SurvivorLink system. For example, healthcare providers
voiced a desire to be able to search for a patient to request
access rather than wait for a patient to invite them to view
records. However, this search function is not possible under
current HIPAA privacy regulations, which require consent for
disclosure of protected health information (PHI). It would also
conflict with SurvivorLink’s guiding principle to ensure
survivors’ control over who have access to their information.
Additionally, young adult survivor and parent users expressed
frustration at needing to verify their email address following
registration, but before creating their health records. While
removing email verification would have streamlined the initial
log-on process for users, it is fundamental to electronic infor-
mation security. Lastly, providers requested that the share fea-
ture enables survivors to share their health record with entire
clinics instead of only individual, registered providers. This
would support the scenario where a nurse or other clinic staff
needed to look at information in the PHR prior to a patient
visit. While HIPAA presents challenges to implementing this
feature, we are currently developing a HIPAA-compliant clin-
ical portal (Fig. 1, year 10) for secure data exchange with
entire clinics and exploring options for HIE-enabled sharing.
In order to share health information with an entire clinic via
SurvivorLink, a survivor will have to request and provide
HIPAA-compliant consent to share with the clinic and the
clinic will have to have executed HIPAA-compliant business
associate agreements (BAA) with SurvivorLink. We are also
investigating options to connect SurvivorLink to existing local
HIE so that information sharing with the clinic could be ac-
complished with patient permission based on the data sharing
agreements and mechanisms of the HIE.

Discussion

SurvivorLink is the only patient-controlled PHR designed
specifically to enable young adult survivors of childhood can-
cer and parents of survivors < 18 years of age to store their
SCP and other important health documents and share these
health documents with their various healthcare providers, re-
gardless of where they practice. The work described here dem-
onstrates how UCD methods can be iteratively employed to
incorporate the user’s voice in the development and enhance-
ment of a PHR in order to improve its usability and utility, thus
removing barriers to adoption. Our initial assessments of
adoption among potential users showed a 23.7% (N = 148/
624) uptake of SurvivorLink among survivors or parent
proxies who attended survivor clinic at our institution during
an 18-month observational study period [37]. While many
tethered institutional and managed care-driven patient portals
exist, SurvivorLink remains unique as an untethered, patient-
controlled system designed with the specific needs of survi-
vors of childhood cancer and the providers who care for them
in mind.
For patients to adopt and use a PHR, they must see the
value and benefit it provides to them. Many pediatric cancer
survivors receive care from a variety of providers and subspe-
cialists who manage their health information within
institution-specific health record systems. Similar to an ex-
ploratory study of PHRs conducted by Sharp et al. [38], par-
ents and survivors participating in our needs assessment
expressed the need for a PHR that would store their health
information across institutions. This would help them manage
and communicate their complex health histories and needs to
their providers who often operate in different institutions (on
different EHRs and tethered PHRs). Continuous survivor care
across the lifespan often necessitates transitions, from pediat-
ric to adult-centered, from cancer center care back to primary
care, and/or at times of survivors’ relocation to a new geo-
graphical area [39–41]. Previous work indicates the usefulness
of SurvivorLink during these transitions in care [37]. Having
on-demand access to their health information via a PHR al-
lows survivors to provide their comprehensive health history
to any healthcare provider and advocate for quality lifelong
survivor care.
Previous studies have found that patient feedback on
perceived ease of use is not only feasible to obtain but also
often feasible to implement within the given technological
infrastructure [42, 43]. With respect to SurvivorLink’s ini-
tial ease of use, the usability evaluations conducted identi-
fied several disjointed steps that were required to create a
health record following registration. Subsequent redesign
and implementation of the health record wizard on
SurvivorLink to address this issue were directly related to
improving successful use of the PHR among survivors and
parents, with users being almost four times as likely to
store and upload a health document after the launch of
the wizard (OR = 3.9, 95%CI 1.9–8.3) [35]. As technology
evolves quickly, successful PHR design must be an itera-
tive process that elicits and responds to patient and provid-
er feedback using UCD methods to evaluate and improve
ease of use over time.

Limitations and future directions

The goal of our system development process was to in-
form design and enhancements specific to our site. As
such, there are limitations to the study which may impact
the generalizability of the findings beyond our PHR sys-
tem. Interviews and focus groups were conducted by the
research team to solicit open-ended opinions from a con-
venient sample of survivor stakeholders, and it is possible
participants’ affinity for the institution that developed
SurvivorLink may have positively biased participant re-
sponses. Limited demographic information was collected;
however, many participants self-reported their diagnoses
during focus group discussions which included leukemia,
lymphoma, sarcomas, and brain tumors. Thus, we felt
confident our stakeholder sample was sufficient to capture
the variability of the cancer experience as it relates to
diagnosis. Our analyses of our qualitative data were con-
ducted manually using both transcripts and field notes,
and we did not seek calculate intercoder reliability as we
were not seeking to apply our needs assessment findings
beyond the development of our PHR. Additionally, our
needs assessment and usability evaluations were conduct-
ed with stakeholders in the geographical area served by
our institution in the southeast United States, and these
groups may not be representative of all potential users.
With these limitations, there may be concerns about the
utilization of SurvivorLink beyond the current institution.
However, there are currently over 1350 registered users on
SurvivorLink and there have been visitors to the site from
all 50 states and 119 countries.
Given this strong interest, a research study is currently un-
derway to disseminate SurvivorLink to other pediatric cancer
centers nationally to learn about clinical adoption and imple-
mentation of the tool and assess its effects on patient activa-
tion, self-efficacy, and return for follow-up survivor care
visits. Process evaluation from the national sample of partici-
pations can yield more feedback for tailored changes to
SurvivorLink. Other future directions include working with
local healthcare systems and HIEs to examine the feasibility
and usefulness of automating transfer of survivor health
information from providers’ EHRs into SurvivorLink to re-
duce the effort by both providers and patients to load infor-
mation and increase the completeness of information provided
via SurvivorLink.

Conclusion

This study demonstrates that UCD methods are important
tools to evaluate and enhance PHRs to meet evolving needs
and ensure their usefulness and ease of use over time. While
young adult survivors, parents of child survivors, and pro-
viders’ perspectives differed slightly in their needs, all groups
informed the core missions and functions of SurvivorLink:
Learn, Store, Share. Based on the input from these stakeholder
groups, SurvivorLink was designed to support survivors in
owning and sharing their health information with providers
at any healthcare system. Through SurvivorLink, survivors
have the ability to create and self-manage a dynamic longitu-
dinal health record to use throughout their lifetime. As tech-
nology advances, there will be a need for continued iterative
evaluation and evolution of this website in order to continue to
meet the dynamic needs of the growing childhood cancer
survivor population.