Human-centered XAI: Developing design patterns for explanations of 
clinical decision support systems 

Tjeerd A.J. Schoonderwoerd a, Wiard Jorritsma a, Mark A. Neerincx *,a,b, Karel van den Bosch a 

a TNO, Soesterberg, Kampweg 55, the Netherlands 
b Technical University of Delft, Delft, Mekelweg 5, the Netherlands   

1. Introduction 

Much of the research on eXplainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) has centered on providing transparency of 
machine learning models. More recently, the focus on human-centered approaches to XAI has increased. Yet, 
there is a lack of practical methods and examples on the integration of human factors into the development 
processes of AI-generated explanations that humans prove to uptake for better performance. This paper presents 
a case study of an application of a human-centered design approach for AI-generated explanations. The approach 
consists of three components: Domain analysis to define the concept & context of explanations, Requirements 
elicitation & assessment to derive the use cases & explanation requirements, and the consequential Multi-modal 
interaction design & evaluation to create a library of design patterns for explanations. In a case study, we adopt 
the DoReMi-approach to design explanations for a Clinical Decision Support System (CDSS) for child health. In 
the requirements elicitation & assessment, a user study with experienced paediatricians uncovered what ex­
planations the CDSS should provide. In the interaction design & evaluation, a second user study tested the 
consequential interaction design patterns. This case study provided a first set of user requirements and design 
patterns for an explainable decision support system in medical diagnosis, showing how to involve expert end 
users in the development process and how to develop, more or less, generic solutions for general design problems 
in XAI.   

3. Domain analysis of clinical decision-making 

The main goal of the domain analysis is to determine if and why 
explanations are required within the context of use, and what 

3.1. Context description 

The purpose of decision-support systems is to enable users to make 
better informed decisions by collecting, analyzing, structuring, and 
presenting information relevant to the decision-making process. By 
facilitating clinical decision-making of a clinician at the point in time 
that these decisions are made, clinical decision-support systems should 
reduce medical errors and improve patient care (Berner and La Lande, 
2007; Kawamoto et al., 2005). By using machine learning to find sta­
tistical patterns in large amounts of patient data, such systems can also 
provide accurate advice regarding the diagnosis of individual patients 
(Friedman et al., 1999; Hunt et al., 1998; Ozaydin et al., 2016). A key 
requirement for the successful adoption of CDSSs into clinical practice is 
that such systems can explain their advised diagnoses to clinicians, as 
this allows clinicians to understand the system, and to build confidence 
in the performance of the system (e.g., Guida et al., 1997; Ye and 
Johnson, 1995). Moreover, the system could support clinicians in their 

communication to a patient by producing explanations that are tailored 
to the patient. So far, clinicians have generally shown low acceptance of 
CDSSs, which is mainly attributed to the inability of such systems to 
provide understandable and meaningful explanations (Berner and La 
Lande, 2007; Holst et al., 2000; Kawamoto et al., 2005). As a result, 
clinicians do not develop an adequate level of trust in the system (i.e., 
calibrated trust (de Visser et al., 2019)). 

3.2. Concept for explanations 

We consulted the literature on explanations within the medical 
domain in order to identify the typical information that is mentioned in 
explanations of medical diagnoses (e.g., Bussone et al., 2015; Kono­
nenko, 2001; Wang et al., 2019; Xie et al., 2019. It is important to realize 
that the diagnostic process is context-dependent and involves analysis of 
large amounts of data. Clinicians often cross-validate relevant patient 
information, in order to maintain high sensitivity (i.e., correctly diag­
nosing patients with their disease) and specificity (i.e., correctly diag­
nosing healthy patients as having no disease) in their decision-making. 
Therefore, clinicians can be supported by information that helps them to 
remain prudent in their decision-making, such as supportive- and 
counter-evidence, a comparison of the current case with similar cases, or 
evidence for potential differential diagnoses. Table 1 shows the 20 in­
formation elements that we abstracted from the literature, and which 

could potentially support clinicians in evaluating hypotheses concerning 
clinical diagnoses. We categorized these information elements based on 
characteristics of explanations that have been identified in the social 
sciences (Hilton, 1990; Miller, 2018): information that is contrastive 
(element 7 and 8), counterfactual (9, 10), example/case-based (11–14, 
19), or involves certainty (15 and 16). Moreover, element 5 and 6 refer 
to supportive and counter-evidence respectively, element 17 and 18 
refer to the input data that are used by the system, and element 1–4 
consist of descriptive information about the diagnosis. Element 20 
concerns the performance history of the system. The choice of categories 
was validated with a number of XAI-experts (colleagues), who 
confirmed that the categories corresponded to those typically used in 
XAI, and that the information elements were categorized sensibly. 

4. Requirements elicitation and assessment for explanations 
from a CDSS 

The goal in this part of the DoReMi-approach is to determine what 
kind of explanations the CDSS should be able to provide to clinicians, 
and to identify potential contextual dependencies for explanations by 
CDSSs. To achieve this goal, we conducted a user study among paedia­
tricians that consists of two parts. We first developed a questionnaire 
that contained the information elements that we identified in the 
domain analysis. In collaboration with an experienced clinician, we also 
constructed a realistic use case of a child patient. In the first part of the 
user study, we investigated the contextual dependencies of explanations, 
by presenting clinicians with the use case, and asking them to indicate 

the importance of each information element in their own explanations 
within multiple hypothetical social situations. In the second part of the 
study, we investigated requirements for the explanations from the sys­
tem by sequentially presenting clinicians with two hypothetical system 
outputs based on the use case (i.e., a positive and negative diagnosis), 
and by asking them to indicate what questions they want to ask the 
system. 

4.1. Methods 

4.1.1. Participants 
A total of six paediatricians (all native Dutch speakers) were con­
tacted via an e-mail in which we generally introduced our research 
context and requested their participation in our study. All clinicians 
were experienced in diagnostic decision-making (M = 18.6 years 
working experience as clinician, SD = 9.8 years). The paediatricians 
were working at different health centres in the same region in the 
Netherlands. Overall, participants indicated that they were slightly 
familiar with artificial intelligence in general, and not at all familiar 
with clinical decision support systems. Clinicians received a small 
monetary reward as token of appreciation to fill in a questionnaire, 
which on average took 50 minutes to complete. 

4.1.2. Materials 
Use case User requirements are best discovered when presenting 
users with a particular context for which they can express their needs 
(Doshi-Velez and Kim, 2017; Maguire and Bevan, 2002). Therefore, we 

collaborated with an experienced paediatrician in order to develop a 
fictitious use case that contains sufficient detail that allows making and 
explaining a diagnosis. The fictitious patient in the use case is a 7-year 
old girl called Miriam, who shows symptoms of Attention Deficit/­
Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD). Although paediatricians do not make a 

definitive diagnosis, they do engage in a diagnostic process in which 
they identify potential problems and indicate the medical diagnosis that 
is likely (i.e., a pre-diagnosis). Based on this pre-diagnosis, they can refer 
a child to a specialist such as a mental healthcare professional. The use 
case was carefully constructed to ensure a sufficient level of realism and 

adequate alignment with current work processes. Although the case 
points to ADHD as primary diagnosis, it also leaves some room for dis­
cussion. The use case consists of four datasources: one short textual 
report, and three completed Likert-scale questionnaires. The report 
consist of a description of a fictitious conversation with Miriam and her 
mother in which relevant observations are mentioned (e.g., ‘Miriam 
never finishes her work’). In addition to this textual report, we also 
presented filled-in versions of two types of questionnaires that are 
typically administered when a behavior disorder is suspected in a child: 
The Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire (SDQ), which is a brief 
survey aimed at capturing emotional and behavioral problems in chil­
dren, and the ADHD Questionnaire (AVL), which is used to identify 
behavioral symptoms of ADHD. The SDQ contains 25 items which are 
scored on a scale of 1 (not true) to 3 (true), for example: ’The child takes 
into account the feelings of others’. The AVL contains 18 items that are 
scored on a scale of 1 (never) to 5 (very often), for example: ’The child is 
easily distracted’. Our use case contains one SDQ, filled in by the mother 
of Miriam, and two AVLs that are filled in by the mother and the teacher. 
Social contexts Table 2 lists the seven social conditions in which we 
investigated information requirements for explanations. We came up 
with these social situations by considering the outcomes of the domain 
analysis. We verified the validity of our identified situations with the 
same expert that helped us to develop the use case. In situation 1a-1c, 
clinicians explained their diagnosis to a colleague who is either 

impartial, agreeing (i.e., also diagnosing ADHD), or disagreeing (i.e., no 
abnormality) with the diagnosis of the clinician. In situation 2a and 2b, 
the mother of the child-patient requests an explanation of the diagnosis 
with which she either agrees or disagrees. In our use case, we chose to 
include the parent of the patient, because diagnoses of child-patients are 
often communicated to parents or caretakers, and not directly to the 
patient itself. In situation 3a and 3b, the clinician assumed the role of 
explainee and indicated what information they find important to receive 
from a CDSS in case it provides a diagnosis that is either congruent (3a, 
ADHD) or incongruent (3b, no abnormality) with the diagnosis of the 
clinician. 
Questionnaire and interview We chose to use a questionnaire followed 
by a short, unstructured interview in order to investigate what infor­
mation clinicians would like to receive from a decision support system, 
and how the content of explanations depends upon the social context in 
which they are provided. To mitigate the risk of overlooking relevant 
information, we adopted both open and closed questions to enable cli­
nicians to indicate their information preferences. While there are 
numerous methods to elicit requirements (e.g., interviews or focus 
groups), we chose to use a questionnaire as the main method. The main 
reason for this choice is that a questionnaire enables structured collec­
tion and comparison of answers. Based on the literature, we already 
developed a fairly extensive overview of concrete information elements 
that are potentially relevant within the context of clinical decision- 

support. The goal in this stage of DoReMi is to verify and validate 
whether these elements are indeed relevant for clinicians, and to un­
derstand why. A questionnaire is a structured way of quantifying the 
importance of each element for different kind of contexts. Moreover, this 
approach allows comparison of answers across domains. In order to 
improve our understanding of why certain information is relevant, we 
also had a short unstructured interview session with the group of cli­
nicians, in which we asked about their attitude towards AI-support of 
medical diagnosis, whether they wanted to elaborate on some of their 
answers, and whether they had any additional remarks. 
The questionnaire consisted of two parts. In the first part, we asked 
clinicians to make a diagnosis based on the use case, and to indicate 
what information they have used in their decision-making. Then, we 
sequentially introduced participants to the social situations, for which 
they were asked to indicate the importance of the information elements 
from Table 1 that they could use in their own explanation. We created 
brief introductions for each social situation. Situations 1a-2b each 
started with a description of the explainee (e.g., whether this is a 
colleague or the mother of the patient, and whether they agree or 
disagree with the diagnosis). We also included a short explanation of the 
diagnosis by the colleague, in which information was mentioned that 
was taken into account in the decision-making by the colleague (e.g., 
’Miriam is easily distracted and quickly loses the main thread during a 
conversation... Although she shows no signs of over-activity, I think 

there are sufficient indicators of ADHD.’). The importance of each in­
formation element in each situation was rated on a five-point Likert- 
scale with the following levels: (1) not at all important, (2) not impor­
tant, (3) somewhat important, (4) important, and (5) very important. 
We also included an open question in each situation, which asks clini­
cians to indicate any additional information elements that they can think 
of. 
In the second part, we introduced clinicians with a fictitious clinical 
decision support system. We wrote an introduction including a general 
description of its purpose and operation (i.e., finding likely diagnoses for 
a particular case, by running the case through a model that was con­
structed by learning from large amounts of patient data), its potential 
supportive functionalities, its limitations caused by its dependence on 
registered data, and its performance (i.e., the system works well in 
many, but not all cases). Situation 3a and 3b consisted of the system 
suggesting the diagnosis ADHD or no abnormality respectively, for 
which no explanation is provided. In both situations, we presented the 
list with information elements, including the two system-specific ele­
ments (19 and 20). We rewrote each element into a question (e.g., ’How 
certain is the system of this diagnosis?’), in order to enable clinicians to 
indicate how important they think it is to be able to ask each question to 
the system within each situation. Additionally, we included an open 
question about whether clinicians suspect changes in the importance 
ratings when imagining that they have been working with the system for 

some time and have learned that most of its advice is correct. 

4.1.3. Procedure 
We invited the paediatricians to a central health centre, where we 
booked a conference room to conduct the study. The first author was 
present to provide a short verbal introduction to the research, and to 
answer any questions during the completion of the questionnaire. 
Although participants were present in the same room, no communica­
tion was allowed between them. Prior to filling out the questionnaire, 
participants were presented with a general introduction of the study, in 
which it was made clear how their data would be used, and that the 
study was evaluated on ethics and quality by an internal review com­
mittee at our research institute. After signing the informed consent, we 
presented the questionnaire, followed by the short interview. After­
wards, paediatricians were thanked for their participation and received 
their reward. 

4.1.4. Data analysis 
Because of the exploratory nature of our study, we did not perform 
inferential statistical analysis on the data. Instead, we investigated the 
quantitative and qualitative data from the clinicians in order to find 

interesting trends. In addition, we determined the median importance 
rating for each information element, and the minima and maxima in 
order to obtain an indication of between-subjects variability. Unfortu­
nately, it appeared that one participant did not fill out six questionnaire 
items, and another participant did not fill out four items, leading to ten 
information elements with four ratings instead of five. The median 
importance ratings and their variability were compared between the 
information elements and the situations. The first two authors analyzed 
the qualitative data to aid the interpretation of these comparisons. We 
used an open coding scheme in which we independently evaluated the 
answers and wrote down any interesting remarks. We then discussed our 
findings. 

4.2. Results 

4.2.1. Part 1: providing explanations in different social contexts 
All six clinicians diagnosed Miriam with ADHD, indicating that the 
information in the use case provides sufficient reason to designate this 
diagnosis as being most likely. In their explanations, all participants 
mention similar factors that are indicative of this diagnosis (e.g., low 
attention span, restless, learning difficulties). Some also mention more 

general characteristics that they took into account, such as the perceived 
impact of the behavior of Miriam at school and at home, and the stable 
relationship with her mother. 

Fig. 3 shows the median, minimum, and maximum importance rat­
ings of the 18 information elements in all five social situations. In gen­
eral, median importance ratings were high for all information elements 
in all social situations. However, some scores also varied heavily across 
participants, as depicted by the error bars in Fig. 3. There are some el­
ements that clinicians unanimously rated as (very) important (scores of 
4 or 5) in at least one situation, which are elements 1 (in all situations), 2 
(only in both disagreeing situations), 3 (only in explanations to the 
parent of the patient), 5 (in all situations, except in case of the dis­
agreeing colleague), 7 (only when informing a colleague, or in case of an 
agreeing colleague), and 15 (only in case of a disagreeing parent of the 
patient). There are also elements that unanimously received relatively 
lower values (maximum of 3) for some situations: element 3 and 4 (only 
when informing a colleague, or when the colleague agrees), 10 (only in 
case a colleague agrees), 12 (only when explaining to a parent of the 
patient), and 14 (only in case the parent agrees). Note that for some 
elements, the majority of clinicians provided low ratings (median values 
lower than 3), while only one clinician provided a higher rating (as 
indicated by the maximum value). Inspection of the data revealed that it 
was not a single clinician who consequently gave either high or low 
ratings, which indicated that participants are rather pronounced about 
the importance of items. 
For situation 1c (in which a colleague-clinician disagrees with the 
diagnosis that is made by the participant), two clinicians also indicated 
(in the free-text entry box) high importance of mentioning the negative 
consequences of not diagnosing Miriam, given her behavioral problems. 

4.2.2. Part 2: receiving explanations from a CDSS 

Fig. 4 shows the median, minimum, and maximum importance rat­
ings of the 20 information elements, given the context in which the 
system provides a diagnosis that is either equal to that of the clinician (i. 
e., situation 3a), or differs (i.e., situation 3b). Overall, median impor­
tance ratings are high, with the exception of elements 3, 4, 9, 13, and 17, 
which have median values of 3 (somewhat important) or lower in situ­
ation 3a and/or 3b. However, every element received a rating of 5 
(highly important) from at least one clinician. There are seven elements 
that most clinicians rated with a 5 and all other clinicians with a 4 
(important) in both situations. These are elements 1, 5, 6, 7, 15, 16, and 
20, all of which have median values of 5. There are two elements that 
received lower ratings from all clinicians (i.e., maximum value of 3 or 
lower), which are element 4 (but only in case the clinician does not agree 
with the diagnosis of the system), and element 13 (but only when the 
clinician does agree with the system). For other elements, the minimum 
and maximum ratings are more varied between individuals. 
Apart from the importance ratings, clinicians also indicated whether 
they still would want to receive the same information in an explanation 
of the CDSS, when imagining that they have been working for some time 
with the system. Unanimously, clinicians predict this information to be 
different (i.e., they all responded with ’No’). They all provided the 
reason that they are likely to get familiar with the decision-making of the 
system over time, thereby requiring less extensive explanations. More­
over, they stated that some information is likely to remain important 
over time (supporting- and counter evidence, and certainty of the 
diagnosis), while other information is likely to become less important 
(what information is used to make this diagnosis, and the diagnosis in 
similar cases). 

4.2.3. Interview with clinicians 
All six clinicians shared a very positive attitude towards the use of a 
CDSS to aid their decision-making, saying that they could ’certainly see 
how such a system could be beneficial in diagnosing’ and that they 
valued the information that was provided by the system. In particular, 
they valued the opportunity to be able to explore the case in more detail, 
by being able to compare supporting and contradicting information for 
multiple diagnoses. Multiple clinicians also explicitly mentioned that 
the explanations help them to better evaluate the different diagnoses 
that are conceivable given the patient’s complaints. 

4.3. Discussion 

The goal of our first study was to obtain insight into the kind of in­
formation that clinicians find important to be part of an explanation of a 
diagnosis. We explored whether the information needs differ depending 
on various social contexts. Furthermore, we explored what explanations 
clinicians want to receive from a system that supports diagnostic 
decision-making. We first discuss the results on explanations as provided 
by clinicians (part 1), and then on explanations from a CDSS (part 2). 

4.3.1. Explanations from clinicians 
Considering the results as a whole, there are three outcomes that 
immediately stand out: (1) importance ratings for most information el­
ements are high, (2) there is a relatively large variation in individual 
scores, while (3) scores for most information elements only show subtle 
differences between the five situations. Given that we carefully 

constructed the list of information that is often used in clinical decision- 
making, it is not surprising that overall, clinicians rate this information 
as being important or highly important (i.e., 78% of all median values 
are above 3). The exhaustiveness of the list is also evident by the fact 
that nearly none of the clinicians mentioned additional information. 
Across all social situations, clinicians consider it highly important to 
mention the information that is used to make a diagnosis (for example, 
data from questionnaires and physiological measurements), and the 
information that supports the diagnosis (for example, the prosocial-, 
attention-, and behavioral scale scores on the intake questionnaires) in 
their explanations. This information can be considered to be the primary 
evidence for their decision. Interestingly, there is no information that is 
unanimously evaluated by clinicians as being less important. 
While the overall median importance ratings for the information 
elements are high, there are large differences in some scores between 
clinicians. This indicates that they have personal preferences concerning 
the information that they provide in their diagnosis. For example, while 
one clinician highly values counterfactual explanations (e.g., I think it is 
ADHD and not ASD, because Miriam is described as social, but is also 
very easily distracted) across all situations (median of scores is 4 across 
elements 9 and 10), another clinician attributes much less importance to 
this information (median of 2). While these differences might be 
somewhat strengthened by potential contrast effects (Sherif et al., 
1958), it still shows that there are individual preferences for particular 
information elements, which is an interesting result. 
We observed only small variations in scores when comparing the 
importance of information elements across different social situations. 

This suggests that, overall, clinicians only subtly adapt their explana­
tions to the social situation in which they need to be used. When we 
consider the results in more detail, it appears that clinicians find it more 
important to include general information, such as a description and the 
prevalence of the condition, in an explanation to a parent of the patient 
instead of a colleague, while explaining how the patient’s case relates to 
other, similar cases is less important. Furthermore, mentioning alter­
native diagnoses for the current case is most important when explaining 
to a colleague. 
Mentioning how certain the clinician is of the diagnosis is most 
important when explaining to a parent of the patient who disagrees with 
the diagnosis, while comparing its case with that of a typical case is least 
important when explaining to a parent who agrees. These results are in 
line with the patient-centered approach of communication within 
healthcare (Baker, 2001), which is aimed at facilitating understanding 
of the diagnosis in patients and their relatives, and individualism (i.e., 
treating patients as individuals instead of one of many that received the 
same diagnosis). 
Lastly, clinicians also find it highly important to mention the rele­
vance of the information for their diagnosis when the explainee (either a 
parent of the patient or a colleague) believes there is no abnormality. 
This result indicates the importance of the sensitivity/specificity 
trade-off in clinical diagnosing (Berner and La Lande, 2007; Kawamoto 
et al., 2005). That is, while clinicians try to mitigate the amount of false 
positive diagnoses, they are also careful to avoid false negatives. This is 
confirmed by the free-text answers of two clinicians, who explicitly state 
the high importance of mentioning the negative consequences of not 
diagnosing Miriam, given her behavioral problems. 

4.3.2. Explanations from a CDSS 
First of all, clinicians unanimously indicated that they find it highly 

important to know about the information that the system used to make 
the diagnosis (element 1). This indicates that clinicians do indeed 
require an explanation that accompanies the diagnosis that is suggested 
by a CDSS. As in the results of part 1, the overall importance ratings of 
information elements are high (i.e., 80% of median values are above 3, 
and all elements were rated as highly important by at least one partic­
ipant). Moreover, once again there are relatively large variations in in­
dividual scores. This suggests that not all clinicians want to receive the 
same explanations from a CDSS, which argues for personalization based 
on their information preferences. However, the fact that many infor­
mation elements are important according to clinicians does not mean 
that it is wise to present all this information in an explanation at once. 
That is, explanations that are too detailed may lead to over-reliance on 
the system, (Bussone et al., 2015; de Visser et al., 2019), causing clini­
cians to adopt decisions of the system without careful consideration (i.e., 
inadequate use). 
Another finding is that the information preferences of clinicians do 
not seem to be dependent upon whether they agree with the system’s 
advice. Regardless of whether they agree with the system, clinicians 
unanimously find it (highly) important to receive an explanation that 
contains: (1) the information that the system used to make the diagnosis, 
(2) supporting and contradicting information (e.g., ADHD is suggested, 
and the patient scores high on questionnaire items measuring attention 
deficiencies, but low on items measuring hyperactivity), (3) how certain 
the system is of the diagnosis, (4) the information that would increase 
the certainty (e.g., items that measure impulsivity are important pre­
dictors for ADHD, but are missing in the current case), (5) other di­
agnoses that are conceivable, and (6) the performance of the system for 
other, similar cases. These results are highly similar to those of the first 
part in which clinicians assessed the importance of information in 
explanations that they provide. In both cases, clinicians find it important to 

indicate the information that is used in the decision-making process, the 
supporting information, other likely diagnoses, and the certainty with 
which they make the diagnosis. Interestingly, information that contra­
dicts the diagnosis, and information that would increase the certainty of 
the diagnosis that is made, is considered more important by clinicians in 
explanations from CDSSs. That is, while not all clinicians find it 
important to mention contradicting information in explanations to 
others, all clinicians want to receive this information as part of the 
explanation from the system. These results reveal a particular attention 
of clinicians to information that enables them to obtain a reliable, ac­
curate, and substantiated picture of all possible diagnoses given the 
information in the case. This is confirmed by their additional remarks 
during the interview, in which they indicate that they value the system 
mostly because it enables them to be more critical, which is also found 
by Wang and colleagues (Wang et al., 2019). That is, regardless of 
whether they agree with the system, clinicians mostly want to use the 
system to better interpret the information in the patient’s case, by 
evaluating the evidence for and against the hypothesized diagnosis, 
other likely diagnoses (i.e., contrastive explanations), and the system’s 
certainty and performance. 
Lastly, clinicians unanimously expected that their information pref­
erences for explanations of the system will change over time, as they build up experience with its advice and explanations. That is, they 
expect their understanding of the system to increase over time, causing 

them to be needing less extensive explanations. More specifically, cli­
nicians stated that supporting- and counter evidence, and the certainty 
of the system will likely remain important in explanations, while in­
formation that is used to make the diagnosis, and the diagnosis in similar 
cases is likely to become less important over time. It might be interesting 
to further investigate this result in a longitudinal study in which users 
work with the system and its explanations for longer periods of time. 

5. Multi-modal interaction design and evaluation of 
explanations from CDSS 

In this part of the DoReMi-method, the goal is to discover how the 
information that is generated by an XAI system can be effectively 
communicated to the user. To investigate this, we first created UI design 
patterns for explanations on the basis of the results that were obtained in 
the first user study. Because we did not find clear contextual de­
pendencies for explanations, and all clinicians found most information 
elements important or highly important, we decided to develop UI 
design patterns for all elements. The steps in the design process for each 
pattern were: (1) specify the explanation design problem (based on the 
user study), (2) specify the information elements that are relevant for the 
design solution, (3) consult XAI literature and AI-experts to identify 
techniques that can obtain the information from the system, (4) consult 
design experts to specify how this information can be presented in an 

understandable manner, (5) create a concept-interface based on the 
pattern, (6) refine the concept based on internal discussions with AI and 
interaction design experts. 
After creating the patterns and user interfaces that contained ex­
planations of a diagnosis based on the use case from the first user study, 
we conducted a second user study in which clinicians evaluated the 
designs. In the following sections, we describe how we created the UI 
design patterns, and how the user study was set up. 

5.1. UI design patterns for explanations by a CDSS 

We developed design patterns for all information elements from 
Table 1, which we contextualized by using the information in the use 
case from the first study. Some information elements were combined 
into a single pattern, because it would be illogical or impossible to 
separate them. Table 3 shows the distribution of information elements 
over the twelve UI design patterns that we created. Initial designs were 
made by author 2 based on his personal interaction design knowledge 
and experience and examples from the XAI literature. The designs were 
then iteratively refined based on reviews with the other authors, and AI 
experts and interaction design experts from our organisation. 

Tables 4 −7 show the most interesting design patterns (i.e., the ones 
containing non-trivial design choices). All other patterns can be found in 
Appendix A. Each pattern includes a problem description (i.e., the user 
needs to know X), a UI design example that illustrates the solution, and a 
rationale for why this is a good solution to the problem (only included 
for non-trivial design choices). In the rationale, we also discuss the XAI 
methods that can be used to extract the information for the UI designs. 

5.2. Methods 

5.2.1. Participants 
The same six paediatricians from the first study also participated in 
this second user study. Participants were once again recruited via an e- 
mail, in which we explained the general purpose of the second study and 
requested their participation. Clinicians received a box of chocolate 
bonbons as token of appreciation. 

5.2.2. Materials 
Questionnaire We based the questionnaire items for the second study 
on questions that have been identified by Hoffman and colleagues 
(Hoffman et al., 2018) as capable of measuring subjective accounts of 
understanding and trust in users of XAI systems. More specifically, we 
used three questions from the scale that measures explanation satisfac­
tion in users (see Hoffman et al., 2018 for the full survey). Although this 
scale contains a total of eight items, we only chose questions that 
directly relate to understanding and trust, as our goal was to let clini­
cians evaluate the interfaces in terms of these concepts. We added three 
other questions in order to measure the importance of each explanation 
component (i.e., the information element(s) presented in one UI), un­
derstandability of the UI, and the extent to which clinicians think that 
the UI improves the decision-making process. This brought the total 
number of items in the questionnaire to six, all of which were presented 
for each explanation-component:  

• This explanation-component is important.  
• This explanation-component is understandable.  
• From the explanation-component, I understand how the system works. 
(taken from Hoffman et al., 2018)  
• This explanation-component lets me judge when I should trust and not 
trust the system. (taken from Hoffman et al., 2018)  
• This explanation-component improves my decision-making process.  
• This explanation-component shows me how accurate the system is. (taken 
from Hoffman et al., 2018) 

We measured importance in order to find out whether the ratings are 

congruent with those obtained in the first study. Low consistency can 
mean that the communicated information by the interface differs from 
that which the interface is designed to communicate, in which case it is 
essential to determine what causes this difference. For example, it could 
be that the information in the interface is difficult to comprehend for 
users, which impedes being able to assess its importance. Therefore, we 
also included understandability of the interface as questionnaire item. 
Another desirable characteristic of explanations by a system is that 
they enable users to improve their understanding of the system (Hoff­
man et al., 2018; Miller, 2018). That is, the information should provide 
an accurate representation of the capabilities of the system and should 
be carefully designed in order to reduce the risk of developing misun­
derstanding (especially in high-risk domains such as healthcare), in 
order to facilitate adequate use of the system. To the same end, expla­
nation interfaces should also enable users to develop a level of trust in 
the system that accurately reflects the system’s performance (de Visser 
et al., 2019), for example by including information that enables 
assessment of the system’s accuracy. 
The main goal of a decision-support system is to support decision- 
making. Therefore, we also included the question about whether clini­
cians feel like the explanations in the interface are able to improve their 
decision-making process. Of course, ultimately we want to obtain 
objective results on all six topics that were included in the questionnaire, 
but this requires users to work with the system and gain experience with 
its explanations for a longer period of time. However, in this part of the 
design process of explanations, it is valuable to obtain subjective mea­
surements to have an indication about the effectivity of the explanation 
interfaces, and to learn how users value the presentation of information 
(i.e., the face validity of the design patterns). 
The full questionnaire consisted of the 12 interface designs, which 
were subsequently presented on the left page of a brochure-style 
booklet. On each right page, the six questionnaire items to evaluate 
the interface on the left were presented. This method of presenting 
enabled participants to see the interface while providing answers to the 
questions. All items were rated on a five-point Likert-scale. The first item 
was rated on the same levels as in study 1: (1) not at all important, (2) 
not important, (3) somewhat important, (4) important and (5) very 
important. All other items were rated on the following levels: (1) 
strongly disagree, (2) disagree, (3) neutral, (4) agree, (5) strongly agree. 
In addition to the closed questions, we included an open question at the 
end of the questionnaire in which we asked whether there is any addi­
tional information that participants would like to receive. 

5.2.3. Procedure 
The study was once more conducted in a conference room at a local 
health centre. The first author was present to introduce the study and to 
answer any questions of the paediatricians. Prior to filling out the 
questionnaire, participants read about the introduction of the study, and 
were once again presented with the use case of the 7-year old called 
Miriam. Then, we subsequently presented the 12 user interfaces and the 
six questions. 

5.2.4. Data analysis 
For each UI, we determined the median, minimum, and maximum of 
ratings on all questionnaire items separately. We evaluated the 12 user 
interfaces on these measures. The consistency of individual importance 
ratings between study 1 and 2 was determined by calculating the mean 
difference between importance ratings of each interface and the average 
importance of the corresponding information elements (see Table 3) in 
situation 3a (system agrees) from the first study. Moreover, the first two 
authors analyzed the qualitative data from the last question from the 
questionnaire in order to evaluate whether participants had any addi­
tions to the information in the interfaces. 

5.3. Results 

Fig. 5 shows the results on all questionnaire items for each user 
interface. Scores on the items are quite consistent between participants, 
as most scores differ by 1 or 2 points (on a 5-point Likert-scale). Overall, 
scores on all six items are high (82% of medians per interface are above 
3). Moreover, as in study 1, there are many relatively high minimum 
values (i.e., 4 or 5) and no relatively low maximum values (i.e., 1 or 2), 
which indicates that, overall, participants gave high ratings. First of all, 
importance ratings are high for all interfaces, especially for UI 12, which 
clinicians unanimously rated with either 4 (important) or 5 (highly 
important). Interestingly, there is relatively strong consistency between 
individual importance ratings in study 1 and study 2 (mean difference 
between scores for each participant = 0.85, standard deviation = 0.64). 
Moreover, importance ratings for information pertaining to the certainty 
(UI 3) and performance (UI 12) of the system were rated with 4 or 5 by 
almost all clinicians in both studies. 
The median score on understandability was 4 or higher for all in­
terfaces, although there were two clinicians who did not find interface 8 
and 12 understandable, respectively. For interfaces 4, 6, and 10, all 
clinicians (strongly) agreed with the statement concerning the ability of 
the interface to facilitate system understanding. On average, ratings on 
the ability of the interfaces to enable clinicians to judge the level of trust 
in the system were slightly lower, with interface 1 receiving the lowest 
ratings (median of 2, maximum of 3), and interface 10 and 12 receiving 
the highest ratings (median of 4, maximum of 5). With respect to the 
ability of the interface to improve decision-making, interface 1 received 
lowest ratings, while only interface 10 received unanimously high rat­
ings of 4. Lastly, interface 12 was rated by all clinicians to best enable 
them to assess the system’s accuracy, while interface 1 and 2 received 
the lowest scores. 
Apart from the ratings on the 5-point Likert-scale, participants 
unanimously indicated that there was no additional information that 
they would like to receive on top of the information that is presented in 
the user interfaces. 

5.4. Discussion 

In this study, clinicians evaluated interface designs for separate 
components of explanations of diagnoses from a CDSS. More specif­
ically, they indicated the importance of the information that the in­
terfaces present, and their level of agreement with statements regarding 
the understandability of the interfaces, their ability to enable clinicians 
to understand how the system works, to judge when they should (not) 
trust the system, to improve the decision-making, and to learn how ac­
curate the system is. Interestingly, the within-subjects consistency in 
importance ratings between study 1 and 2 for each information element 
is high, which implies that the interface designs are able to communicate 
the information that they are intended to communicate. 
Moreover, there is likely to be an interaction between importance 
and understandability of the interface, as understanding the information 
that is presented is a prerequisite for being able to assess its importance. 
In this study, nearly all clinicians agreed or agreed strongly with the 
statement about understandability of each interface. However, there 
was one clinician who did not find UI 8, which enables making and 
evaluating counterfactual statements about patient information, un­
derstandable. Another clinician did not find UI 12, presenting a 
confusion-matrix that indicates the system’s performance, understand­
able. Although most clinicians indicated to understand all interfaces, the 
fact that some did not underlines the importance of proper training with 
the system. That is, all end users should have a similar level of under­
standing about the system’s functionalities and their potential useful­
ness, in order to enable similarly adequate use of the system. User 
interfaces should thus be designed in such a way that the information 
that they present is understandable, while also supporting learning 
about the system. It is therefore also interesting to know what interfaces 

can increase system understanding. For most of the interfaces that we 
designed, clinicians felt that it increases their understanding of the 
system, especially the information concerning supporting and contra­
dicting factors (UI 4), differential diagnoses (UI 6), and the partial de­
pendency plots that enable case-based reasoning (UI 10). Lowest ratings 
were provided for interface 1, which contained a description of the 
diagnosis, and 3, in which the certainty of the system was expressed in 
natural language, which can be expected as this kind of information tells 
little about how the system works. 
Next is the ability of the interfaces to enable users to obtain an 
appropriate level of trust in the system. The results of our study show 
that merely providing the system output along with a description of the 
diagnosis was judged as being least informative about the trustworthi­
ness of the system’s advice. This is understandable, as this information 
does not enable users to learn about the reasoning behind the advice, 
which is why explanations are required. The interface that shows the 
system’s performance was rated as being most helpful to assess the 
trustworthiness of the system. This is line with previous research in 
which performance was found to be the most powerful predictor of 
human trust in a system (see Hancock et al., 2011 for a meta-analysis). 
Overall, the statement regarding trust in the system received the most 
neutral scores, which indicates that clinicians are most indifferent about 
this item. This could indicate that clinicians have difficulty evaluating 
this characteristic of the interface, which emphasizes the importance of 
an objective evaluation of trust (e.g., by measuring reliance). This 
finding is also congruent with the notion that trust in AI systems is not 
solely based on explanations of outputs, but also on the performance and 
attributes (e.g., adaptability and personality) of the system (Hancock 
et al., 2011). 
Overall, clinicians were positive about the contribution of the in­
formation that is presented in the interfaces to their decision making, 
except for general information about the diagnosis, for which most cli­
nicians were neutral (and one even strongly disagreed). Moreover, 
participants unanimously agreed that case-based information contain­
ing the typical case of a patient with the diagnosis that is suggested, and 
its relation to the current case would improve their decision-making. 
Lastly, most UI design patterns are judged by clinicians as enabling 
them to assess the accuracy of the system, which is important to be able 
to determine how reliable the output of the system is. On average, in­
formation about the diagnosis, the information that is used in the 
decision-making, and the certainty of the system inform clinicians the 
least about the system’s accuracy. Not surprisingly, interface 12, which 
contains the confusion-matrix that shows the sensitivity and specificity 
of the system for all or a selected amount of cases that received the same 
diagnosis was judged as providing the most information about the sys­
tem’s accuracy. 

6. General discussion 

We described the DoReMi-approach for the development of XAI, in 
which end users are actively and repeatedly involved in order to develop 
fit-for-purpose explanations. While the user is central to the approach, 
the design of explanations that are adequate for use in a particular 
context requires collaboration of a multi-disciplinary research and 
development team from the start. That is, the method includes activities 
that cover multiple areas of expertise: research and development of XAI 
methods, interactions with domain experts, design and execution of 
human factors research, and design of interaction between user and XAI. 
Thus, successful development of XAI requires a team that consists of end 
users, and experts on AI, human factors, and (human-computer) inter­
action design. 
By collaborating in a multi-disciplinary fashion, we applied the 
DoReMi-approach to investigate explanations for clinical decision sup­
port in the domain of child health. This provided us with the desired 
design specifications (see Fig. 1): a description of the context of use, a 
suitable use case to investigate and evaluate explanations, explanation 

requirements from clinicians, and ultimately a first set of UI design 
patterns for explanations. The DoReMi-practice enabled us to efficiently 
obtain these first design specifications by involving a relatively low 
number of end users and by using reusable questionnaires. Note that the 
results of DoReMi should be refined and evaluated further through their 
use by other XAI researchers and developers. 
The DoReMi-approach is intended to be used right from the start of 
XAI development, in order to find out what content and what form is 
suitable for explanations within the context(s) in which the system will 
operate. The main purpose of explanations is ultimately to enable users 
to learn about the system (Lombrozo, 2006; Williams et al., 2013), so 
that they understand how the system works and are able to predict when 
and to what extent its output can be trusted, which facilitates adequate 
use of the system (Hoffman et al., 2018). These effects of explanations 
can be estimated, but not determined with subjective evaluations. 
Instead, they require objective measurements within the context of use. 
Therefore, the first activity after obtaining all outcomes from the 
DoReMi-method is to build a prototype of the XAI system based on these 
findings, and to have users interact with the system in the context of use 
(which may be simulated for high-risk domains) in order to measure 
their behavior. By combining subjective (e.g., Hoffman et al., 2018) with 
objective (e.g., Samek et al., 2017) measurements, it can be established 
what the effects of explanations are on users’ understanding of, trust in, 
and reliance on the system. This can also provide more insight into how 
and when the explanations are used by the user. For example, it could 
reveal context-dependencies that were not discovered during domain 
analysis or requirements elicitation, and it also provides opportunity to 
investigate the requirements and effects of explanations over time. 
Additionally, potential (undesirable) side-effects can also be revealed, 
such as the effect of the amount of detail in explanations on the degree of 
reliance on the system (Bussone et al., 2015). 

7. Conclusion 

This paper presented the application of a human-centered design 
approach for eXplanations of Artificial Intelligence (XAI) as a practice 
for user requirements analysis and deriving corresponding reusable 
design solutions. It distinguishes three components: Domain analysis to 
define the concept & context of explanations, Requirements elicitation & 
assessment to derive the use cases & explanation requirements, and the 
consequential Multi-modal interaction design & evaluation to create a 
library of design patterns for explanations. This DoReMi-approach pro­
vided the first set of user requirements and UI design patterns for an 
explainable decision support system in child health, showing how to 
involve expert end users in the development process, and how to derive, 
more or less generic solutions for general design problems in XAI from 
the domain & requirements analysis and current interaction design 
knowledge. Whereas current XAI-studies mainly focus on single purpose 
explanations (most often transparency) and natural-language explana­
tion formats (Nunes and Jannach, 2017), the DoReMi-approach pro­
vided a richer XAI design space with (1) a (first) set of user requirements 
for explanations that service the different user goals, and (2) a (first) set 
of reusable design patterns for multi-modal explanatory user interfaces. 
The evaluations with clinicians showed that they really need expla­
nations of the AI-output, particularly to help mitigate false positive di­
agnoses, while avoiding false negatives. Such explanations support the 
required critical attitude, reducing the risk of over-reliance. All clini­
cians who participated in the study indicated that the explanations of the 
different design patterns are important and understandable, supporting 
trust-calibration and decision-making. The set of UI design patterns 
seem to cover all relevant information elements to be included in the 
different explanations. There were some individual differences in the 
rating of the explanations that point to the need for personalization. 
Currently, the explanations and design patterns are being integrated 
in a CDSS prototype, and will be further tested on their understand­
ability, trust development and decision-making performance. This study 

will entail different sessions to study learning, trust development and 
performance change over time. To extend the scope and test the 
genericity of the explanation design patterns, the development and 
evaluation will include different types of use cases (e.g., child mental 
health, adult diabetes management) and users (e.g. clinicians and 
patients).