Original Paper

Development of a Connected Sensor System in Colorectal
Surgery: User-Centered Design Case Study

Christel Schwartz-Lasfargues1,2, MSc; Camille Roux-Gendron3, MSc; Pim Edomskis4, MD; Isabelle Marque1,2, PhD;
Yves Bayon5, PhD; Johan F Lange4, MD, PhD; Jean Luc Faucheron6,7, MD, PhD; Bertrand Trilling6,7, MD, PhD

1Public Health Department, CHU Grenoble Alpes, Grenoble, France
2Inserm CIC 1406, Université Grenoble Alpes, Grenoble, France
3Floralis, Grenoble Alps University, Grenoble, France
4Department of Surgery, Erasmus Medical Centre, Rotterdam, Netherlands
5Medtronic – Sofradim Production, Trevoux, France
6Colorectal Surgery Unit, Visceral Surgery and Acute Care Surgery Department, CHU Grenoble Alpes, Grenoble, France
7TIMC, Université Grenoble Alpes, Centre National de Recherche Scientifique, Grenoble INP, Grenoble, France

Isabelle Marque, PhD
Public Health Department
CHU Grenoble Alpes
Pavillon Taillefer
Grenoble, 38700
France
Phone: 33 476767961

Methods

Ethics Approval

All participants in Rotterdam provided oral consent and
participated voluntarily without a dependency situation. Ethical
approval was not sought in the Netherlands for this study, as it
is not subject to the Medical Research Involving Human
Subjects Act (Wet Medisch-Wetenschappelijk Onderzoek met
Mensen [28]), according to the guidelines of the Erasmus
Medical Center’s ethical committee (Medisch Ethische
Toetsings Commissie [29]) and the Netherlands’ national
legislation [30].

All participants in Grenoble provided oral consent. Ethical
approval was not sought in France. As a noninterventional
human factors study, which posed minimal risk to the
participants, this study was deemed to fall outside the scope of
the Jardé Law [31].

A Cooperative Design Methodology

To develop this system, a UCD approach was
implemented as described in standard International Standards Organization
9241-210 and standard IEC 62366-1:2015. The process required
all design choices to be systematically assessed by the users.

For this case study, a cooperative design methodology was
chosen to benefit from the active participation of future users
alongside other stakeholders. This methodology allowed future
users to actively and creatively participate in device design [32].

In the cognitive ergonomics literature, many possible methods
have been proposed to integrate users and designers in the
dynamic process of system development [32]. The following
data collection techniques were implemented here (as described
in Figure 2): observations, participatory design through
workshops (with Medtronic, Maatel,

Figure 2. Outline of the methodology used—designed by the authors. OR: operating room.

Commissariat à l’énergie atomique et aux énergies alternatives,
and Grenoble-Alpes University), and formative evaluation
through user tests (with Grenoble-Alpes University Hospital
Erasmus and Grenoble-Alpes University).

This methodology was implemented from the beginning of the
project, in parallel with the technical development of the device.
The specificity of our intervention was that a first iterative loop

JMIR Hum Factors 2022 | vol. 9 | iss. 3 | e31529 | p. 4

(observation, design, and formative evaluation) was completed
before producing a functional prototype system.

This methodology aimed to address 2 important challenges at
this stage of the project.

As the users of this device are potentially numerous (surgeons,
OR nurses, and department nurses), the first challenge was to
define how and when the different stakeholders could interact
with the system, from the OR till the patient’s discharge. The
system should be smoothly integrated into the daily clinical
practice.

The second challenge was to propose technical characteristics
for the development of the system, such as the size, weight, and
attachment system on the patient.

Analyses of the Existing State (January 2019 to
February 2019)

Analyzing the overall background of the industrial partner’s
project shed light on the key points to be addressed:

1.
Commercial: market and competitive landscape study
2.
Technical: work on biomarkers [24-27] and development
of connected pH and lactic acid sensors
3.
Use of the device: initial feedback from expert health
professionals (voice of the customer) on the clinical needs
and means to address them and storyboard presenting how
the device will be used by experts
4.
Literature review

From the first clinical needs identified, these documents helped
to define a strategy for the technical deployment and wide
adoption of the device, considering the future users and how
the new device can be integrated into their practice. The
knowledge at the beginning of the project was mainly provided
by experts, without fully integrating the realities in the hospital
setting. The initial focus of this case study was interest in the
system, rather than its real future use and the corresponding
challenges.

Thus, close observation of the actual work of future users should
provide valuable knowledge, serving as a basis for the whole
UCD.

Observations (March 2019 to May 2019)

In all, 2 European hospitals were recruited as partners in the
project, the Erasmus Medical Center in Rotterdam (the
Netherlands) and Grenoble-Alpes University Hospital (France),
to include complementary dimensions in the project (different
countries and organizations; involvement in similar projects).
Moreover, Erasmus Medical Center was involved in 2 clinical
studies with Medtronic to determine the interest in biomarker
use [24,32], and Grenoble-Alpes University Hospital is
intensively committed to evaluate innovative medical devices,
with a group entirely comprising experts in UCD approaches.
As cultural and organizational differences were expected,
observations were conducted at both sites. In Grenoble,
observations were conducted by 2 usability engineers. In
Rotterdam, they were performed by a usability engineer, a
French surgeon, and a Dutch physician.

Several visits were made to observe routine practices and
analyze the work of the various participants (surgeon, nurse
manager, nurse, and nurse assistant in the operating theater and
hospital ward). A total of 5 elective procedures (laparoscopy
and laparotomy) were observed, 1 at Erasmus Medical Center
and 4 at the Grenoble-Alpes University Hospital. Totally, 5
shifts (morning, afternoon, and night shifts) were observed in
the digestive ward of the Grenoble-Alpes University Hospital.
In addition to the data gathered during the course of these
observations, interviews were conducted with several selected
users.

The objective of these observations was to understand the use
context, tasks to be completed, tools currently used, and how
conditions vary from day to day. These observation times
highlighted the needs and expectations of the target users and
the potential difficulties and constraints they may face. This
information was used to design a tool that would be easy to
integrate into the health care professionals’ daily practice.

Workshops (June 2019 to October 2019 and February
2020)

Participative workshops with members of the development team
were conducted to promote an efficient design of the medical
device. They were facilitated by the presence of 2 usability
engineers involved in the project. Industrial partners provided
complementary expertise with new and integrative ideas on the
development of the system [33]: Maatel for the development
of the IoT module, Commissariat à l’énergie atomique et aux
énergies alternatives for the development of the sensor module,
Medtronic for the global vision and commercial strategy of the
project, and usability engineers for the integration of the users’
needs.

A total of 4 themed workshops were set up in the Grenoble area.
The sessions were centered around the manipulation and
handling of the device in simulated condition. Thus, a life-size
mannequin’s bust and several drains were available in each
session.

The size and weight of the device were the subject of the first
workshop. To ensure the efficacy of the session, a mock-up of
the future device, electronic components similar to those that
will be used in the future device, a balance, and a ruler were
available. The manipulation of the objects provided support to
overcome the unavoidable technical constraints regarding the
needs of the users. Through exchanges and proposals, the
technically viable size and weight were determined.

The first version of the device was 3D printed with the
previously defined size and weight.

The second workshop was centered on connectivity between
the sensor and the IoT modules. Each member manipulated
different connection systems previously identified by the
usability engineers. The session ended with the selection of a
connection system that was both easy to handle, sufficiently
safe to avoid involuntary disconnection of the 2 modules, and
technically feasible.

The wireframe smartphone interface was the theme of the third
workshop. The first version was created by the usability

JMIR Hum Factors 2022 | vol. 9 | iss. 3 | e31529 | p. 5

engineers using Adobe Experience Design (Adobe). The aim
was to test the interface through different scenarios to readjust
the wireframe in preparation for user tests.

The final workshop was conducted after the usability tests (refer
to the Formative Evaluation Through Usability Tests section)
and focused on the device’s attachment system to the patient.

To affix the system, a technical constraint was the length of the
drain. The device should be placed at 10 cm from the abdomen
(to avoid degradation of exudates along the drain), which limits
the options for positioning the sensor module. As the system
has significant weight, the risk of it pulling the sutures holding
the drain in place as it exits the skin (major source of pain and
infection) must be considered. Therefore, it is necessary to be
able to attach it to the patient. During this workshop, attachment
systems used on stoma and urinary pouch, camera pouch, and
belt pouch were considered and manipulated to converge on an
ideal solution.

Working with low-level equipment has the advantage of
allowing the user to visualize how the device may be integrated
into their daily practice without hindering imagination. Using
systems that seem very mature or products that require high
developmental cost often hinders creativity. These workshops

promoted the rapid development of a prototype system, which
was tested with the expected users to obtain data from the
clinical field.

Formative Evaluation Through Usability Tests
(November 2019 to December 2019)

A total of 5 usability tests were organized with 13 participants:
3 groups with nurses and nurse assistants (n=2, 67% in Grenoble
and n=1, 33% in Rotterdam) and 2 groups with surgeons and
surgical residents (n=1, 50% in Grenoble and n=1, 50% in
Rotterdam), to compare views and analyze feedbacks. These
tests were conducted by 2 usability engineers.

Tests were performed using low-level mock-ups (3D-printed
model). They were sufficient at this stage of the study and
perfectly allowed users to project themselves to future use of
the tool. Thus, simple technical designs were developed, not
going as far as anything sufficiently tangible to be presented as
functional to future users.

To conduct the tests as efficiently as possible, a transportable
test kit (Figure 3) was developed in addition to the mock-ups
and wireframe smartphone interface. This kit included the test
protocols, a camera, and a mannequin bust.

Figure 3. Usability test setup.

The aim of the Exucheck project was explained to all the
participants before the start of the usability tests. Participants
were free to ask questions, and all questions were answered.
During the test, participants were asked to perform a set of tasks
that they may be asked to perform in the future, using the whole
prototype system (sensor, IoT modules, and wireframe
smartphone interface). For example, they were instructed as
follows:

The patient (Mrs. de Groot Ann) is coming out of
surgery. A drain was placed after the surgery. To
analyse the exudates, the surgeon placed an

“Exucheck” sensor on the drain. You must now plug
the IoT module into the sensor in order to get the
exudate analysis. You have a Smartphone that will
guide you through the different steps to install the IoT
module. It's your turn now!
Participants could stop any suggested task during the usability
test. It was emphasized that it was the Exucheck system that
was tested, not the participants. All participants provided their
consent to participate in the usability tests and have the session
recorded by video and audio for subsequent analysis.

JMIR Hum Factors 2022 | vol. 9 | iss. 3 | e31529 | p. 6

The participants were able to comment on the size, shape, and
weight of the mock-ups and the ease of navigation on the
wireframe smartphone app.

User tests made it possible to do the following:

1.
Present the concept to future users.
2.
Gather early feedback to identify points that are not yet
addressed.
3.
Confirm or better understand clinical practice regarding the
introduction of the system.
4.
Identify cultural differences between Dutch and French
practices.
5.
Propose improvements to the system.

Results

Context in Which the Device Is Used

Field observations allow better understanding of the tasks,
interactions, and constraints associated with the context in which
the new system will be integrated. The aim of this case study
was to propose transparent and seamless integration of the
system into daily practice.

We initially assumed that the device would be fully deployed
at the end of colorectal surgery. However, the end of a surgery
corresponds to a phase in which the OR nurses are particularly
busy. Each additional task linked to the introduction of this
system can delay the operating schedule, which is undesirable
for the just-in-time organization of the operating theater. Thus,
another setup was proposed: only the sensor module must be
calibrated in the OR. When the patient returns to the ward after
surgery, a nurse and nurse assistant round occurs. Then, a few
additional minutes can be taken to attach and activate the IoT
module.

During hospitalization, and consistent with real hospital
organization, the best time to monitor the sensor data is as part
of standard nurse and nurse assistant rounds, when other
biological parameters are recorded (temperature, blood pressure,

etc). Every minute is accounted for in a hospital environment.
Over the course of observations and interviews, the fear of
adding to the workload was mentioned several times. Thus, it
is essential that the tool can be configured as quickly and
automatically as possible. Owing to the many daily constraints
faced by hospital staff, this device should not be seen as an
additional hurdle.

Daily practices were not significantly different in terms of
patient trajectory of care between the Grenoble-Alpes University
Hospital and Erasmus Medical Center. However, 2 main
distinctions were observed: lower frequency of nurse rounds in
Rotterdam than in Grenoble and the role of a physician assistant
to whom the nurses refer in Rotterdam. This role does not exist
in France. However, at this stage of the project, these differences
do not affect the integration of the medical device into daily
clinical practice.

The results of this observation phase are valuable as they
represent a rich source of information to refer to whenever a
change is made to the product over the course of its design.

To conclude, the workflow was enriched and validated through
the usability tests. The medical device was considered
compatible with the normal daily practice and workload of
health care professionals.

Features of the Exucheck System

The overall feedback on the features of the system was good
from all participants; they expressed interest in the concept.

Most future users were willing to test it (“When do you think
it will be available for clinical tests?” [surgeon]) and found the
concept easy to use (“Good. It is intuitive. It is not
complicated”).

Now, we present the features of each element of the system.

The Sensor and IoT Modules

The following recommendations emerged from dedicated
workshops and usability tests (Figure 4).

Figure 4. Main specifications of the sensor and Internet of Things (IoT) modules system.

JMIR Hum Factors 2022 | vol. 9 | iss. 3 | e31529 | p. 7

As the weight (maximum 100 g) of the device is a technical
constraint (sum of the weight of the electronic board and
estimated weight of the sensor module), the perception of load
was studied. This perception depends on the density of the

device. Thus, the density can be modified to evenly distribute
the weight, to reduce the impression of carrying a load.

The final design that was selected was curved (Figure 5) to
reduce the impression of bulkiness that users mentioned about
the previous 3D model (a parallelepiped).

Figure 5. Illustration showing the curved design.

Regarding the connection between the two modules, the
participatory design led to the following:

1.
Mechanical connection was made through the lateral
buttons. Magnet will be used. Push buttons were
recommended for the final design.
2.
Electrical connection was made through a pin in the IoT
module that activates the sensor module when the IoT
module is plugged onto the sensor module.

Device Attachment

The main technical constraint for attaching the system was the
length of the drain placed at 10 cm from the abdomen. Usability
tests revealed the criticality of this issue, with differing views
among the nurses, nurses’ assistants, and physicians on where
and how to affix the device. The workshop dedicated to this
aspect also did not result in consensus on a potential placement
and fixation of the system. It was concluded that more technical
tests were required to remove certain constraints and ensure
that the device met the practitioners’ requirements.

Thus, how the system should be placed on the patient remains
to be resolved. The following key parameters were identified:
diameter and length (10 cm) of the drain between the sensor
module and where the drain exits the skin (Figure 6). To
progress on resolving this question, a functional prototype
system is required. Currently, two strategies can be envisaged:

1.
Seeking solutions and continuing the design iteration cycles.
This strategy will allow clinical studies to begin with a more
complete device that is close to the commercial device. The
clinical study can be used as a support for the summative
evaluation to complete the usability file for European
Conformity marking [34].
2.
Pursuing the proof of concept with a clinical study, despite
this issue. This strategy will allow verification of the
technical efficacy of the system. Furthermore, it can be
used to identify key points to choose the most suitable
solution. For example, if the measurements at 10 cm and
50 cm from the exit through the skin are similarly reliable,
the sensor and IoT modules can be placed further from the
patient’s abdomen. This possibility will allow great freedom
on where to place the system.

JMIR Hum Factors 2022 | vol. 9 | iss. 3 | e31529 | p. 8

Figure 6. Illustration showing the issue regarding placement of the device on the drain attached to the patient’s abdomen.

The Display Module

A wireframe interface of the mobile app was created using
Adobe Experience Design (Figure 7).

Over the course of discussions with nurses, issues with
smartphone type, screen size, security, robustness, and risk of
theft were discussed.

Regarding the mobile app, the feedback was positive, indicating
that the handling was intuitive, even for professionals who are
not particularly technically aware. However, it was

recommended that the font size be increased and access to the
results be simplified by minimizing the number of clicks or
even eliminating them. For example, the staff suggested that
simply bringing the phone close to the sensor and IoT modules
should trigger the display of results.

Regarding the use of a medical device based on a smartphone,
the health care professionals are open to the idea of having a
small touch-sensitive device. The main fear was theft or damage
of the device. Therefore, it is important that it is robust and not
very attractive to avoid being stolen.

JMIR Hum Factors 2022 | vol. 9 | iss. 3 | e31529 | p. 9

Figure 7. Wireframe smartphone interface for the display module.

Discussion

Strengths of the Study

The 
implemented 
methodology, 
through 
observations,
workshops, and usability tests, contributed to resolve the 2
challenges (integration into the daily practice and technical
features) raised at the beginning of the study. The UCD enabled
us to converge toward a common vision of a solution that best
meets the requirements of the field and the technical constraints.
At the end of this first stage of the project, we obtained a set of
recommendations. This medical device will be developed
according to feedback from technical tests and the next feedback
from users.

The importance of implementing a UCD approach as early as
possible in an innovative project was largely confirmed by the
results obtained from this case study. Key points to be
considered when working on a medical device are discussed
below.

First, a UCD implemented at the earliest stage in the
development of a medical device makes it possible to guide the
design and plan the new technology such that it is consistent
with the various users’ (physician, surgeon, nurse, etc) daily
practices, almost from the beginning. This type of approach
guides toward a solution that will be easy to integrate into
current care practices in an abdominal surgery department, while
remaining technically feasible. Meetings and discussions with
future users as early as possible ensure that strategic decisions
are made appropriately, such as relating to the shape of the
system and its operating mode. Beginning with technical
developments can be counterproductive (loss of time and
money) if they are not adapted to the reality in the field. By
considering the end users’ feedback from the earliest stages of
the design process, it becomes possible to develop robust
specifications for the technical partners within a limited time
frame. The cycle of observations, workshops, tests, and new
versions of the prototype systems was completed within 12
months, before the culmination of technical development.

Second, the techniques and tools selected were relevant to the
context of this medical device and the time frame of the project.

In particular, when designing a medical device for use in a
hospital environment, it is important to consider the entire life
cycle of the system. In our case, observations began when the
device was implemented during abdominal surgery (ie,
preparation of the OR) and were continued till the patient was
discharged from the hospital. Observation of all the steps
allowed a systemic view of the patient’s trajectory and helped
to understand how the system can be integrated into the care
trajectory. Multiple interactions around the patient were noted,
which allowed us to envisage how the system will be managed
by the distinct groups of health care professionals.

Workshops organized with industrial project partners created a
real, dynamic environment around product design. For the case
presented here, each workshop was dedicated to a specific
developmental aspect: shape of the system, attachment system,
and so on, making them attractive, concise, and effective. Each
member of the project brought their own expertise based on
their field experience and shed light on the expectations of future
users based on the data collected during the observation phase.
The workshop format was found to be particularly efficient. A
wealth of results was obtained over a short period with minimal
financial investment. Moreover, by remaining in touch with the
needs of end users—medical staff and patients—the team
maintained a realistic approach to the system’s design, which
gave great meaning to the project. Thus, this approach quickly
reinforced synergies between partners by decompartmentalizing
expertise.

From the beginning of the project, using low-level material
made it easy to illustrate what was being said and develop the
concept. In our project, a simple 3D print, a drain, and a
mannequin bust allowed good projection, for both the future
users and the project team. Touching and manipulating elements
makes the experience more tangible and generates very rich
feedback. In the early stages of a project, functional prototype
systems are not necessary or even recommended. Proposing
handmade prototype systems encourages users to modify them
and propose improvements.

Finally, user involvement is central to a UCD approach and
requires appropriate strategies for each situation and project,
particularly, in a hospital environment. Significant responsibility

JMIR Hum Factors 2022 | vol. 9 | iss. 3 | e31529 | p. 10

is involved, as patients’health depends on the work of the health
care staff. Moreover, the health care team’s time is precious,
and their availability depends on their working hours, which
are often staggered. To adapt to these constraints, it is necessary
to do the following:

1.
Anticipate the time and financial resources needed to
facilitate the participation of nurses and physicians [10].
As this case study was conducted as part of the Exucheck
project, associating the health care professionals as partners
in the definition of the project was key to their involvement.
2.
Be available. This made it possible to conduct observations
throughout the nurses’ and physicians’ work, regardless of
their working hours. When integrating a new medical device
into a department, the atmosphere and tasks differ over the
24-hour period; this can have an impact on how a device
is used and on nurses’and physicians’interactions with the
system. By appointing 2 usability engineers to work together
on the project, a large number of situations could be
observed and the results could be compared.
3.
Be reactive. An evaluation kit that was always ready and
transportable was an asset when conducting user tests. This
kit allowed rapid access to the field to exchange views with
the team on a last-minute slot and bring the device
evaluation tools as close as possible to the nurses’ and
physicians’ workplace.
4.
Adapt the organization of user tests. Nurse–nurse assistant
pairs were involved, which helped their projection into
conceptual innovations. As a result of
shared awareness
[35] between users, new ideas were more forthcoming and
converged more rapidly toward a solution through a limited
number of tests. A clinical team should share their practices
to help in designing technologies for the team. However,
bias can occur as a result of hierarchical relationships within
the team conducting tests. The usability engineers must
remain vigilant during tests to ensure that they are gathering
all points of view.

Limitations

One of the recognized limitations of UCD is that it considers
only end user feedback for design choices and addresses
technical constraints in parallel. The co-design approach that
we used enabled us to remain as vigilant as possible on this
point and to continually confront the needs and expectations of
users regarding the technical constraints. However, we note that
on certain aspects, notably the attachment of the system to the
patient, our methodology has not yet succeeded in proposing a
convincing solution. This shows that the user does not always
have answers to the problems and that the proposed solutions
are sometimes technically unfeasible. Therefore, it is important
to set up new design loops involving the end user and the
technical team in the design choices. This is especially true as
users can evolve, change their minds, gain expertise, and
transform their practice. Therefore, our role is to keep a critical
eye on their feedback and be open to any request for change. It
is also important to bear in mind that every technological
advance can call an initial user need into question and vice
versa.

Although patients are end users of the medical device, they were
not consulted for this project. This was a conscious decision
related to the level of progress of the development. In this first
phase, the daily life of the patients was observed and analyzed
in concertation with nurses and physicians. When a functional
system is developed, feedback from patients will be essential.
At this stage, there were several questions about the system and
how it works to take full advantage of patient feedback.

Another limitation was that observations at both sites occurred
only during elective surgical interventions. Thus, the results
and recommendations do not consider the specificities of
emergency surgery.

The study did not mention criteria such as safety (for the patient
and 
health 
professional), 
sterilization 
or 
disinfection
requirements, biocompatibility materials, antireflux system, and
so on. By mutual agreement between the partners, these points
have not been considered as priority in this early phase of the
project and will be analyzed at a later stage in the mandatory
process of risk analysis linked to usability engineering, when
the first prototype is available.

Conclusions

This paper presents the deployment over 12 months of a UCD
methodology for the design of an innovative medical device
during its early development phase.

The approach was implemented at the beginning of the project,
from the concept of the medical device, and in parallel to
overcoming technical barriers. The advantages of integrating
the usability of the device during this step and in close
collaboration with the technical teams, notably through
workshops, were the following:

1.
Identify valuable technical features (eg, shape, size, and
weight) for hardware integration of the sensor module, IoT
module, and software interface and avoid unnecessary
generation of functional hardware that fails to meet needs.
This approach promotes cost-effective development with
minimized iterations.
2.
Rapidly counterbalance user constraints with technical
solutions.
3.
Gather initial positive indications of future adoption of the
system. This encourages continued technical development
and financial investment.

The key to the success of our case study was the techniques
implemented (observations, workshops, and usability tests); our
adaptation to collecting user feedback in a hospital environment
with constraints, particularly in terms of the availability of
nursing staff; and finally, the active and enthusiastic involvement
of the project team. The interest of the whole team in the results
of the usability study and in the technical advances also
facilitated their appropriation and integration over the course
of the project.

The results show that involving various stakeholders around
the notion of usability from the beginning of a project is possible
through the implementation of immersive and collaborative
techniques and through the very early manipulation of
nonfunctional prototype systems.

JMIR Hum Factors 2022 | vol. 9 | iss. 3 | e31529 | p. 11

The targeted objective was achieved. Technical and functional
specifications were obtained within a few months. The UCD
approach did not hamper technical development and, in contrast,
optimized and enriched the development directions. The
specifications consider future uses, needs of professionals, and
technical constraints, while also facilitating future device
integration within the hospital and as part of the patients’
trajectory.

This study presents the first iterative loop within the framework
of a UCD approach. This starts the usability engineering file
according to standard IEC 62366-1:2015 to ensure compliance
with European Regulation 2017/45. The approach will support
the continuation of the project through other iterations until the
final version of the system is produced.