Development of mass media resources to
improve the ability of parents of primary
school children in Uganda to assess the
trustworthiness of claims about the effects
of treatments: a human-centred design
approach

Daniel Semakula1,2, Allen Nsangi1,2, Matt Oxman3, Sarah Ellen Rosenbaum3, Andrew David Oxman2,3*,
Astrid Austvoll-Dahlgren3, Claire Glenton3, Simon Lewin3,4, Margaret Kaseje5, Angela Morelli6, Atle Fretheim2,3 and
Nelson Kaulukusi Sewankambo1

Methods
We used design thinking methods. Design thinking es-
pouses five major steps: (1) empathising to define the
problem, (2) defining the problem, (3) ideation, (4)
prototyping (experimenting on potential solutions) and
(5) testing [34]. We overlaid design thinking with a
human-centred design approach [35–38]. This ap-
proach is characterised by multiple iterative cycles of
development. For simplicity, we have summarised that
process into four steps: (1) idea generation, (2) proto-
typing, (3) user testing and (4) analysis and incorpor-
ation of findings (Fig. 1).

Setting
This project was implemented in Central Uganda. The
majority (over 70%) of people live in rural areas only
slightly more than 30% have attained at least secondary
school education [39].

Participants
Different participants were involved at different stages as
described in Table 1, which presents a chronological
descriptive summary of each phase and who partici-
pated. Throughout the project, we established and main-
tained contact with a national advisory panel consisting
of officials from three government ministries (health,
education and one concerned with children, labour, gen-
der and social development). We also established and
maintained contact with a network of teachers, and jour-
nalists, editors of Ugandan media enterprises and com-
munication specialists, whose role was to advise on
strategies for successful implementation of the project.
In an early phase of the project, our principal target
audiences were “mass media intermediaries”—journalists

Fig. 1 One cycle of a human-centred design process

Page 2 of 17

Table 1 Overview of the methods, key activities and participants in each phase of the development process

Method type/date
Participants
Description of key activities

Idea generation and exploratory prototypes

Review of existing
resources
February 2013 to
September 2014

The research team (AA, AM, AN,
AO, CG, DS, SL, SR)
We searched for and reviewed existing mass
media resources that teach the
key concepts.

Idea generation
workshop
(participatory
collaboration)
February 2013

Researchers, teachers and
journalists from Indonesia, Nepal,
Norway, Uganda and the UK

At the 3-day kick-off meeting for the project, the
research team together with invited
teachers and journalists (18 people) discussed
which concepts to focus on and
brainstormed about potential resources.

Prioritisation of
key concepts
(participatory
collaboration)
August 2013

The journalists’ network in
Uganda (25 journalists) [17]
At a 3-day workshop, the journalists assessed the
relevance of a list of 32 key concepts
to journalists and their audiences.

Prototyping
workshop (facilitation
and non-participatory
observation)
September 2013

The journalists’ network in
Uganda, (25 journalists)
This was a full-day workshop at which journalists
brainstormed and created prototypes.

Idea generation
meetings and
prototyping
(participatory
collaboration)
October 2013 to
October 2014

The research team (AA, AM,
AN, AO, CG, DS, LN, MK, MO,
NS, SL, SR)

We had a series of meetings during which
we brainstormed. One idea was a service
that would provide structured press releases,
including application of the key concepts
to a treatment claim. We prototyped one press
release. Another was a wire service
that would produce short stories that would explain
key concepts to readers and
listeners in the context of news about a specific
treatment claim. We prototyped two
examples of stories produced by such a news service;
one as a print story and one as
a radio programme.

Focus group
feedback (focus
group discussion and
semi-structured
interviews)
October 2014

Four media editors, a journalist
and a health communication
specialist. Four random members
of the public

Structured press releases: The participants read the
press release, and then
provided feedback.

Focus group
feedback (focus
group discussion and
semi-structured
interviews)
October 2014

Four media editors, a journalist
and a communication specialist.
Four random members of the
nonacademic public.

News service: The participants read or listened to
each of the stories and then
provided feedback. Following this, we interviewed
three of the participants of the
focus group discussion and each of the four
members of the public

Semi-structured
interviews
October 2014

Four members of the
general public
The participants listened to and read the prototypes
of the messages and provided
feedback about the news service. Any problems
identified were noted and
followed up.

Analysis of findings
and idea generation
October 2014

The research team (AA, AM,
AN, AO, CG, DS, LN, MK, MO,
NS, SL, SR)

We reviewed the feedback on the news service
prototype and generated ideas
to address the problems that we identified.

Version 1. The Health Choices (radio) programme (v1)

V1 Development of
a prototype
October 2014 to
April 2015

The research team (AA, AM,
AN, AO, CG, DS, MO, SL, SR)
We outlined plans for a series of what we initially
thought of as a radio programme
and prepared prototypes of two versions of the
first episode; one using an interview
format and one using a story format.

V1 User testing
in Uganda,
(semi-structured
interviews)
April 2015

Two health journalists and
four other members of
the nonacademic public

Two versions of prototype 1 were tested in sequence.
First, the participants listened to
the first version of the prototype (1a) and provided
early feedback. We then
user-tested an alternative prototype (1b) of the same
contents as the first with a

Page 3 of 17

Table 1 Overview of the methods, key activities and participants in each phase of the development process (Continued)

Method type/date
Participants
Description of key activities

story-based theme. Prototype 1b was partly based on
early feedback from the testing
of prototype 1a.

V1 Analysis and idea
generation for V2
May 2015

The research team (AA, AM,
AO, CG, DS, MK, MO, NS, SL, SR)
We analysed the feedback and discussed findings
from the user testing and feedback
on the first version of the IHC podcast and generated
ideas to address the problems
that were identified.

Version 2. The IHC podcast (v2)

Interviews with parents to identify
relevant claims
(semi-structured
interviews)
March–April 2015

30 parents
We interviewed parents to identify health conditions
and treatments that were relevant to them.

V2 Development
of the second
complete prototype
June to August 2015

The research team (AA, AM, AN,
AO, CG, DS, MK, MO, NS, SL, SR)
Radio producer, actors, journalists
and parents of primary school
children

We prepared a series of nine episodes targeted at
the parents of primary school
children in Uganda. MO prepared a script for each
episode, which was edited by DS
and AO, and other team members provided feedback.
A professional radio producer
and actors produced the episodes.

V2 User testing and
piloting in Uganda
(semi-structured
interviews)
September to
December 2015

28 parents and 7 research
assistants
28 parents listened to the podcast. We interviewed
them after they listened to each
episode. With the help of the parents and research
assistants, we also piloted a
method for delivering the podcast to the parents in
areas where they live and work,
collecting feedback on the method and technologies used.

V2 Analysis and idea
generation for V3
December 2015
to January 2016

The research team (AA, AM, AN,
AO, CG, DS, LN, MK, MM, MO,
NS, SL, SR)
Radio producer, journalists
and parents.

We entered the findings into a Google spreadsheet.
For each finding, AN, AO, DS, MM,
MO and SR coded its importance (very important,
important or less important);
whether it was a problem, an idea or positive feedback;
and whether it applied to the
entire podcast, a specific episode or was a repeat of a
previous finding. The findings
were summarised for the research team and the major
findings and plans for the third
version, and the community trial were discussed and agreed.

Version 3. The final IHC podcast (v3)

V3 Development of
the final podcast
January to March 2016

The research team (AA, AM, AN,
AO, CG, DS, LN, MK, MM, MO,
NS, SL, SR)
Radio producer, actors, musicians,
parents of primary school children,
other members of the
general public

MO prepared new scripts, which were edited by DS and AO.
Other team members
provided feedback. DS translated scripts to Luganda. DS, AN,
AO prepared the lyrics to
the theme song. Other members provided feedback. A
professional musician was
commissioned to edit the lyrics and produce the song. A
professional radio producer
and actors produced the episodes. DS, AN, AO and MO
reviewed the produced
episodes and suggested edits to the production.

Review of existing
resources
February 2013 to
September 2014

The research team (AA, AM,
AN, AO, CG, DS, SL, SR)
We searched for and reviewed existing mass media
resources that teach the
key concepts.

Idea generation
workshop
(participatory
collaboration)
February 2013

Researchers, teachers and
journalists from Indonesia, Nepal,
Norway, Uganda and the UK

At the 3-day kick-off meeting for the project, the
research team together with invited
teachers and journalists (18 people) discussed which
concepts to focus on and brain
stormed about potential resources.

Prioritisation of
key concepts
(participatory
collaboration)
August 2013

The journalists’ network in
Uganda (25 journalists) [17]
At a 3-day workshop, the journalists assessed the
relevance of a list of 32 key concepts
to journalists and their audiences.

Page 4 of 17

Table 1 Overview of the methods, key activities and participants in each phase of the development process (Continued)

Method type/date
Participants
Description of key activities

Prototyping
workshop (facilitation
and non-participatory
observation)
September 2013

The journalists’ network in
Uganda, (25 journalists)
This was a full-day workshop at which journalists
brainstormed and created prototypes.

Idea generation
meetings and
prototyping
(participatory
collaboration)
October 2013
to October 2014

The research team (AA, AM,
AN, AO, CG, DS, LN, MK, MO,
NS, SL, SR)

We had a series of meetings during which we
brainstormed. One idea was a service
that would provide structured press releases,
including application of the key concepts
to a treatment claim. We prototyped one press
release. Another was a wire service
that would produce short stories that would explain
key concepts to readers and
listeners in the context of news about a specific treatment
claim. We prototyped two
examples of stories produced by such a news service;
one as a print story and one as
a radio programme.

Focus group
feedback (focus
group discussion and
semi-structured
interviews)
October 2014

Four media editors, a journalist
and a health communication
specialist. Four random members
of the public

Structured press releases: The participants read the
press release, and then
provided feedback.

Focus group
feedback (focus
group discussion and
semi-structured
interviews)
October 2014

Four media editors, a journalist
and a communication specialist.
Four random members of the
nonacademic public.

News service: The participants read or listened to
each of the stories and then
provided feedback. Following this, we interviewed
three of the participants of the
focus group discussion and each of the four members
of the public

Semi-structured
interviews
October 2014

Four members of the
general public
The participants listened to and read the prototypes
of the messages and provided
feedback about the news service. Any problems
identified were noted and
followed up.

Analysis of findings
and idea generation
October 2014

The research team (AA, AM,
AN, AO, CG, DS, LN, MK, MO,
NS, SL, SR)

We reviewed the feedback on the news service prototype
and generated ideas to
address the problems that we identified.

Version 1. The Health Choices
(radio) programme (v1)

V1 Development of
a prototype
October 2014 to April 2015

The research team (AA, AM,
AN, AO, CG, DS, MO, SL, SR)
We outlined plans for a series of what we initially
thought of as a radio programme
and prepared prototypes of two versions of the first
episode; one using an interview
format and one using a story format.

V1 User testing
in Uganda
(semi-structured
interviews)
April 2015

Two health journalists and four
other members of the
nonacademic public

Two versions of prototype 1 were tested in sequence.
First, the participants listened to
the first version of the prototype (1a) and provided early
feedback. We then
user-tested an alternative prototype (1b) of the same
contents as the first with a
story-based theme. Prototype 1b was partly based on
early feedback from the testing
of prototype 1a.

V1 Analysis and idea
generation for V2
May 2015

The research team (AA, AM,
AO, CG, DS, MK, MO, NS, SL, SR)
We analysed the feedback and discussed findings from
the user testing and feedback
on the first version of the IHC podcast and generated
ideas to address the problems
that were identified.

Version 2. The IHC podcast (v2)

Interviews with
parents to identify
relevant claims
(semi-structured
interviews)
March–April 2015

30 parents
We interviewed parents to identify health conditions and treatments that were
relevant to them.

Page 5 of 17

and editorial news teams. Aiming to reach a broader public
through intermediaries, we explored ideas about resources
we might develop to support their work, so they could report
health stories about treatment claims more critically and in-
formatively. We established a network of 25 Uganda journal-
ists with interest and experience in health reporting, to
generate resource ideas and provide feedback on prototypes.
These were conveniently selected based on their availability
and interest in health reporting and in the project. We re-
cruited them by contacting leaders of three major health
journalists’ professional organisations in Uganda (Uganda
Science Journalists’ Association, Health Journalists Network
of Uganda and Uganda Health Communication Alliance)
and the national professional organisation for journalists
(Uganda Journalists’ Association). We asked them to avail us
with names of journalists and media practitioners involved in
health-related reporting. We describe this process in greater
detail in another report [31]. We also recruited a group of
editors from Uganda media houses, based on recommenda-
tions from the journalists in our network and others working
in mass media organisations.
In subsequent phases, our focus shifted to creating re-
sources that would target mass media audiences directly

instead of through intermediaries. In order to narrow
our focus further and to complement the set of learning-
resources we were developing for children in primary
schools, we defined our target audience as the parents of
primary school children in Uganda We recruited parents
with children in year five of primary school who, like the
journalist network, participated by generating ideas and
providing feedback on prototypes and the subsequent
versions of the resources.
The research team participated in idea generation, data
analysis
and
prototype
refinement.
It
included
re-
searchers with backgrounds in health systems research,
journalism, public health, medicine, social sciences and
information design. We engaged professional radio pre-
senters, actors, musicians and music producers to help
develop the final versions of the mass media resources.

Procedures
The development work entailed five phases: (1) review
of existing resources and prioritisation of key concepts,
(2) idea generation and exploratory prototypes, (3) ver-
sion 1 of what became the IHC podcast, (4) version 2 of

Table 1 Overview of the methods, key activities and participants in each phase of the development process (Continued)

Method type/date
Participants
Description of key activities

V2 Development of
the second complete
prototype
June to August 2015

The research team (AA, AM, AN,
AO, CG, DS, MK, MO, NS, SL, SR)
Radio producer, actors, journalists
and parents of primary school
children

We prepared a series of nine episodes targeted
at the parents of primary school
children in Uganda. MO prepared a script for
each episode, which was edited by DS
and AO and other team members provided feedback.
A professional radio producer
and actors produced the episodes.

V2 User testing and
piloting in Uganda
(semi-structured
interviews)
September to
December 2015

28 parents and 7 research
assistants
28 parents listened to the podcast. We interviewed
them after they listened to each
episode. With the help of the parents and research
assistants, we also piloted a
method for delivering the podcast to the parents in
areas where they live and work,
collecting feedback on the method and technologies used.

V2 Analysis and idea
generation for V3
December 2015 to
January 2016

The research team (AA, AM, AN,
AO, CG, DS, LN, MK, MM, MO, NS,
SL, SR)
Radio producer, journalists and
parents.

We entered the findings into a Google spreadsheet. For
each finding, DS, AN, AO, MM,
MO and SR coded its importance (very important, important
or less important);
whether it was a problem, an idea or positive feedback;
and whether it applied to the
entire podcast, a specific episode or was a repeat of a
previous finding. The findings
were summarised for the research team and the major
findings and plans for the third
version, and the community trial were discussed and agreed.

Version 3. The final IHC podcast (v3)

V3 Development of
the final podcast
January to March 2016

The research team (AA, AM, AN,
AO, CG, DS, LN, MK, MM, MO, NS,
SL, SR)
Radio producer, actors, musicians,
parents of primary school children,
other members of the
general public

MO prepared new scripts, which were edited by DS and
AO. Other team members
provided feedback. DS translated scripts to Luganda. DS,
AN, AO prepared the lyrics to
the theme song. Other members provided feedback. A
professional musician was
commissioned to edit the lyrics and produce the song.
A professional radio producer
and actors produced the episodes. DS, AN, AO and MO
reviewed the produced episodes and suggested edits to the production.

Page 6 of 17

the IHC podcast and (5) version 3 of the IHC podcast
(Fig. 2).

Review of existing resources and prioritisation of key
concepts
We searched for and reviewed existing mass media and
other resources designed to improve public understand-
ing of health information and their ability to assess the
trustworthiness of information about claims of the ef-
fects of treatments in the mass media. We searched rele-
vant databases for published literature and contacted
researchers
in
relevant
fields
[40,
41].
We
held
workshops with key stakeholders such as journalists to
set priorities for key concepts for which we should de-
velop resources [31].

Idea generation
To generate new ideas for resources to be developed, we
conducted brainstorming sessions both within our research
team and with the journalists network [42]. In addition, we
conducted a 1-day workshop with journalists in which we
explained to them the idea and asked for their contribu-
tions (Additional file 1).

Prototyping
We collected all of the ideas that we generated in a
spreadsheet from which we selected ideas for prototyp-
ing (Additional file 1). The criteria used to decide which
ideas to develop resources for is summarised in Table 2
below.
Working with information designers and journalists, we
converted written descriptions of ideas into prototypes.

For example, for ideas about print-based news stories, we
wrote actual news stories based on claims about treatment
effects in the media, while for ideas of radio programmes
we
produced
and
recorded
a
version
of
a
radio
programme. These prototypes were then shared with po-
tential users, journalists and members of our research
team for user testing and feedback.

User testing and feedback
We varyingly used a combination of concurrent and
retrospective think aloud and retrospective probing
methods of formative usability testing to monitor peo-
ple’s understanding of the content of our products along
the development pathway. In the concurrent think aloud
method,
testers
are
encouraged
to
verbalise
their
thoughts as they test a service while in retrospective
think aloud method, they recall their thoughts and can
relay them in post-use interviews and discussions [43].
For instance, to collect feedback about a news service
idea, we presented an example of a news story that
might come from such a service to a group including ed-
itors, a journalist and a communication specialist. As
they read it, they made notes on the articles, marking
areas where they had comments and sometimes voicing
those out in real time. In addition, we used prompts to
elicit discussion and feedback about the specific example
as well as the news service concept itself and took notes.
In addition to the focus group discussion, we inter-
viewed individual participants using a semi-structured
interview form, recorded the interviews and took notes.
In the later phases when we had created prototypes of
the podcast, we carried out user testing with people in
our
target
audience.
User
testing
is
a process
of

Fig. 2 Development flow chart for the IHC mass media resource. This is a summary of the development process as it unfolded across the
timescale of the project

Page 7 of 17

formative evaluation of a product or service that involves
observing a person using a product or service and
obtaining feedback during or shortly after they interact
with it [35, 36].
To assess changes in user experiences along the devel-
opment pathway, we interviewed user-test participants
serially at different stages of the design process. This
allowed us to monitor trends in perceptions about the
resources in development. We monitored for changes in
perceptions regarding the relevance, value, usefulness
and other facets of the user-experiences honeycomb
framework. We were able to tell when and how perspec-
tives changed with every new prototype and version of
the final resources.
We entered the feedback both from user-test par-
ticipants and from members of the research team
into Google spreadsheets. At least two researchers
from the IHC team working independently coded
each observation for each version of the IHC pod-
cast based on the importance of the finding and its
implications for changes to the podcast. The coding
was combined in a single spreadsheet, discussed by
the coders and consensus was reached (Table 3).
Based on these findings, we generated a list of prob-
lems
and
suggestions
for
changes.
We
discussed
major problems and brainstormed solutions to those
problems with the rest of the IHC team. After agree-
ing on the changes that we would make, we created
new prototypes to be user-tested and the design
cycle continued until we came up with a final prod-
uct. We used three main criteria to guide when to
end the development iterations:

1. Most of the problems of importance identified in
previous prototypes have been addressed as
evidenced by their absence in subsequent

prototypes and more positive feedback on areas
where those problems were.
2. Convergence of responses pertaining to
understanding of the content
3. No new major problems have been identified in
new prototypes as a result of changes made to
previous ones.

During the development of the second version of
the IHC podcast, we discussed methods for delivering
the podcast to our target audience. The feasibility of
these methods was assessed in a pilot exercise using
the completed episodes of version 2. The experiences
of research assistants and parents were captured using
a semi-structured interview form. Findings from this
process generated information about the practical re-
quirements for conducting a community-based rando-
mised trial evaluating the effectiveness of the podcast
[44] and informed our next steps in the development
and delivery of version 3 of the IHC podcast.

Results
Participants’ characteristics
Members of the journalists’ network included 14 females
and 11 males with a median age of 32 years and median
years of experience of 5 years. The majority (16 out of
25) worked with private media enterprises while the rest
worked with government (8 out of 25) or government-
private media partnerships (1 out of 25). Most (18 out of
25) worked in urban areas and had at least tertiary edu-
cation (23 out of 25).
Parents who participated in the user testing were
mainly female (20 out of 28), had a median age of 28
years, had an education level of primary or less (19 out
of 28) and were employed in the informal sector running
small home-based businesses (25 out of 28).

Table 2 Criteria for deciding on prototypes to develop

Criterion
Description

Contextual
appropriateness
The idea should align and be seen to align with the cultural, political norms and expectations
in the context where the intervention is to be developed

Feasibility
The ideas can potentially be developed easily and practically with resources that are readily
available in the context in which it is to be developed.

Cost
Developing the idea should have a reasonable cost, given the available budget and the
context in which the resources would be developed.

Flexibility
Resources developed using the idea could be used or changed in different ways, e.g. by
inserting or removing parts without causing a lot of problems.

Replicability
It should be possible to replicate the development of the resources without losing important
attributes and information

Transferability
To the extent possible, the resources or parts of the resources developed from the idea
should be able to be used in other contexts without much difficulty.

Self-reliant
Using the resources developed from the idea should depend on having other resources,
e.g. regular support from health workers or teachers.

Scalability
It should be possible to use the resources on a wider scale

Page 8 of 17

Review of existing resources and prioritisation of key
concepts
We reviewed a total of 415 eligible studies conducted
over the last seven decades. We found that only a hand-
ful of the interventions and evaluation tools described
included the key concepts that we deem important for
people to understand in order to be able to critically ap-
praise the trustworthiness of treatment claims. The key
concepts that appeared more frequently in interventions
were “Treatments may have beneficial and harmful ef-
fects”, “Comparisons of treatments should be fair”, “Like
should be compared with like” and “Single studies can
be misleading”. We identified a number of different
evaluation tools, but only four of these included 10 or
more key concepts. None covered all the key concepts.
These results are reported in detail elsewhere [40]. A
priority-setting exercise we conducted early in the pro-
ject participants found all six groups of the key concepts
to be important, applicable and understandable. The full
results from this phase are reported elsewhere [31].

Idea generation and exploratory prototypes
We initially intended to develop tools for journalists to
help them write articles and produce media programmes
that would enable the public to think more critically and
acquire skills to assess the trustworthiness of claims about
the effects of treatments. Through brainstorming sessions
with the research team and with journalists, we generated
many ideas for doing this. These included the following:

 Practical resources, such as structures for reporting
claims about treatment effects, visual aids that could be
used to present and explain research evidence, glossaries
of health research terms and plain language tools
 Training modules for journalists and journalism students
on reporting health research and critically assessing and
reporting claims about the effects of treatments
 A journalist network and a researcher network to
support journalists in reporting claims about
treatment effects

Tools such as these might help to address some barriers
to improving reports of treatment claims [45], such as dif-
ficulties making health research jargon understandable
and access to reliable sources of evidence. However, we
decided against these ideas because they would not ad-
dress important underlying barriers that make it difficult
for journalists to report more informatively such as com-
mercialism in the media (the need for journalists to sell
stories, which can conflict with providing balanced infor-
mation) and organisational constraints (such as editors
that can be an obstacle to preparing more informative
reporting of treatment claims). In addition, we thought
that, to the extent that we could develop effective tools for
journalists, it was unlikely that they would be widely used
outside of a small subset of health journalists, further lim-
iting their impact. Input from the journalist network sup-
ported the conclusion that developing tools for journalists
would have little if any impact in Uganda.
In the prototyping workshop, the journalists agreed
that radio was the best way to reach the broadest audi-
ence in Uganda. Most of the prototypes they developed
were live talk shows, a format that is popular in Uganda
involving health experts as panellists and journalists as
moderators. The pros and cons for using radio are sum-
marised in Table 4 below.

Shifting from resources targeting mass media
intermediaries to those for the general public
The findings above relating to difficulties associated
with developing resources for journalists led us to
shift focus from developing resources for supporting
media intermediaries to collaborating with them to
jointly produce and publish content. We proceeded to
develop two prototypes: first, a rapid response service
to meet the public’s needs for information about
assessing the trustworthiness of claims about the ef-
fects of treatments, and then a news wire service to
produce short stories for publication in the media
(Additional file 2). Co-producing and publishing con-
tent with journalists was also seen by journalists and

Table 3 Coding of the importance of feedback for the users’ experience

Category
Description

Highly important problem
A problem with the resources that must probably be addressed for the resources to be effective

Important problem
A problem with the resources that should probably be addressed for part of the resources to be effective

Problem
A superficial problem with the resources

Highly important positive feedback
Positive response that probably should inspire in changes to the resources

Important positive feedback
Praise that maybe should inspire changes to the resources

Positive feedback
Praise that validates the resources as they are

Highly important idea
An idea that probably should inspire changes to the resources

Important idea
An idea that maybe should inspire changes to the resources

Idea
An idea that probably should not inspire changes to the resources

Page 9 of 17

media intermediaries as a nonviable option. Key find-
ings from the feedback we received on these proto-
types are summarised in Table 5 below:
Based on these findings, we began to explore creating
a series of pre-recorded audio messages about assessing
the trsutworthiness of claims about the effects of treat-
ments. We decided to develop a programme that closely
resembled a live interview talk show. We worked with a
multidisciplinary team including journalists, professional
actors, editors, health professionals, health researchers
and members of our target audience to develop ideas,
write scripts and produce a series of pre-recorded audio
episodes. A pre-recorded radio show was chosen over a
live radio show because of the logistical and technical
challenges related to producing live radio shows such as
consistency in messaging by presenters and the reliance
on media-savvy researchers, skilled moderators, among
others. The scripts would be about assessing claims
about treatment effects, and recordings could be hosted
across multiple electronic media platforms. We initially
planned on producing this as a radio programme. Some
of the contents of the episodes are outlined in Table 6.

Version 1: the Health Choices radio programme
Because of the problems earlier identified with live radio, we
chose to produce a pre-recorded radio programme (Table 7).
User testing of the first prototype indicated that the de-
tailed explanations were valued, the opinions of members of
the public provided authenticity to the programme and the
health researcher and professor provided credibility to the
programme. However, we identified several problems as out-
lined below:

Problems associated with the first prototype: the health
choices radio programme

 The first episode was too long (15 min) and the
explanations were confusing. There was too much
information packed into a single episode, which
made it difficult to follow.
 Presenting two claims in one episode created
confusion about the take-home messages.

 The programme was not interactive; it had long
explanations which made it boring.
 The three members of the audience (in the
programme) had very strong opinions about the
claims, which were wrong and were sustained after
listening to the explanations and the evidence. In
addition, some of them introduced new claims about
treatment effects when giving their opinions about
the claims that we were discussing in the episode.
 The pre-recorded interview sounded unnatural
when scripted.

Incorporating feedback into the redesign of the programme
Based on the above findings, we decided to modify the for-
mat of the programme, to shorten each episode, to only
include one claim in each episode and not to include the
opinions of people from the target audience but to use a
skit to introduce the claim to be discussed. The skit was in
the form of a story. We produced a new prototype that
was 8 min, removed the long introduction, shortened the
explanations and the conclusion and only used one claim.
User testing with members of our target audience (adult
members of the public) indicated that the shorter version
was better than the previous version and that the explan-
ation using an analogy and examples was good.
However, listeners still confused the claim and the main
message about applying an IHC key concept to assess the
trustworthiness of the claim. They also still found the
programme boring, and the introduction too long. We
therefore decided to modify the format again and to pro-
duce a podcast series instead of a radio programme. This
enabled us to more easily define and reach a target audi-
ence. It also removed the constraints of the norms and ex-
pectations of radio programmes in Uganda and other
problems with radio programmes mentioned earlier.

Choosing the final target audience
We decided to focus on parents of primary school chil-
dren as our target audience. This would complement the
IHC primary school resources [19], with the potential to
reinforce learning of both children and their parents, and
the potential to reach parents through their children’s

Table 4 Journalists’ reasons for and against using radio

In favour of using radio
Against using radio

1. Easily accessible to a large section
of the public
2. Free of charge to access
3. Can be entertaining
4. Allows flexible use of local
languages

1. Audience’s perceived difficulty to tune in to a show consistently at the time a programme is aired
2. Lack of options to pause or replay the radio programmes at will.
3. Unstable access to electricity in some areas
4. The large volume of competing information on radio.
5. The need to use multiple languages.
6. It would be very challenging to get the right people to answer questions as experts on live radio talk
shows as health professionals are usually very busy.
7. It is difficult to achieve consistent messaging when running live talk shows

Page 10 of 17

schools [27]. The checklist could help clarify that the focus
of the podcast was on the IHC key concepts, provide a
quick reference and help them to remember the concepts.
Having parents as our target audience enabled us to
tailor the podcast to a greater extent, focusing on
claims, concepts and stories that would be relevant to
this audience. We decided to limit the number of epi-
sodes for
practical reasons
(limited time and re-
sources
to produce
and
evaluate
them),
but
also
because we thought that parents might not want to
listen to a large number of episodes and we did not
want to overwhelm them with too much information.
We therefore prioritised nine key concepts using the
following procedure: each member of our research
team independently made a list of the key concepts
they thought we should prioritise for the podcast; we
summarised our judgements and discussed disagree-
ments until we arrived at a consensus (Table 8).

Version 2: the IHC podcast
We created a series of eight main episodes, each including
a skit in which a claim is made by a character and its
trustworthiness is assessed and discussed by other charac-
ters. The setting and characters were chosen according to
the claim. For example, one episode about the effects of
birth control pills was situated at a village health meeting
and involved a woman asking a community health worker
about the trustworthiness of the claim that birth control
pills cause women to gain weight. The skit included an ex-
planation by another character (the community health
worker) of why the claim was not trustworthy, by applying
an IHC key concept. We used an analogy to help explain

the concept, and there was a conclusion with a take-home
message. Each main episode was 5–7 min long.
In addition, we developed an introductory episode, 1-
min recap episode for every two main episodes, and a
conclusion episode, making a total of 13 audio files for
each of the two commonly spoken languages (English
and Luganda). The recap at the end served as a conclu-
sion, repeating the key messages from all the main epi-
sodes. During the user testing, participants listened to
the episodes one at a time in their preferred language,
and they provided feedback in the same language.
Table 6 summarises the contents of each episode, the
rationale for the choice of claims and the key concept
applied in assessing the trustworthiness of the claim.
The complete Version 2 of the IHC podcast can be
found
here
(https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=
PLeMvL6ApG1N35f6DQ3qP9fWE7pMEDZTbH).
Findings from user testing are summarised in Add-
itional file 3. Based on these findings, we clarified that the
aim of the podcast was to enable people to make choices,
not to tell them what to do. We used the metaphor “give a
man a fish and you will feed him for a day; teach a man
how to fish and you will feed him for a lifetime” in the
introduction episode. In addition, we added a short sen-
tence to the introduction for each episode about the dif-
ference between telling them whether a claim is right or
wrong and teaching them how to assess any claim. We
also edited the introduction to each episode to make them
shorter, added voice variations and intonations in those
that sounded boring and introduced the claim used in
each episode in the introduction to the episode.
Main changes to version 2 of the intervention (the
IHC Podcast)

Table 5 Feedback on early prototypes (rapid response service and news wire service)

Main theme
Specific feedback

Focus on audio messaging
• Focus on audio messages through radio, as this is the most accessible means of mass communication.
• Make stories available for listening and download online (e.g. via Facebook, YouTube, Sound Cloud, a
project website and iTunes.
• Consider a series of features prepared for specific media (e.g. regional radio) rather than a news service.

Narrow down the target audience
• Segment the resources for specific target audiences as it is difficult to develop a single product that
appeals to all.

Make the aim and content clearer
• Make it clearer to the audience that we are empowering them to assess claims about the effects of
treatments, not assessing the claims for them.
• Provide a clear message regarding the trustworthiness of each claim.
• Consider using more than one example in the explanations and use claims that are of interest to the target
audience.
• Repeat important information in each story.
• Consider a checklist or a list of reminders for our audience as a quick reference tool.
• Use more than one language.

Ensure credibility of the project,
content and sender
• Ensure the audience knows that there is a credible organisation behind the project.
• Provide more information about the claims and their origins to avoid the audience thinking that we are
making the claims.
• Ensure that the editors, producers and other “gatekeepers” understand what the project is about.

Additional considerations:
• Train journalists and editors.
• Include fact-checking packages with stories.
• Promote the project and stories ahead of time in various media.

Page 11 of 17

Table 6 Claims used in main episodes of IHC Podcast versions 2 and 3

Episode and main lesson/key concept§
Claim used in the episode and issues of
concern or subject for discussion
The issues or subject for discussion about the
claim and reason for inclusion

Episode 1
Most treatments have both good and bad
effects (benefits and harms)

“There are herbal medicines that cure malaria
and do not have any bad effects.”
The claim that herbal treatments do not have any
bad effects is untrustworthy since most treatments
can have both good and bad effects. How sure
can one be that herbal treatments are indeed
without any bad effects?

Episode 2
Knowledge about the effects of treatments
requires comparisons

“Zmapp, a new investigational drug in
evaluation can cure Ebola Virus Disease”
Zmapp was an investigational drug at the time.
Evaluation of Zmapp was not yet complete at
the time of production but it was given to some
health workers who subsequently improved.
Given the information available at the time, how
sure could we be that Zmapp cures Ebola Virus
Disease?

“Eating quail eggs can make one very strong.”*
There was no known evaluation at the time
comparing taking quail eggs to taking nothing
or to anything else, to establish if eating the quail
eggs makes one stronger. How sure can one be
that eating quail eggs will make one stronger in
the absence of any fair evaluation of their effects?

Episode 3
Personal experiences are not a reliable basis for
claims about treatment effects

“Putting cooking oil on a burn will heal it since
it has worked for someone else before”
The claim was based on someone’s personal
experience using cooking oil on burns wounds.
How reliable are personal stories (anecdotes)
at predicting how treatments will work?

Episode 4
An effect on an outcome may be associated
with a treatment, but it may not be the
treatment causing the effect to happen

“A lot of women gain weight when they take
contraceptive pills.”
This claim was based on the association between
women using contraceptives and adding weight.
Is it possible that an effect on an outcome could
be associated with a treatment when it is not the
treatment causing the effect?

Episode 5
How long a treatment has been used or how
many people have used it is not a reliable basis
for judging the effects of treatments.

“An herbal treatment called ‘kyogero’ stops
babies from getting infections because many
people have used it for a long time.”

This claim is based on the finding that many
people have used the herbal treatment for a long
time. Does the finding that many people have
used a treatment for a long time mean that the
treatment is effective and/or safe?

Episode 6
Opinions of experts can be misleading if they
are not based on reliable evidence

According to one expert, “taking some hot
pepper will heal stomach ulcers”.
The claim was based simply on what an expert
said- an expert opinion. Is it possible that experts
can be wrong in their opinions, for example, if
they are not based on the best evidence?

Episode 7
Comparisons of treatments should be fair
“Medical male circumcision reduces the
chances of acquiring HIV.”
This claim was based on a fair comparison of
medical male circumcision to prevent HIV and no
circumcision. What are fair comparisons? Do fair
comparisons of treatments offer a reliable basis for
determining if treatments are effective and/or
safe?

*“Group support treatment is helpful for
someone who has depression and HIV because
the treatment has been compared with other
alternatives and found to be effective.”

This claim was based on a fair comparison of
using group support treatment and not using it
for people with depression. What are fair
comparisons? Do fair comparisons of treatments
offer a reliable basis for determining if treatments
are effective and/or safe?

Episode 8
Single comparisons of treatments or
comparisons with very few people
can be misleading

According to findings from a small study:
“washing hands with soap does not stop
children from getting diarrhoea”.

The claim was based on a single study with very
few participants. To what extent can we rely on
single studies with very few participants?

*Claims used in version 3 of the IHC podcast in place of the one used in version 2
§A complete description of the IHC Key concept and their implications can be found in Austvoll-Dahlgren et al. [30]

Page 12 of 17

• Ensuring that men and women were fairly represented in the
characters for each episode and that the story and content of each
episode would appeal to both men and women

• Adding more interactive dialogue and distributing talking time more
evenly across the characters

• Correcting all intonations where voices were experienced as flat and
ensuring that actors spoke slowly enough for listeners to comprehend

• Having the characters who learn something in each episode express
wanting to share it with others

• Having a theme song (in both Luganda and English)

• Replacing the claims used in some of the episodes

• Clarifying or adding relevant information about the specific claims
that were used, such as adding other examples of artemisinin
combination treatment (ACT) to episode 1 and adding a message about
what you should do when you get a burn to episode 3

• Improving the explanation of how and why health researchers
sometimes compare using a treatment to “no treatment” or to “doing
nothing”

• Improving the explanation of the concept that association is not the
same as causation in episode 4

• Making specific changes to some of the episodes, such as adding
restaurant background sounds to episode 3 and changing the setting of
episode 4

• Adding more information to the conclusion episode, including more
details from each episode

• Removing terms that appear for the first time in the conclusion
episode

Version 3: the final IHC podcast
In addition to the changes above, we removed the
credits to partner institutions in countries other than
Uganda from the introduction of each episode. We did
this to avoid giving the impression that the messages
were coming from a “foreign” place. We emphasised
more clearly the difference between this programme and
other programmes in every episode by including the
statement “In many health programmes people tell you
what health choices to make: but in this programme, we
explain why some of the things people say about
treatments are trustworthy and others are not. If you
understand this you can choose for yourself what
treatments are right for you”.
To further focus attention on the lessons about
assessing claims in each episode, we decided to add a
key concept to the introduction of each episode: most
treatments of any kind have benefits and harms. Based
on our observations of very strong pre-existing beliefs
about some claims, we felt that including this key
concept in the introduction of each episode would help
the audience pay attention to the explanations. We
changed the introduction of each episode to include the
statement: “most treatments of any type have good
effects and bad effects”.
The
final
podcast
can
be
found
here
(https://
www.informedhealthchoices.org/podcast-for-parents/). It
is a series of 13 audio messages teaching nine key
concepts that people need to understand and apply in
order to assess the trustworthiness of claims about
treatments and make informed health choices. This
includes an introductory episode, 8 main episodes, 3
recaps to the episodes and a conclusion episode, each
produced in two languages. Each main episode lasts 5–7
min, and each recap lasts 1–3 min. The theme song has
a mixture of Luganda and English in “Afrobeat”, a

Table 7 The Health Choices radio programme

The Health Choices radio programme featured a radio show host who
interviewed a health researcher and a professor about two treatment
claims. For each claim, people from the target audience gave their
opinions before and after the trustworthiness of the claim was
discussed by the three show participants.
To explain the trustworthiness of each claim, the guests (health
researcher and professor) applied an IHC key concept to assess the
claim and used an analogy to help explain that concept. Then, the
best available evidence from a systematic review was presented and
used to assess the trustworthiness of the claim. More information
was provided about where a listener could access research evidence
pertaining to similar claims. Key take-home messages were about
how to assess the trustworthiness of treatment claims. We produced
two prototypes, both of which can be found here (https://www.you-
tube.com/playlist?list=PLeMvL6ApG1N2G_aT-nfOI1NAOyF9FzKjb). Each
episode had the following:
1. Welcome remarks for the programme and the episode
2. A recap of the previous episode
3. An overview of the episode
4. A skit introducing the first claim
5. Opinions from three people from the target audience about the first
claim before listening to an explanation
6. Explanation of the reliability of the first claim applying an IHC key
concept
7. A presentation of the findings of a systematic review
8. Opinions from the same three people about the claim after listening
to the explanation and evidence
9. Introduction of the second claim and a repetition of steps 5 to 8
10. Conclusion of the episode

Table 8 Nine key concepts prioritised for the Informed Health
Choices podcast

Recognising an unreliable basis for treatment claims
• Treatments may be harmful
• Personal experiences or anecdotes (stories) are an unreliable basis for
assessing the effects of most treatments
• An “outcome” may be associated with a treatment but not caused by
the treatment
• Widely used treatments or treatments that have been used for a long
time are not necessarily beneficial or safe
• Opinions of experts or authorities do not alone provide a reliable basis
for deciding on the benefits and harms of treatments
Understanding whether comparisons are fair and reliable
• Identifying effects of treatments depends on making comparisons
• Apart from the treatments being compared, the comparison groups
need to be similar (i.e. “like needs to be compared with like”)
• The results of single comparisons of treatments can be misleading
Making informed choices about treatments
• Decisions about treatments should not be based on considering only
their benefits

Page 13 of 17

popular music genre in Uganda. We incorporated parts
of the song at the beginning, in the background and at
the end of each episode.
With the help of research assistants and members of
our target audience, we explored the feasibility of
using small portable media players to deliver the
podcast to parents. At the time of development,
content such as ours would be challenging to access
through internet-based technologies and smartphone
access was still very low.
We found that preloading the audio messages onto
small inexpensive portable media players and giving
these to the parents was a feasible way to deliver the
IHC podcast. This also enabled us to circumvent
additional problems associated with radio described
above. The parents were pleased that they had the
opportunity and sufficient time to replay the episodes
any time they wished and that the messages on the
devices could be shared with others.

Discussion
We discuss our findings in relation to each of the facets
of the honeycomb framework of user-experience [20],
focusing on lessons that might be relevant to other
researchers working in this and related fields.

Usefulness
We found increasing appreciation of the usefulness of this
work as participants began to understand how much of the
“health advice” to which they were exposed was in fact
unsubstantiated claims about what we should do to
maintain or improve our health. We were informed
repeatedly by some editors that if someone can pay for the
media space it does not matter what they have to say as
long as it is not “politically offensive” or “destructive” to
their media enterprise. “It is not our duty to check the
trustworthiness of the messages in advertisements”. Most
of the people with whom we interacted mistakenly
assumed that the government approved all health-related
content in the media. People and companies continue to
make unsubstantiated claims about the effects of treat-
ments in the mainstream media. Overall, the IHC podcast
was seen as a useful tool that could help empower people
to question more and assess statements made about the ef-
fects of treatments, both in the mass media and elsewhere.

Usability and understandability
In the early stages of development, we encountered many
usability challenges. For example, the print version of the
structured press releases lacked important content and the
writing style was not acceptable to media houses. The audio
version had confusing content, difficult medical terminology,
insufficient explanations and a host of production glitches.

People often did not understand the main purpose of the
project, and this in turn led to misunderstandings about
the content, such as thinking we were going to provide
them with health advice. There may be several reasons for
this. One is that a lot of people do not routinely question
the trustworthiness of treatment claims. When they do,
they frequently consider who is making the claim, rather
than the basis of the claim. Although fact-checking is com-
mon, critically appraising claims about treatment effects is
uncommon and is seldom done in a systematic way in the
mass media [1, 5, 7–11]. People also question the ability of
journalists and nonacademic members of the public to
assess the trustworthiness of treatment claims and assume
that this is something that requires professional training.
We worked with our audiences to adjust each episode, and
the approach to the podcast as a whole until they were
satisfied that the content was understandable and the
podcast was usable.

Credibility
A few participants in the user testing questioned who was
funding this work and who our partners were. Otherwise,
we did not find creditability to be a major problem. This
may be, in part, because the project was based at
Makerere University, which is well known in Uganda.
Some journalists, however, did question the source of
funding for the project. Concern about funders pushing
specific agendas is common in Uganda. We were open
about funding sources and the roles of the funders in the
project, which helped reassure the journalists. However,
we removed credits to non-Ugandan partners in the audio
recording so that it would not interfere with the credibil-
ity. This information was available for anyone who visited
the web site for more details.

Desirability
Early users (journalists and editors) did not experience
most of our initial ideas as desirable (i.e. the structured
press releases, the “Be Fair and Compare” news service for
journalists and the first version of the Health Choices
programme), largely because they perceived these ideas as
very unfamiliar and foreign. We abandoned several ideas
for this reason.
We changed our target audience, focusing on reaching
the public directly, rather than through journalists and
editors, and narrowing our target audience to parents of
primary school children. We also changed to a story-
telling approach to introduce the claims and explain their
trustworthiness in version 2 of the IHC podcast, because
people tend to make sense of their lives through stories,
they hear in the contexts with which they are familiar. A
systematic review of the effect of changing health-
promoting behaviours through narrative interventions

Page 14 of 17

supports the use of a narrative approach [46]. Characters
in the narrative can model new behaviours and enhance
self-efficacy [47]. Some participants demonstrated the
desirability of the podcast by asking if they could have all
the episodes so they could listen to them at once or listen
more in their own time. A health communication NGO
and producers at the Uganda Broadcasting Corporation
expressed interest in airing the podcast on radio as part of
their health communication programming.

Identification
Recording in Luganda was likely the most important
strategy we employed to create a product that did not feel
alienating and foreign to our participants, most of whom
had Luganda as their first language and were not fluent in
English. We also used terminology, examples of claims,
stories and music genres that were appropriate for our
target audience. In the earlier versions of the media
resources,
participants
felt
that
we
used
unfamiliar
language, which alienated them and appeared to reduce
their motivation to engage with the content. In one
episode, we used a claim which we mentioned was from
research done in the Democratic Republic of Congo on
the
effect
of
handwashing
with
soap
on
reducing
diarrhoea. Whereas handwashing is a hygienic practice
applicable to Uganda and the whole world, some users
experienced the use of an example of a study from Congo
as foreign. We also used a claim about Zmapp, which was
used to treat American aid workers during the Ebola crisis
in western Africa. Again, in addition to Zmapp being a
difficult word, the story of Ebola in West Africa was not
something with which they could easily identify. We
initially used a jazz jingle that people felt was “music for
the elite”. We changed that to “Afrobeat”, a music genre
most Ugandans listen to.

Reflexivity
Our
own
interest
was
to
develop
and
test
our
intervention in collaboration with the members of our
target audience. We do not know to what extent this
might
have
presented
biases
in
our
assessments;
however, it is possible that because of project deadlines
we might not have explored all the end-users’ feedback
to the extent that it might have required. Although we
intentionally looked for both negative and positive feed-
back, our desire to develop useful resources might have
led us to interpret some of the feedback more positively
or more negatively. Again, we do not know the extent to
which this might have been a problem, if at all. Our own
positions as researchers from reputable organisations
that are well known by the community might have intro-
duced biases in our end-users’ responses, perhaps this

might have led them to provide more positive feedback
about the resources.

Conclusions
We have developed an educational podcast to help
parents assess the trustworthiness of claims about the
effects of treatments. During the design process, we
encountered many problems with the early prototypes.
We were able to address those problems by working
directly with end-users through an iterative, human-
centred design approach, which engages end-users in
the design process and can help to ensure that an inter-
vention is relevant and acceptable [48]. As a result, we
were able to design an educational podcast that listeners
experienced as useful, understandable, credible, desirable
and appropriate. This, in turn, helped to ensure that our
intervention was effective [44]. To our knowledge, the
effectiveness of other podcasts for non-formal education
or health education have not been evaluated in rando-
mised trials [49–54], and we are unaware of other work
describing the use of a similar process to design a mass
media intervention to enable people to think more crit-
ically about treatment claims.
Because
we
tailored
the
podcast
to
our
target
audience, it is less likely it will feel familiar to people in
other countries. Therefore, the IHC podcast that we
developed is unlikely to be transferable to many other
contexts. However, others can use the same approach to
create a podcast tailored to their target audience, using a
guide we have prepared for this purpose [55].