Systematic User-centered Design of a
Prototype Clinical Decision Support System
for Glaucoma

Brian C. Stagg, MD, MS,1,2 Benton Tullis, BS,3 Afua Asare, OD, PhD,1 Joshua D. Stein, MD, MS,4,5,6

Felipe A. Medeiros, MD, PhD,7 Charlene Weir, PhD, RN,8 Damian Borbolla, MD, MS,8,9

Rachel Hess, MD, MS,2,10 Kensaku Kawamoto, MD, PhD, MHS8

Methods

This qualitative study used deidentiﬁed data from semistructured
telephone interviews with 5 clinicians who care for patients with
glaucoma. These clinicians were purposefully sampled from
members of the Utah Ophthalmology Society and the Utah Opto-
metric Association to ensure a representation of a range of clinical
specialties (glaucoma specialist, general ophthalmologist, optom-
etrist), practice settings (academic medical center, private practice,
and large multispecialty clinic), and years in clinical practice. A
sample size of 5 was chosen a priori as a reasonable number for
development of a prototype design based on published literature,
with a plan to interview additional clinicians if thematic saturation
was not achieved.16 It was evaluated by the University of Utah
Institutional Review Board and deemed exempt. The study
adhered to the Declaration of Helsinki.

User-Centered Design Process Framework

For the design of this prototype glaucoma CDS system, we fol-
lowed the User-Centered Design Process framework available on
usability.gov.7e9 This is an iterative process that involves 4 phases:
specifying the context of use, specifying design requirements,
creating design solutions, and evaluating and reﬁning designs. The
goal of this framework is to ensure design solutions meet the needs
of those who will be using the product.

Step 1: Specifying the Context of Use

The semistructured interviews were conducted over telephone by a
single researcher (B.C.S.) in May 2021. The interview guide
covered 4 major questions: (1) How do you determine the appro-
priate timing for the next visual ﬁeld test for a patient with glau-
coma? (2) What factors inﬂuence this decision? What might make
you do it more often? Less often? (3) What factors make this de-
cision more challenging? Easier? (4) What would help you make
this decision? Before conducting the interviews, we piloted and
reﬁned these questions with 2 user-centered design researchers and
1 ophthalmologist who were not involved with the project to
evaluate for clarity and comprehension. During the interviews, the
interviewer recorded clinician responses to the questions by mak-
ing notes. These notes were completely deidentiﬁed and no in-
formation that would link the notes to the clinicians was retained.
Two researchers (B.C.S. and B.T.) reviewed the notes from
the interviews to identify distinct statements. The 2 researchers

independently analyzed the statements using inductive thematic
analysis and grounded theory.17,18 The researchers evaluated
the statements looking for themes that addressed Step 1
(specifying the context of use) and Step 2 (specifying design
requirements).
The
2
researchers
then
met
to
develop
a
consensus codebook of themes. A third reviewer was available
to adjudicate disagreements (D.B.). After the codebook of
themes
was
established,
the
2
researchers
independently
recoded all the statements using the ﬁnal coding scheme. The 2
researchers again met to reach consensus on the coding of the
statements, with the third researcher again available to resolve
disagreements.
The
2
researchers
reviewed
the
themes
addressing the context of use for the prototype CDS system and
developed a brief statement to describe the context of use for
the system, with the third researcher available to adjudicate
disagreements.

Step 2: Specifying Design Requirements

Two researchers (B.C.S. and B.T.) reviewed the statements and
themes to identify design requirements. As the ﬁrst step, the 2
researchers mapped the themes to the fundamental human need
framework.19,20 In this framework, the fundamental human needs
domains
are
subsistence,
security,
affection,
understanding,
participation, idleness, creation, identity, and freedom. The 2
researchers then developed design requirements based on the
themes and fundamental human needs. A third reviewer (D.B.)
adjudicated disagreements.

Step 3: Creating Design Solutions

Based on the interviews and themes identiﬁed above, 2 re-
searchers (B.C.S. and B.T.) developed user stories that depicted
typical situations where a user would beneﬁt from the CDS sys-
tem. The research team then developed a CDS system design
solution to meet these needs using Figma software (Figma Inc).

Step 4: Evaluating and Reﬁning Designs

We showed the design solution to the 5 clinicians who care for
patients with glaucoma described above and 3 informatics and
design researchers. After interacting with the design solution, the
clinicians and researchers provided feedback, which was incorpo-
rated in a second iterative design solution. We followed this iter-
ative design loop for 2 additional iterations. The third iteration was
satisfactory to the clinicians and researchers and was accepted as
our prototype glaucoma CDS system for determining the appro-
priate timing of follow-up visual ﬁeld testing. Throughout this
process, design suggestions from the clinicians and researchers
were recorded.

Results

We conducted semistructured telephone interviews with 5
clinicians who care for patients with glaucoma. There was a
range of clinical specialties (2 glaucoma specialists, 2 gen-
eral ophthalmologists, and 1 optometrist), practice settings
(3 from academic medical centers, 1 from private practice,
and 1 from a large multispecialty clinic), and years in
clinical practice (2 with > 15 years and 3 with < 15 years in
clinical practice). During the interviews, the clinicians made
a total of 41 distinct statements.

Step 1: Specifying the Context of Use

We grouped the clinician statements into 9 themes that
addressed the context of use for the CDS system. It
appeared that thematic saturation was attained as each
theme was discussed by > 1 clinician. The themes and
representative statements for these themes are listed in
Table 1. Four of the themes described how the clinicians
currently make decisions regarding the timing of visual
ﬁeld
testing,
1
theme
described
the
importance
of
clinician experience in this decision, and 4 themes
described clinician desires that would improve their
ability to make this decision. Clinicians described making
the decision regarding the timing of visual ﬁeld testing
based on intuition, broad heuristics, patient data and
ﬁndings,
and
patient
preferences.
Clinicians
desire
compiled and easy-to-use data, more certainty when mak-
ing this decision, help communicating with patients, and
help keeping track of the published literature. Clinicians
with less glaucoma experience reported more difﬁculty
with the decision.
From these themes the researchers developed a statement
describing the context of use for the prototype CDS system:
design a CDS system to help clinicians who care for patients
with glaucoma determine the timing for a follow-up visual
ﬁeld test for an individual patient with glaucoma because
determining a personalized timing for follow-up testing must
be done quickly in the middle of a busy clinic and requires
the synthesis of a large amount of data that is scattered in
different places in the EHR.

Step 2: Specifying Design Requirements

The 9 themes that addressed the context of use for the CDS
system mapped to 7 domains of the fundamental human
need frameworkdsecurity, freedom, creation, participation,
idleness, protection, and understanding (see Table 2), with 2
themes matching to each of security and participation. From
the themes and their corresponding fundamental human
needs, the researchers developed 9 design requirements for
the prototype CDS system to help clinicians who care for
patients
with
glaucoma
(see
Table
2).
Key
design
requirements
included
the
preservation
of
clinician
autonomy,
incorporation
of
currently
used
heuristics,
compilation of data, and increasing and communicating
the level of certainty regarding the decision.

Step 3: Create Design Solutions

Based on the interviews and themes identiﬁed above, the
researchers (B.C.S. and B.T.) developed 3 user stories that
depicted typical situations where a user would beneﬁt from
the CDS system.

(1) A glaucoma specialist who wants a recommendation
for follow-up that is nuanced, so she is able to see
the impact of alternative options.

(2) A general ophthalmologist who wants a recom-
mendation
for
follow-up
that
is
presented

efﬁciently, so he makes good decisions while
seeing a lot of patients.

(3) An optometrist who wants a recommendation for
follow-up that she trusts, so she knows her patient is
getting appropriate care.

With these user stories in mind, the research team then
developed an interactive preliminary CDS system design
solution to meet these needs (see Fig 1A).

Step 4: Evaluating and Reﬁning Designs

After completing 3 iterative design cycles using this pre-
liminary CDS system design solution with 5 clinicians who
care for patients with glaucoma and 3 informatics and
design researchers, the design was satisfactory to the clini-
cians and was accepted as our prototype glaucoma CDS
system for determining the appropriate timing of follow-up
visual ﬁeld testing (see Fig 1B). During this iterative design
process, we identiﬁed 9 design features intended to address
the 9 CDS design requirements described in Step 2 above
(Table 2). For example, clinicians expressed their desire to
retain autonomy. The design feature to address this
requirement was to use sliding widgets that allowed
clinicians to see the impact of their decisions under
varying assumptions. During the iterative design process,
clinicians
felt
the
sliding
widgets
allowed
for
both
autonomy
and
data-driven
guidance.
Clinicians
also
desired complied and easy to use data. The design feature to
address this requirement was to make pertinent data (such as
prior eye surgeries, medications, and prior eye pressure
measures) visible in a single initial user interface.

Discussion

Using the User-Centered Design Process framework, we
developed a prototype CDS system to help clinicians
determine the appropriate timing for follow-up visual ﬁeld
testing for patients with glaucoma. During this systematic
design process, we identiﬁed design requirements for this
CDS system and iteratively developed design solutions to
address these needs. We learned that clinicians who care for
patients with glaucoma need CDS systems that preserve
clinician autonomy, compile and present data, incorporate
currently used heuristics, and increase and communicate the
level of certainty regarding the decision. The CDS prototype
developed in this study will be used as a starting point for a
future large-scale iterative reﬁnement and EHR integration
process.
During the qualitative interviews, clinicians reported that
the effort and cognitive load from data gathering and visu-
alization were key challenges in deciding the appropriate
timing for follow-up visual ﬁeld testing. This correlates with
prior research showing that data gathering increases cogni-
tive load and emotional distress and contributes to clinician
burnout.21 Clinicians caring for patients with glaucoma must
incorporate large amounts of longitudinal data from many
sources accurately and efﬁciently to make decisions.10

During our iterative design process, clinicians strongly

preferred design solutions that presented most of the
pertinent data in a single user interface. Future CDS
systems and informatics interventions for glaucoma should
also use design solutions that address the challenge of

data gathering and visualization. To make this possible,
vendors will need to ensure that imaging and testing
devices that monitor glaucoma use data standards that are
interoperable and allow for data sharing. There is a good

business case for vendors to improve interoperability as
integrated
data
display
is
something
that
clinicians
strongly desire and has the potential to improve patient care.
Preserving cognitive autonomy was important to the
clinicians during both the cognitive interviews and iterative
design process. This desire for cognitive autonomy is in line
with prior work in the ﬁeld of CDS as systems that preserve
cognitive autonomy are more likely to be used.21e23 The
clinicians also desired data-driven guidance to increase
certainty when determining the appropriate timing for
follow-up visual ﬁeld testing. Our design solution to allow
for both cognitive autonomy and data-driven guidance was
to use sliding widgets that allowed clinicians to see the
impact of their decisions under varying circumstances. As
we work to design CDS systems and informatics in-
terventions to improve glaucoma care, we should remember
the importance of supporting clinician autonomy.
Ophthalmologists and optometrists see many patients
during clinic and experience serious time constraints.24 In a
prior
study,
nearly
90%
of
ophthalmologists
and
optometrists who care for patients with glaucoma felt that
“minimal
time
required
to
use
tool”
would
be
an
important characteristic of CDS systems for glaucoma.12

In the present study, clinicians also felt that having data in
an efﬁcient, easy to interpret format was important. In
future work, we plan to iteratively reﬁne the prototype
CDS system described in this paper in a large-scale work-
ﬂow and EHR integration process. One of the major focuses
of this integration project will be to ensure that the CDS
system is efﬁcient and requires minimal time for the clini-
cians to use. During this workﬂow integration, we will
evaluate the appropriate timing in the workﬂow for CDS
presentation and the appropriate role, if any, of prompts in
the EHR to promote use of the CDS system.
Though not the focus of this manuscript, understanding
the recommendations provided by this prototype CDS sys-
tem is important. The recommendations will be provided by
a statistical calculator based on prior work evaluating the

variability of visual ﬁeld tests.14,25 This statistical calculator
uses a power calculation to determine the frequency of
visual ﬁeld tests spread over a set period of time
necessary to estimate a deﬁned rate of visual ﬁeld loss
given a patient’s test variability with speciﬁed statistical
power. Though this calculator is based on an accepted
understanding of visual ﬁeld test variability and statistical
power, it will be important in future work to develop a
strong evidence base for its effectiveness, as we found
that clinicians desire conﬁdence and certainty in the
recommendations provided by CDS systems for glaucoma.
Our study had limitations. We had an a priori small
sample size of 5 clinicians, though we appeared to reach
thematic saturation and this may be a reasonable sample size
for development of a prototype design based on published
literature.16 The CDS prototype developed in this study will
be further developed and evaluated in a future large-scale
iterative
reﬁnement
and
implementation
process.
Our
study used a purposeful rather than a representative sample.
Because of this, our ﬁndings are not intended to be statis-
tically representative of all clinicians who care for patients
with glaucoma. However, because we used a purposeful
sample that included an appropriate range of clinical spe-
cialties and years in clinical practice, our ﬁndings provide an
inclusive starting point for understanding the design re-
quirements for a CDS system to help clinicians determine
the appropriate timing for follow-up visual ﬁeld testing for
patients with glaucoma. Our study was not designed to
address the recommendations provided by the prototype
CDS system. The focus of this study was on the user-
centered design of this prototype and understanding the
design requirements for glaucoma CDS. This study was not
quantitative and thus did not allow for statistical evaluation
and hypothesis testing. The prototype glaucoma CDS sys-
tem will be evaluated quantitatively in the future. As a
preliminary design project, we employed telephone in-
terviews and interactions with the prototype CDS system for
our iterative design process. In future work, we plan to use

cognitive task analyses, think-aloud methods, and direct
observation of clinicians using the CDS system. These
methods should provide a more nuanced understanding of
how the users interact with the EHR and CDS system.
In this study, we used a systematic design process based
on the established User-Centered Design Process framework
to rigorously develop a prototype CDS system to help
clinicians determine the appropriate timing for follow-up
visual ﬁeld testing for patients with glaucoma. The proto-
type CDS system we developed will be used as a starting
point for a future, large-scale iterative reﬁnement and EHR

integration process. The systematic design process we used
serves as a pattern for the future development of user-
centered informatics solutions and CDS systems to improve
glaucoma care. During the systematic design process, we
identiﬁed design requirements for this CDS system and
iteratively developed design solutions to address these needs.
Clinicians who care for patients with glaucoma need CDS
systems that preserve clinician autonomy, compile and pre-
sent data, incorporate currently used heuristics, and increase
and communicate the level of certainty regarding the
decision.