Developing a digital training tool to
support oncologists in the skill of
information-provision: a user centred
approach

Sebastiaan M. Stuij1,2,3, Constance H. C. Drossaert4, Nanon H. M. Labrie1,5, Robert L. Hulsman1,2,
Marie José Kersten3,6,7, Sandra van Dulmen8,9,10, Ellen M. A. Smets1,2,3*
and on behalf of the INSTRUCT project
group

Methods
The CeHRes Roadmap comprises 5 phases [39]. Briefly,
the first phase, called contextual inquiry, entails a needs
assessment involving the intended users of the technol-
ogy and the environment in which it will be imple-
mented.
The
subsequent
value
specification
phase
intends to reveal what should be included in the tool
and how it should work, resulting in user requirements.
This is followed by a design phase which refers to build-
ing prototypes that fit with the user requirements. The
operationalization phase addresses the actual introduc-
tion, adoption, and employment of the technological
intervention in practice. The final evaluation phase refers
to the actual use of the technology and the assessment

of the impact thereof. This paper describes the activities
in the first three steps in the developmental process of
the training. Given that the CeHRes Roadmap is meant
to be used in an iterative and exploratory way, we con-
ducted several sequential small qualitative studies as ini-
tial steps in the development process, with different
methodologies for each phase. These are described in
greater detail below (see also Fig. 1 for an overview).
One of the qualitative studies, i.e. a focus group study,
has previously been published in a separate paper [14].
Here we again, yet, briefly report on this study, to illus-
trate how the findings of this study fit in the larger de-
sign process.

Results
Phase 1: contextual inquiry
To uncover the learning needs and training preferences
of oncological health care providers regarding a digital
training for the skill of information-provision and to
gain an understanding of the context, we consulted the
literature and conducted an interview study.

Literature
To understand the context, we first consulted the litera-
ture addressing information-provision skills of onco-
logical health care providers (e.g. studies in which the
information giving behaviour of oncologists was ad-
dressed, literature on CST, text books on communica-
tion in health care). Empirical studies demonstrate that
oncologists often provide too much information [40],
without checking patients’ information needs [41] and
understanding [42, 43]. CST have been found to be ef-
fective yet requiring a considerable time investment; they
are recommended to be experiential and to last at least 3
days [15], although evidence for optimal training format
is still needed [44]. Our review of digital CST, described
in the introduction, indicated these to be promising, al-
though few have addressed the specific skill of information-
provision. For effective information-provision, instrumental
communication strategies such as the ‘teach-back’ and ‘ask-
tell-ask’ approach are recommended to respectively check

Fig. 1 Activities in step 1,2 and 3 of the CeHRes roapmap

Page 3 of 17

for patients’ understanding and to tailor information to
their information needs [45, 46] (see Table 2 for more de-
tails about these strategies).

Focus group interviews
Using focus group interviews, we aimed to investigate
oncologists’ learning needs related to their information-
provision skills, and explored their user-preferences
about a digital training tool. Full details are presented in
a separate paper [14], here we briefly describe the
method and main findings.

Participants and procedure To maximise possible vari-
ation in needs and preferences, we strived to include
participants varying in sociodemographic characteristics
(age, gender), clinical experience, from academic as well
as general hospitals, and in experience with modern
technology. Participants were recruited through a snow-
ball approach using e-mail, phone, and face-to-face
meetings. A focus group of 1, 5 h was scheduled per hos-
pital location, including up to 5 people. Separate inter-
views of approximately 1 h were scheduled with HCP
who (eventually) could not attend the focus group ses-
sion. During focus group sessions and individual inter-
views,
two
general
domains
were
discussed:
1)
participants’ learning needs concerning information-
provision skills, and 2) their training preferences with re-
spect to a new digital training tool on this issue. Finally,
perceived barriers and facilitators for a digital training
were questioned. A topic guide with open-ended ques-
tions was used to guide the interviews’ in a semi-
structured fashion.

Analysis All interviews were digitally audio recorded
and transcribed verbatim. Thematic content analysis first
involved the collective construction of an initial code-
book by three researchers (SS, NL, ES) using the topic
guide. Transcriptions were then independently analysed
and discussed by these researchers until consensus was
reached. Subsequently, themes and subthemes were
reviewed and refined until researchers agreed that these
reflected the essence of the complete dataset. Finally, a
summary of the main findings was constructed (SS) and
checked (ES), including major themes, noteworthy ex-
ceptions, and relevant quotes.

Results Four focus group sessions, with respectively 5,
3, 3, and 2 participants per session (n = 13), and three in-
terviews were conducted.
Detailed findings are described elsewhere [14], but it
should be highlighted that the most prominent educa-
tional needs perceived by the health care professionals
included how to 1) tailor their information to the needs
of the individual patient, 2) structure and prioritise

information during a consultation and 3) deal with pa-
tients’ emotions. The oncologists desired a digital train-
ing tool to be customized to their individual learning
needs, to allow for feedback on their competence and
improvement in (recorded) information-provision skills
from peers, communication experts, and/or patients and
to be able to monitor progress. Additionally, promoting
behavior change, i.e., the transfer of skills to clinical con-
sultations, should be a key-feature of such a training.
Oncologists in training, rather than senior oncologists,
appeared to be most interested in considering digital as
opposed to more conventional face-to-face communica-
tion skills trainings [14].

Phase 2: value specification
The value specification phase aimed to uncover which
content is important to include in the tool and how the
tool should work, based on the learning goals and train-
ing preferences of the users as identified in the context-
ual inquiry phase, and to translate these to concrete user
requirements. Our choices were additionally guided by
our starting point to adhere to the principles of experi-
ential practice [47] and reflective learning [48, 49] and
feedback informed self-assessment [50]. Learning is con-
sidered to be an active constructivistic process in which
learners discover for themselves the principles that guide
effective communication behavior by practicing skills.
This process is informed by skills practicing, reflective
thinking and peer-feedback [50].

Participants and procedure
We set up two multidisciplinary expert panels compris-
ing members of the INSTRUCT project group, who re-
spectively
addressed
the
learning
content,
and
the
learning format of the digital training, based on the find-
ings thus far. Both groups met separately, yet exchanged
their notes to inform each other. The executive re-
searcher (SS) attended all meetings as a liaison. During
meetings, preliminary decisions were made through con-
sensus. At a final meeting, these decisions were critically
discussed with the entire INSTRUCT group.

Learning content
The learning content-panel decided upon which specific
skills to address in a first prototype of the digital training
tool. This panel included expert members of the IN-
STRUCT group with a background in communication
research in oncology (ES, JvW, AP, RH), and/or commu-
nication skills training (ES, RH). Additionally, we con-
sulted an expert in communication skills training of
medical specialists (DvW). Building on results of the first
phase, which indicated learning needs for tailoring,
structuring and dealing with emotions, consensus was
reached that the most pressing need of HCP to be

Page 4 of 17

addressed in a digital training should be tailoring the
amount and content of their information giving to the
information needs of individual patients and to take in-
dividual patients’ level of understanding, i.e. their health
literacy, into account while at the same time keeping
control over the structure and duration of the medical
consultation. Additionally, professionals’ awareness of
specific skills (e.g., ‘teach back’ to check patients’ under-
standing) yet inability to implement these into practice
was believed to be an important focus for a training tool.
In subsequent meetings, consensus was reached about
the sub-tasks deemed relevant for tailoring of informa-
tion and the specific skills for these tasks (see Table 1).

Learning format
The learning format-panel aimed to determine the for-
mat for the digital training, and comprised of members
of the INSTRUCT group including a user experience re-
searcher (CD), two education professionals (RH, NC), an
epidemiologist with a focus on information technology
in cancer care (MvO) and an expert in human computer
interaction (SS). Three separate group meetings were
organised after which individual appointments were
made to refine the proposed formats of the digital train-
ing tool. In these meetings, the results of the contextual
inquiry phase with respect to the professionals’ desired
training format were interpreted and translated to user
requirements (see Table 2).
Results of the focus groups indicated that oncologists
are increasingly familiar and comfortable with relatively
conventional interfaces such as medical e-learning mod-
ules, in which a user opens a web-based e-learning appli-
cation and is presented with learning content in the
form of informative text, illustration, video examples
and interactive assignments including the use of video
annotations. The development of a conventional e-
learning was considered to be a viable option, since an
e-learning can be tailored to learners’ previous experi-
ence, individual learning needs and/or learning style,
thereby accommodating HCPs need for personalisation.
Moreover, e-learnings have been found to be promising
in the context of communication skills trainings [34, 36,
37].
A second idea emerging in the expert discussions
encompassed the use of a chatbot, also known as a form
of a conversational agent, which refers to an automated
digital avatar which interacts with the user through dif-
ferent instant messaging services (e.g. Facebook, What-
sapp) [51].
Conversational agents are increasingly used in the do-
main of communications skills training, including the
domain of communication skills in health. To illustrate,
in our preparatory review of the literature on online
communication skills training we found three studies

involving the evaluation of virtual patients to teach com-
munication skills to medical students [31, 37, 52]. A re-
cent systematic review on the effectiveness of online
training for medical students [53], reported on one more
study [54]. In all these studies, conversational agents are
used as virtual patients. However, the chatbot we envi-
sioned for our training module aimed to guide the
learner, i.e., oncologist, through the learning process by
taking on the role of coach rather than patient. For ex-
ample by asking questions via instant messages such as:
“Let’s continue with our learning goal shall we?”; “Do
you have time for this now?” (yes/no); “Because you in-
dicated a preference for scientific literature, would you
like to read a recent article on tailoring I highly recom-
mend?” (yes/no).
The ‘personalized’ approach offered by the conversa-
tional interface of a chatbot was assumed to address on-
cologists’ need for a personalized training program
including individualized feedback by creating a highly
engaging, personal, and focused, learning experience in
which the chatbot acts as a ‘learning coach’. By offering
brief, interactive, and location independent learning ex-
periences on their smartphone, a chatbot may accom-
modate oncologists’ time constraints. To the best of our
knowledge, chatbots have not previously been used for
CST.
Lastly, to address the need to facilitate transfer of skills
to clinical consultations we aimed for a marked alterna-
tive for the pocket–sized cards often used by clinicians
as a guideline for guidelines and procedures. The use of
physical gadgets (e.g., a button, coloured wristband, key-
chain or badge) as reminders was suggested (inspired by
‘TinyTasks’ by the Technical University Delft [55]). For
example, a wristband may serve as a reminder to try and
tailor information to individual patients during the day.
Physical reminders of specific tasks could be linked to
particular digital learning content and as such could be
combined with a digital training tool.
Based on the aforementioned arguments, two format
ideas for early prototypes of a digital tool were drawn
up: a relatively conventional web-based e-learning mod-
ule and a more innovative chatbot. Additionally, proto-
types of physical reminders were to be developed as an
add-on to aid learning and skill transfer.
As a final step in the value clarification phase, the re-
sults of both the learning content and learning format
panels were presented at a plenary meeting of the IN-
STRUCT project group for feedback and suggestions.
Following discussion it was decided 1) to – initially - de-
velop and evaluate separate prototypes of an e-learning,
a chatbot and physical reminders, and 2) to continue
testing with oncologists in training, because of their
greater interest in the possibilities offered by a digital
training tool.

Page 5 of 17

Table 1 Skills for tailored information provision*
Sub-tasks for tailoring
Skills
1.Estimate of patients’ knowledge level
Use questions such as: e.g. Can you tell me briefly what you already know about.., so I may
try to provide additional information, if needed?

2. Estimate of patients’ health literacy, intellectual skills
Use Teach-back:
Ask the patient to describe in their own words what they understood/ remember from
the information provided thus far
• “I gave you quite a lot of information, what would you consider the most important?”
• “To check whether I have been clear, can you please tell me; what do you remember?”
• “Shortly you will go home. Suppose your partner asks ‘what did the doctor tell you’?. What
will you tell him/her?”

3. Estimate of and tailoring to patients’ monitoring
coping style/ information need
Use questions such as:
• “There is a lot to discuss …. Some patients want to have as much information as possible,
others prefer not to know too much. How is this for you?”
• “Will you please tell me if you feel you have had enough information?”
Discuss the outline if the patient indicates a limited need for (additional) information:
• “I will discuss the main points. Should you wish more information on a specific issue, please
feel free to interrupt me”
Consider exploring patients’ reason for a limited wish for information (relevant for 8).
- If patient indicates a lack of understanding, then adapt information to intellectual level
(relevant for 2)
- If patient indicates to find additional information too confronting, to provoke too much
anxiety, to fear it will reduce hope, then refrain from more detailed information .
If the patient appears ambivalent:
- Make this ambivalence explicit
- probe for clarification
- offer the different information topics you can provide (e,g, about treatment procedure,
about short and/or long term side-effects, about prognosis
Prioritize, if patient expresses a high need for information yet time does not permit
extensive discussion,
• “I notice you have many issues to discuss. Unfortunately, we will not be able to discuss
these all during this consutation. What would you consider the most important issues that
we certainly need to address.”

4. Assess patients’ stress level to adapt information giving
accordingly
Take notice of (non-verbal) signs and make these explicit
• “I notice it all becomes a bit overwhelming for you. Am I correct?”

5. Assess which information the patient finds relevant
Involve the patient in setting the agenda for the consult
• “Are there any issues you would like to discuss now, so we can make the best use of our
time?
Ask-tell-ask: Announce an information topic and ask whether the patient is interested (at
this point in time), tell, and ask the patient to respond to this information
- Examples of an information starters:
• “Would you mind if I tell you something about … …”
• “What would you like to be informed about?”
- Examples of probes for a response:
• “Is there anything more you’d like to hear about?”
• “What do you make of this?”
• “I don’t know what this means to you?”
• “Is this what you expected?”

6. Assess how the patient wants to be informed (e.g. by
you, by a nurse, in writing, via internet)
At the end of the consultation, ask
• “I gave you a lot of information, would you also like to read about this, for example in a
brochure or the internet?

7. Assess when a patient wants to be informed
Ask for example
• “Would you mind if I tell you something about … …”
• “Would you like to hear more?”
• “Is it ok with you if I get back to this the next time we meet? ..
At a follow-up consultation, ask
• “Do you have any questions as a result of what I told you last time?”

8. Tailor information to the patients’ personal context
Probe for patients pre-existing knowledge (see 1) and his opinion about the information
(see 5)
Stimulate patients’ question asking:
• “If you have any questions, please let me know.”
Repeatedly invite the patient to share his thoughts, reflections, feelings (see 5):
• “What do you think about what I just told you?”

9. Check whether your information aligns with patients’
information need.
Ask-tell-ask (see 5), in between your information giving. Do not wait for the end of the
consultation
• “Is this enough information for you?”
• “Which questions do you have?”
• “Did I forget anything you might want to know?”

10. Check whether the patients has understood your
information
Teach-back (see 2)

*References and sources for these recommendations: Silverman, Kurtz, Draper. Vaardig communiceren in de gezondheidszorg. 2000; Remke
van Staveren Patientgericht Communiceren, de tijdstroom, 2013; Back and Arnold, Discussing prognosis, JCO 2006; 24: 4209–4217; C.L. ter
Hoeven, L.C. Zandbelt, S. J. Franssen, E.M.A. Smets, F.J. Oort, E.D. Geijsen, C.C.E. Koning, J.C.J.M. de Haes. Measuring cancer patients’ reasons for
their information preference: Construction of the Considerations Concerning Cancer Information (CCCI) questionnaire.
Psycho-Oncology, 2011;20:1228–1235

Page 6 of 17

Phase 3: design
User group evaluations of three prototypes
Prototypes of increasing fidelity of the two training tools,
the conventional e-learning and the chatbot, were devel-
oped in an iterative process of prototype design and two
user group assessment sessions.

Participants and procedure Feedback on the appreci-
ation of the tools in general and of specific features in
particular was gathered from six hemato-oncologists
from the department of hematology of the Amsterdam
University Medical Center/ University of Amsterdam.
They had consented to participate upon invitation by
the
hemato-oncologist
from
the
INSTRUCT
group
(MK). Two user group assessment sessions were orga-
nized, involving respectively four (3 males) and two par-
ticipants (1 male).

In each assessment session, the executive researcher
(SS) presented an overview of 1) the web-based e-
learning module (interactive ‘clickable’ wireframe) (see
Fig. 2); 2) an envisioned scenario in which an oncologist
interacts with the chatbot (a mockup of an automated
chat conversation with a digital ‘coach’) (Fig. 3) and 3) a
sketch of the physical reminders (Fig. 4).
Building on the specified user requirements (see Table
2), the presented prototypes of the e-learning and chat-
bot contained simulations of the following interactions
(see for more details Table 3): 1) the possibility to assess
information giving skills before, during and after train-
ing, and receive performance feedback; 2) the possibility
to personalize the learning experience and set individual
learning goals; 3) the possibility to acquire information
about a topic of interest; 4) the possibility to practice
newly acquired information; 5) receiving reminders of

Table 2 User requirements

User Need
Tool Requirement

Learning content

To understand the importance of effective information provision
1) Offer a short introduction which explains the importance of this topic
and training and what the user will gain from it.

To learn effective communication techniques to tailor information to
patient characteristics, to structure information giving and how to deal
with patients’ emotions as a result of information such as anger and
sadness.

2) Offer specific chapters on each topic (tailoring, structuring and dealing
with emotions), offering explanation, (video) examples and assignments
of effective communication techniques. Tailoring has priority.

Learning format

To feel engaged while learning new skills during training.
3) Offer engaging and relevant content with different types of media:
text, video, animations, illustrations and interactive assignments.

To learn new communication skills in a constrained amount of time.
4) It should be as time effective as possible by including personalisation
options,
5) avoiding large amounts of text, offering short animations clips, and
6) ending chapters with a summary and take-away message.

Learning from evidence-based content.
7) Include learning content which is concise and built upon scientific
literature and include easily accessible links to these sources.

A learning experience tailored to degree of experience and individual
learning needs.
8) Offer a pre-test to determine the user’s experience and learning goals.
9) Have the tool generate a personalized training advice.

A learning experience tailored to preferred style of learning.
10) Offer the user different media options with the same learning
content.

Examples of desired communication skills
11) Offer video content, preferably recording of real consultations,
demonstrating desired communication skills.

Opportunity to practice communication skills.
12) It should allow for practising skills within the learning environment
and
13) in daily practice.

Peer feedback on communication skills.
14) It should offer functionality to record a consultation and allow for
playback and
15) evaluation of performance by peers

To evaluate progress on communication skills before and after the
training.
16) Offer a pre- and post-test and
17) progress insights using a scoring system and/or graph.

To be reminded of newly learned skills in daily practice during training
period.
18) Offer notifications and tips aligned to individual learning goals.

Earning accreditation points for training.
19) Emphasize that the training will include accreditation points and
20) offer a certificate of completion at the end of the training.

To be able to consult an expert on communication skills.
21) Include a feature in which the user can contact an expert to ask for
feedback and/or make an appointment.

Page 7 of 17

learning goals during training and daily practice; 6) the
possibility to ask for personal (professional) coaching.
The presentation of these simulated interactions be-
tween the user and the tool, made it easier for the par-
ticipating hemato-oncologists to judge the advantages
and disadvantages of the suggested prototypes.

Analysis Both assessment sessions were transcribed ver-
batim and a thematic analysis was conducted using in-
ductive coding. Transcripts were read multiple times for
familiarity and independently coded by two coders (SS,
ES). Initial coding attached basic surface-level labels to
data. Both researchers subsequently discussed differ-
ences in interpretations until consensus was reached be-
tween the two coders. Next, codes addressing similar
themes were collapsed to form subthemes. Findings
were presented at an INSTRUCT expert-group meeting
for critical reflection.

Results Based on the presentation, participants in both
user group assessment sessions favored the conventional e-
learning over the chatbot. In their view, an e-learning would
make it easier to focus on and dedicate time to the acquisi-
tion of skills, as compared to the more easily accessible, but
fragmented approach via a chat-bot. However, participants
considered individual differences in this preference likely,
depending on age and familiarity with the use of (social)
media on smartphones. The possibility to compose a per-
sonal learning track (feature 1,2 and 4), based on an initial

assessment, was greatly appreciated, although it was noted
that this possibility might withhold some individuals from
receiving the modules they would actually need. Elements
to enhance the transfer of skills to daily practice (features 2
and 5) were considered more suitable for a chatbot as com-
pared to e-learning. The idea of somehow using reminders
(feature 5) was generally well-received, although none of
the participants saw any added value in the tangible phys-
ical reminders. Importantly, participants resisted too many
different information channels. All agreed that any training,
regardless of the medium, should focus as much as possible
on video-recordings of own, real-life consultations (feature
2) and facilitate personal feedback from a communication
expert (feature 1 and 6). Based on these comments, we fur-
ther pursued the development of an interactive prototype
of both the e-learning and chatbot, but not of the physical
reminders.

Individual user-evaluations of two prototypes
After several iterations of developing interactive proto-
types by the lead researcher (SS) based on input of the
aforementioned group evaluation and in close collabor-
ation with expert members of the INSTRUCT learning
format panel, we subsequently conducted one-hour indi-
vidual user-testing sessions.

Participants and procedure
The sample comprised five junior oncologists in training
at the Amsterdam University Medical Center/University

Fig. 2 Screenshot of a mock-up of the web-based e-learning tool (created with ‘Axure’ [https://www.axure.com/])

Page 8 of 17

Fig. 3 Some screenshots of the mock-up of the chatbot (created with ‘Botsociety’ [(https://app.botsociety.io/])

Fig. 4 Illustration of Tiny task as inspiration for a physical reminder (created using ‘Sketch’ [https://www.sketchapp.com/])

Page 9 of 17

of Amsterdam (age range 31–37; 3 women), who were
recruited via the hemato-oncologist involved in the IN-
STRUCT group (MK). Each test-session started with the
e-learning module, followed by the chatbot, and ended
with evaluative questions addressing their appreciation
of (aspects) of the training tools. Participants were expli-
citly instructed to pretend using each of the six simu-
lated interactions offered by the tool (see Table 3) and
perform two assignments for both tools while thinking
aloud during these tasks. The two simulated assignments
comprised 1) the evaluation and/or annotation of a
video-recording of an actual consultation (of their own
or a colleague as part of a pre-post training test, or an
instructional fragment) and 2) the recording of their ver-
bal reaction in response to a video-recorded utterance of
a patient. Following a think-out-loud protocol [56], the
executive researcher (SS) probed for clarification and
suggestions and asked open-ended questions during the
testing session concerning the usability and feasibility of
the interactive prototypes. All sessions were video-
recorded and transcribed to be able to systematically ob-
serve how participants used the training tools [57, 58]. A
test protocol ensured consistency across individual test-
ing sessions.

Analyses
The executive researcher (SS) performed an initial analysis
by grouping all remarks of participating physicians ac-
cording to one of six pre-defined themes (remarks about
the digital training tools overall; the format of instructions;
the assignments; the format of feedback on assignments;
assessment and about the comparison e-learning versus
chatbot) and per theme as either positive, negative, or
‘other’. This overview was independently summarized by

two researchers (ES, CD) and subsequently discussed to
reach consensus about main findings.

Results
Results revealed that, of the five participants, four
expressed a willingness to use a digital training tool to
acquire information-provision skills. They appreciated
the innovative approach and saw merit in the possibil-
ities offered by the technology to perform the training in
their own time and attuned to their own learning needs.

I’m a big proponent of e-learning because everybody
can learn things in their own way. I think it is a
great additional, … additional tool to improve your
skills in your own time. (#1, female)

A greater variety of ways to study would be wonder-
ful. That you can just … we can just learn something
and that your phone kinda does it for you … that
you only have to read a piece of text or watch a
short film … that information is just provided in the
form of a text message, that is of course brilliant. –
because we are so much used to that. That is much
nicer than a text book. (#2, male)

Participants questioned the reliability and value of a for-
mal assessment such as an entry test on the basis of the
limited number of consultations that would be assessed,
the assumed lack of clear criteria for rating communica-
tion skills, and the risk that trainees would then only up-
load their ‘best’ consultations.

There is also a chance that physicians will chose pa-
tients who are ‘easy’ … that is also my experience.

Table 3 Description of the main features of the e-learning and chatbot

Feature
Descriptiona

1: Entry test
Participants had to perform an ‘entry-test’ [9] comprising the video-recording of a consultation with one of their own pa-
tients [14]. This video-recording had to be sent to peers, who provided immediate feedback [15]. This task had to be per-
formed in the e-learning module as well as Chatbot.

2. Personalization
In the e-learning; the content and some assignments could be tailored to participants’ learning needs (e.g. to self-select a
module [4], to obtain access to supportive literature [7]). Moreover, the chatbot offered additional choices to personalize the
training experience such as whether the participant preferred to receive instructional material as text or video [10], or how
much time the participant wanted to spend on this specific session.

3. Information
presentation
The content of the instructional material was the same in both the e-learning and chatbot and comprised brief text, an ani-
mation and video fragments of consultations [7, 10, 11]. However, in the Chatbot this material was presented more inter-
active, whereas in the e-learning it was presented more static (scrolling and clicking).

4. Assignments
The e-learning contained assignments such as reviewing video-recorded consultations (their own or of colleagues) and leav-
ing a verbal message in response to an utterance of a videotaped patient [12]. The chatbot only contained the assignment
to leave a verbal message (to not to have too many repetitive tasks during the testing session).

5. Reminder
In the e-learning, an email appeared to remind the participant of a personal learning goal [18]. The chatbot provided a notifi-
cation on the participants cell phone, as a reminder.

6. Expert coaching
The e-learning module contained a menu-option facilitating consultation with a communication expert [21]. In de chatbot
module, the option was offered to consult a communication expert for example after having received a too low grade for
an assignment.

aThe numbers in brackets refer to the requirements described in Table 2

Page 10 of 17

You are likely to choose a conversation that’s run-
ning smoothly; you are not going to use your worst
conversations for this [e-learning]. (#2, male)

. Assessing everything isn’t feasible,, but you’re doing
it based on one video. It remains, well … a subjective
assessment. Suppose you could upload more videos.
Then it would be less about this one patient were
things maybe didn’t go as smooth. Yet, this would
come with the disadvantage of being very time-
intense. (#3, female)

Regarding the information presentation, participants ap-
preciated the combination of text, educational anima-
tion, and illustrative/exemplary video fragments of skills
as offered in both the e-learning and chatbot.

Generally, I appreciate to watch short films. Other-
wise, it tends to be a lot of text that doesn’t stick
[with you]. (#1, female)

[in response to the opportunity to watch short exem-
plary/prototypical films:] “it is very useful to have
examples of conversation techniques. You can always
read about it, but you just have to do it. (#2, male).

It’s great that it looks appealing, some visual cues
are nice. (#4, male)

Regarding the illustrative video fragments, some partici-
pants expressed a wish to see both positive and negative ex-
amples of skills. References to background papers, provided
as hyperlinks, or brief summaries thereof were welcomed.
Participants liked the ‘tone of voice’ to be informal and per-
sonal (e.g. your consultation vs the consultation) yet not
too informal (in particular with regard to the chatbot).

Concerning the assignments, the functionality of anno-
tating fragments of video-recorded consultations was
evaluated positively.

Its’ great. You learn from yourself and others; by re-
ceiving feedback from others.(#5, female)

It was recommended to make the assignment concrete,
not overly easy and to announce that feedback would be
provided to enhance motivation. All five test participants
valued the option to upload and respond to their own
video-recordings and those of peers. They considered
this to be novel, motivating, valuable, insightful, and bet-
ter than actually attending someone else’s consultation.

I would find it irritating if someone was sitting next
to me [in clinic] and watching all my movements.
Thus, I appreciate the videos. It’s a little bit of

hurdle, but gives you lots of insights; cause you are
also re-watching it by yourself. As opposed to having
someone sit next to you [in clinic], then you would
have to discuss everything right away –otherwise you
have already forgotten what you had discussed with
the patients. Thus, I think this is a very useful aspect
of it. (#3, female)

Yeah, I think it is very good to upload something,
cause you have obviously thought about it yourself;
and then you would like to hear what someone else
might think about it. I think that’s great. (#4, male)

Critical comments concerned emotional concerns or
practical barriers (time consuming, technical problems)
for making a recording. Some saw more value in discuss-
ing video’s in a (small) group.

It makes you quite vulnerable to have the conversa-
tion video-taped; especially if you’re not used to it. I
think that [this aspect] could cause some hesitation.
But by now, we’ve done it so many times that it be-
came routine. (#5, female)

The following suggestions were given to improve this
video-feedback feature: involve experts, have several rather
than one person provide feedback and guarantee privacy,
which includes a) permission of patients; b) restrictions in
the time that video’s are accessible for feedback and c) ex-
plicit agreements about respecting privacy.

The assignment to leave a verbal message in response
to an utterance of a video-recorded patient was consid-
ered “fun”, stimulating and relevant for the transfer of
skills to clinical practice.

Well that you yourself –that is pretty funny –
[laughing]. I like the idea that you … you obviously
miss the body language, but words … you hear what
somebody else would say … better than writing it
down.(#2, male)

Oh wonderful, that is actually funny: Interviewer:
Would you use this feature yourself? Yes, certainly,
in this manner. I would totally do that..(#3, female)

Yes it is nice; it’s about communication techniques
and you sit silently in front of a computer by your-
self. No, that is nice … I think it’s a nice experiment,
that I would encourage. (#5, female)

As a downside, it was noted that the presence of others
(e.g. colleagues in the room) may be a barrier to use this
functionality. Therefore, providing the option to (also)
type a response should be considered.

Page 11 of 17

Both the e-learning and chatbot offered the feature of gen-
erating reminders. Some saw the added value (# 5: “it would
help me”) whereas others would fear message overload, in
particular when these would appear on their mobile phone.
Participants were somewhat skeptical about the lack of
face-to-face feedback which they considered critical to
acquire communication skills. Therefore, the option to
receive expert coaching was well-received.

I think nobody knows that this is available. I’ve been
thinking more often about how to do it. One person
is obviously different from another, thus I think it
would be very nice if you had the opportunity to ask
someone to provide input once in a while. –but that
never occurred to me (#3, female)

Additionally, some concerns were voiced about privacy
issues regarding the use of video-recordings of consulta-
tions. Importantly, it was noted that the use of training
tools needed to be formally coordinated (e.g. clear dead-
lines, facilitation by coordinator, criteria for ‘success’, ac-
creditation points).

Four out of the five test participants favored the chat-
bot over the e-learning. The following positive reactions
were voiced about the chatbot: refreshing, faster and a
more informal form of communication, doesn’t feel as
work, low threshold to use this, convenient, might more
easily integrate in daily clinical routine.

It’s just faster; you have more of a feeling … with e-
learning it always feels like such movies take 5 mi-
nutes [gestures wildly], but that the essence/take-
home message could have been told on only one mi-
nute. Here you can chose if you want to watch a
short movie including an example / … e-learning
gives you that feeling that you don’t have to listen to
a full lecture; I can learn my way, and actually gain
more. (#1, female)

I think it’s fun; it’s a nice idea’ it’s more modern
… I learned more from this training than from
the previous. Thus, I think it works very well. Yet,
I foresee some practical issues: I imagine it being
difficult to motivate everybody to install the app
and actually do this training with each other. I
think this will be difficult, but if you do it in a
specific period of time, it would be possible I
think. (#4, male)

You have to make it practical, right! … otherwise,
you have to go back to your computer and log-in
again. However, if this is on your phone and you re-
ceive reminders to work on a certain topic … yeah,
that’s very accessible (#5, female)

On a more critical note, one participant felt that the
chatbot was rather in the lead whereas she would like to
be more in control herself. Some participants questioned
the value of a chatbot for watching video’s or reading
longer texts and felt they would be more easily dis-
tracted when using a chatbot as compared to an e-
learning.

I think it’s difficult to watch a movie, if it’s on your
phone. Extensive text is even more difficult I believe;
too much information. … You also showed a link to
more information, this seems less handy to read on
your phone. Yet, the way [of having a chatbot] ap-
peals to me a lot. (#1, female)

Two participants suggested to combine the e-learning
with a chatbot, by providing learning modules via a
more conventional e-learning and a digital coach to help
them in their daily practice.

It would be interesting to combine this [chatbot] with
the e-learning: That based on your answers, you will
get support from the chatbot. For example, “I can see
that these are topics you’re struggling with, would
you like me to tell you more about ‘tailoring’ (#4,
male)

Discussion
This paper describes the first three phases of the
CeHRes Roadmap [39] for the user-centred design of a
digital training tool aimed at supporting oncologists’
acquisition of information giving skills in the context of
oncology treatment. Digital training tools for communi-
cation skills training seem promising because they offer
busy oncologists the opportunity to gain knowledge
about and to practice their communication skills at
their own time and pace, at a location of their choice
and attuned to their own learning needs. Yet, to the
best of our knowledge, no such trainings are currently
available.
Participating oncologists acknowledged the relevance
of CST and responded positively to our proposed digital
training formats.
We provide insight into the issues that influence on-
cologists’ decisions to eventually use such a training
tool.
Based on literature, our starting point of building on
the principles of experiential practice [47] and reflective
learning [48], consultation of the users in the inquiry
phase of the development process [14], and on expert
opinion in the value specification phase, essential ele-
ments to consider for the digital training format were
personalization and interactivity.

Page 12 of 17

Personalization
In our prototypes we applied different strategies to offer
users a personalized experience. First, by asking oncolo-
gists to inform us what skills they want to learn regard-
ing treatment information provision, we could start with
content attuned to their needs. Subsequently, we allowed
users to pick and choose how they would learn by offer-
ing a non-linear approach. That is, they could skip or
choose particular content and thus map their own learn-
ing path. Of note, this runs the risk that learners skip
content that would actually be relevant to them. There-
fore, any personalized tool should eventually also incorp-
orate a progress monitoring system to assess whether,
despite personalization, the tool is delivering the desired
results - in our case, whether information giving skills
actually improve. To this end, our proposed tool in-
cluded the option of a pre- and post-test. To further
personalize the learning experience, we also tried to tap
into the users’ learning style and preference by offering
the option to choose from text, video, and animation.
This feature
was much
appreciated.
Moreover, we
started with developing an e-learning chatbot and phys-
ical reminders to see which learning environment would
fit oncologists best. The idea of physical reminders was
quickly discarded, as none of the participants appreci-
ated the concept. Additionally, we encountered clear dif-
ferences between users in their appreciation of the e-
learning versus conversational chatbot user-interface.
Purely from a personalization perspective it might be
recommended to integrate both interfaces in the digital
training, so the presentation format can be user-defined.
For optimal personalization, age factors, including ex-
perience with technology need to be taken into account.
We found oncologists in training to be more interested
in the chatbot than more senior oncologists. By offering
both the e-learning and chatbot in the digital training,
both senior and younger clinicians might be reached.

Interactivity
The need for interactivity is in line with a review which
concludes that learners greatly value (digital) courses
that allow to enter into a dialogue with a course tutor,
fellow students, or a virtual tutorial and to obtain on-
going feedback [59]. Oncologists are no exception in this
regard. The real time chat function in our chatbot is an
example of a functionality aimed at interactive dialogue.
The importance of interactivity to support peer-
feedback is intrinsically connected to the premises of ex-
periential and reflective learning [47, 48] and to the Pro-
fessional and Scholar roles of the CanMeds model,
which is nowadays the leading educational model under-
lying many medical curricula in the world [60]. Partici-
pating oncologists underscored the importance of peer-
feedback as a relevant feature of any training tool and

suggested themselves the use of videos of clinical consul-
tations. Video-based learning, as proposed in our proto-
types, by sharing and commenting on video-recordings
of clinical performance has been found to be effective
[61, 62]. Importantly, for actual implementation of such
a feature, privacy issues need to be taken well care of to
safeguard the privacy of patients as well as learners.
In addition to peer-feedback, many oncologists indi-
cated the wish to also receive personal feedback from a
communication expert. Expert feedback may be relevant
because peers may be biased in a positive direction,
guided by not wanting to be too critical in their feedback
to preserve the interpersonal relationship [63]. To ac-
commodate oncologists’ wish, we included the option to
consult a communication expert in our tool, which was
highly appreciated. However, this raises the question
whether it is possible to fully digitalize a communication
skills training. A blended learning approach, combining
the advantages of technology with traditional teaching
strategies, may therefore be the key to uptake in this
context. Blended learning integrates asynchronous e-
learning, which is independent of time and space, and
synchronous on-site learning, which is facilitated at a
fixed time by an educator [64]. Online learning plat-
forms can offer the opportunity for also the communica-
tion expert to review and annotate the work of students
at their own time and place. Online video-feedback is
feasible and effective [61, 65]. This way, the advantages
of both approaches can be combined. This is supported
by the finding that participants from blended learning
programs especially emphasized the value of the face-to-
face components [31, 32, 66].

The CeHres roapmap
A particular challenge of this project was to create a tool
that was engaging enough to capture the interest of busy
oncologists. We therefore deliberately chose an iterative
design process, such as the CeHRes roadmap, to create
as many opportunities as possible to check that the tools
we were developing would align with their needs and
preferences. This stepwise approach, comprising inter-
views, focus groups, user assessments, and individual
user testing, was helpful in generating valuable feedback
from the users. A lesson learned is that the use of small
steps also has some disadvantages. We noticed that par-
ticipants became progressively more enthusiastic about
the tools, the further developed they became. In a first
presentation, the possibilities and functionalities of the
foreseen training tools are still rather abstract and may
therefore not come across as very attractive. Hence, it is
challenging for a developer to keep users engaged for
further testing. Another lesson learned is that one
should not strive for ‘one size fits all’. Personalization
may be a way to also engage those who are initially

Page 13 of 17

reluctant, such as more senior clinicians. It implies that
to accommodate and thus reach as many individuals as
possible with a communication skills training, different
training formats should be offered alongside each other.
In hindsight, our decision to focus on oncologists in
training because they seemed more interested in com-
puter based training may have been a missed opportun-
ity to learn how to engage senior clinicians.
In our foreseen digital training we focused on the skill
of information-provision. Information-provision is par-
ticularly challenging in the oncology setting, although
specialists in other disciplines may be confronted with
similar issues. Oncology consultations are generally
characterized by high information density due to the
complexity of the life threatening diagnoses, the numer-
ous treatment options that are often available, and their
associated risk of serious side-effects. Importantly, this
information is likely to cause emotional distress in pa-
tients. For all of these reasons, the importance of high
quality communication skills is generally well recognized
in the oncology setting, as illustrated by published guide-
lines [11]. Despite room for improvement, communica-
tion skills trainings for oncology clinicians have been
widely implemented in the last decades [67].
In view of this context, medical oncologists might be rela-
tively prone to be involved in the development of a tool for
communication skills, as compared to clinicians in medical
specialties with less attention for this competency. Add-
itionally, a digital training targeted at information-provision
skills of oncologists will be particularly useful as a refresher
training to maintain or further improve their previously ac-
quired skills. For other medical specialists, it may be more
relevant to start with developing basic communication
skills. This most likely will require more traditional face-to-
face communication skills training.
Integrating stakeholder involvement in the develop-
ment process maximizes acceptability, potential effect-
iveness and thereby eventual implementation. However,
it is challenging to integrate expert knowledge and scien-
tific evidence in the process of attempting to include
and accommodate subjective opinions and experiences
from end-users. We struggled with this tension. We per-
formed a literature search to create an inventory of the
potential of an online intervention for communication
skills training and involved experts in the ‘learning con-
tent’ and ‘learning format’ group. Hence, members of
the research team were knowledgeable about the state of
the art. Yet, at the same time, we did not want to bias
the participants too much by introducing this know-
ledge, out of fear to restrict the richness of their input
regarding desired features of the tool and consequently
to create functionalities they themselves would not have
proposed. As a consequence, our eventual prototypes
may be considered relatively conventional.

To address this tension, future developers may consider
following the procedure as suggested by O’Brien and col-
leagues [68]. They propose, as a stage 1 in an iterative user-
centered design process, to compile the evidence base for
the issue addressed by the foreseen tool, preferably, albeit
not exclusively, by systematic reviews. Next, this evidence is
recorded as a list of ‘evidence statements’ which inform the
aims and content of subsequent co-design sessions. If evi-
dence needs to be compiled, this approach can be labor
and time intensive, and thus it would take a considerable
proportion of the time-line of a project. Where recently
conducted, high quality systematic reviews exist, these can
be used to develop evidence statements to inform the co-
design process [68]. The introduction of ‘evidence state-
ments’ would certainly be attractive to clinicians, as they
are used to and value the use of systematic reviews as an
important pillar of evidence based medicine.

Limitations and future directions
The following limitations need to be considered. Al-
though we applied a user-centered approach, by choos-
ing to use the CeHRes framework, this does not mean
that the ideas were fully co-created with the end-users.
Participant samples in each of the different phases were
relatively homogeneous and small and it was rather de-
manding to involve professionals over a longer period of
time. Although it is generally known that co-design asks
for considerable involvement of the participants, we
nevertheless again emphasize the effort that is required
to engage medical professionals in such a process As a
result, limited conclusions can be drawn. However, be-
cause in this early phase of development we were valid-
ating design decisions prior to a formal evaluation, the
qualitative data has been useful to inform the develop-
ment of our prototypes. Future studies, covering phase 4
(operationalization) and 5 (evaluation) of the CeHRes
roadmap, will need to progressively include more partic-
ipants and outcomes have to be measured more rigor-
ously, encompassing rigorous behavioural observation
and standardized assessment instruments (e.g. the Sys-
tem Usibility Scale), based on technology acceptance
models such as the Unified Theory of Acceptance and
Use of Technology (UTAUT), to assess the tools’ usabil-
ity, uptake and effectiveness [69, 70]. Finally, our proto-
types of training tools focused on one particular skill
only. That is, on the tailoring of information to patient
characteristics such as their need for information or level
of understanding. Tailoring of information is an import-
ant skill encompassing various sub tasks as illustrated in
Table
1.
Nevertheless,
other information
skills
are
equally important in discussing cancer treatment infor-
mation, such as structuring of the information and dem-
onstrating empathy. We decided to narrow the focus
down to tailoring, for the purpose of developing a

Page 14 of 17

prototype. A future tool may very well also address other
relevant communication skills.
Technology acceptance models [59, 70] predict that if
oncologists would perceive the characteristics of the
digital tools, such as their easy availability, as advantages
over a more traditional face-to-face training format, they
will be more likely to perceive the tools as useful and
therefore more inclined to accept them. Issues of accept-
ance, adoption and adherence as well as the effectiveness
of the tools in improving oncologist’s information-giving
skills have to be tested in summative evaluation studies,
as part of the last phase of the CeHRes roadmap (see
Fig. 1) [39]. Only rigorous evaluation studies, using the
full spectrum of qualitative and quantitative evaluation
methods, will be able to fill the gap between the postu-
lated benefits of digital training tools for communication
skills and actual outcomes [71]. On a last note, we ac-
knowledge that even if we succeed in developing a tool
that is accepted by oncologists, i.e. perceived as useful
and easy to use, and that has been proven effective, that
is succeeds in improving oncologists’ information giving
skills, contextual factors such as support from superiors,
accreditation points, and costs will determine the suc-
cess of its implementation.

Conclusion
In conclusion, extensive development work was con-
ducted in collaboration with multiple health care profes-
sionals to iteratively develop two innovative prototypes
of digital tools that would appropriately engage oncolo-
gists in learning effective information giving skills. We
expect that spending time on the design process will pay
off later, as such that we were able to gather insightful
data from users that informed the eventual prototypes.
The prototypes that were developed upon both literature
as well as users’ needs, were well appreciated and thus
provide a solid basis for further development and testing
in the operationalization phase, involving the introduc-
tion and use in actual practice [39].