Developing visualization-based decision
support tools for epidemiology

Alistair Sutcliffe1, Oscar de Bruijn1, Sarah Thew2,
Iain Buchan2, Paul Jarvis2, John McNaught3 and Rob Procter4

Method

User-centred design

We adapted scenario-based design27 and user-centred
requirements engineering,28 both of which advocate
the use of scenarios, storyboards and prototypes in
iterative cycles of requirements elicitation, design
exploration and user feedback to create the process.
Scenario-based design (SBD) was chosen owing to the
often volatile and complex requirements of e-science
applications. As research practices often change as an
investigation evolves, requirements can become mov-
ing targets, which is particularly true in the rapidly
developing field of biohealth informatics. SBD is well
suited to such circumstances because its iterative
approach facilitates collaborative design exploration

between users and developers. The process is summar-
ized in Figure 1.
Twenty-one
participants
were
involved
in
the
requirements
exploration
and
evaluation
session
(8 male, 13 female); representing two user groups:
eight academic epidemiologists and 13 public health
analysts who worked for Primary Care Trusts (PCTs;
local organizational units in the UK NHS, consisting
of one or more hospitals and associated healthcare ser-
vices including local doctors (general practitioners)).
Only one of the epidemiologists had any previous GIS
experience. Most of the public health analysts made
use of maps produced by colleagues with GIS training
but only one analyst regularly made use of GIS tools.
A ‘snowball’ approach to recruitment of academic epi-
demiologists
was
used;
initial
participants
were
recruited via ADVISES team member contacts and
each one was asked if he or she knew of other col-
leagues who might make use of geographical informa-
tion in his or her work. Health analysts were contacted
via a local public health analysts networking group.
Initial requirements elicitation involved only the
academic users. Four unstructured interviews were
conducted at the beginning of the project to gain
background knowledge on working practices, user

Prepare
Storyboards

Users

Elicit
scenarios

Analyse
expert
Dialogue

External
agent

Key

Refine
storyboards & 
scenarios

UI designs

concepts

Specify
workflows

Process

sequence

Specify
Require
ments

Develop
prototypes

Evaluate
prototypes

User
feedback

Developers

HCI principles
& patterns 
Information
source

Figure 1. Scenario-based design process, illustrated as a data flow diagram to show the sequence of activities in the
design process.

preferences and domain norms. Interviews were con-
ducted on site, allowing the epidemiologists to show
us existing software they prefer to use, discuss their
data management practices and allow us to view exam-
ple datasets. Users were encouraged to talk aloud as
they worked, prompted by questions from the analyst,
to analyse workflows and the decision-making process
in epidemiological research. These early interviews
provided key insights into epidemiologists’ attitudes,
which influenced the project direction:


An early exploratory interview discussed the soft-
ware tools used to carry out epidemiological
research. A question about image and graph cre-
ation software led to a discussion about epidemiol-
ogists’ preference for numbers over images – they
feel images can be ambiguous and open to inter-
pretation, and prefer to see numbers in academic
publications.

Routine
data
collection
and
warehousing
are
becoming
the
norm
within
the
NHS
and
Department of Health. The academic users had
access to these data, and made use of them in
hypothesis testing, but they were also interested in
the idea of data-driven hypothesis generation and
pattern identification.

The academic epidemiologists were observed carry-
ing out their research and in five weekly progress meet-
ings. These observations helped to gather background
knowledge, as well as understanding epidemiological
language, research questions and workflows. A key
orientation to explore requirements as research ques-
tions was motivated by the Goals–Questions–Results
method.29 Research questions elicited from academic
users were used to create scenarios and use cases that
envisioned a new system to support analysis, e.g.
‘What are the characteristics of the GP (General
Practitioners)-registered population in North West
England?’ This scenario described how a user could
explore a map of patients registered with PCTs in the
North West, stratifying the population by location,
gender and ethnicity. Scenarios were supplemented by
analysis of the users’ language in interviews and meet-
ings to develop an ontology describing the key compo-
nents of epidemiological maps. Development of this
ontology also informed the design of the query
interface.
Subsequently, interviews and workshops were held
with both academic and health analyst users. Ten
workshops were facilitated by the second author, seven
with health analysts and three with academic users. A
combination of scenarios, sketching and brainstorm-
ing was used in the first workshops to generate design
ideas. Scenarios, based on initial interviews, were used

as ‘idea seeds’. For example, one scenario contained
data that were too sparse to produce a statistically
sound map so the data had to be aggregated into larger
units. Storyboard sketches were prepared for each sce-
nario; however, these were presented only after users
had been given the opportunity to sketch ideas them-
selves. In subsequent workshops more detailed story-
boards and prototypes were presented, and discussed
in ‘walkthroughs’ based on the scenarios. The analyst
facilitated the walkthrough by explaining the opera-
tional sequence then requesting feedback and sugges-
tions for improvements from the users.

Experience with user-centred design

Preliminary analysis with academic epidemiologists
created requirements for a system that supported
querying datasets, statistical analyses of differences
between populations and trends over time, which pro-
duced displays of the retrieved results on maps and
graphs with summaries of the statistical analyses. As
the application had to serve two user communities, we
investigated how the initial expert-orientated system
might be used by analysts in the NHS, who had some
appreciation of statistics but were not experts. The
study aimed to find out how much of the functionality
users were prepared to use if they did not have knowl-
edge of the research-orientated workflows, familiar to
the academic epidemiologists.
The preliminary design used in paper prototyping is
illustrated in Figure 2 (more detail on the prototypes
can be viewed at www.youtube.com/watch?v=8EfSM9
KG3Dg). This prototype was used in scenario walk-
through sessions observing the users’ behaviour while
they followed scenarios to answer relatively complex,
realistic questions. The users were health analysts with
varying degrees of experience. The requirements story-
board walkthrough used several scenarios to assess
health analyst users’ reactions to the prototype and,
inter alia, the academic users’ mode of operation.
Design of the scenarios was motivated by the need to
encourage the users to explore functional requirements
as well as investigating their domain-specific practices
and workflows. For example, one scenario contained
data that were too sparse to produce a statistically
sound map so the data had to be aggregated into larger
units. Another scenario asked users to interpret popu-
lation densities in map regions according to the colour
coding, in order to test awareness of the danger of
drawing inferences from small samples. Areas that
showed high levels of diabetes had very small popula-
tions, making it impossible to confirm whether or not
they were genuine hotspots.
The workshops provided a good opportunity for
both groups of users to articulate their processes and

6

Figure 2. Upper panel: paper prototype illustrating a map of a fictitious city including an apparent hotspot indicated by
shading the distribution; lower panel: later concept demonstrator prototype, illustrating scripted query–results display
sequences.

7

abstract concepts, and provided data for both develop-
ment of an ontology and understanding of tacit work-
flow processes, such as how the researchers make
decisions about the reliability of a particular dataset.
Scenarios facilitated exploring possible system designs
as well as producing information on the users’ tasks
and workflow. Several design representations were
used, ranging from simple storyboards or paper proto-
types, through scripted concept demonstrators to
functional prototypes. Scripted concept demonstrators
illustrated pre-set operational sequences within the
look and feel of the prototype, although they were
implemented
as
PowerPoint
animations
or
in
Macromedia Director. Prototypes were implemented
in Microsoft Studio with Visual Basic. The various
prototypes were used in combination with scenarios in
task walkthroughs to explore how the software tool
might support the steps in the user’s work.
The users approved of the basic design concepts:
multi-panel displays, query sliders coupled to dynami-
cally updated displays and a high-level research ques-
tion interface, rather than SQL-style queries. New
requirements emerged for comparison between areas
using two maps as well as complex association ques-
tions between two or more variables, e.g. ‘What is the
link between asthma and obesity?’ The health analysts
used local geographic knowledge when interpreting
maps and requested support for understanding the
implications of local geography, for example adding
overlays of the street network or adding point locations
of schools or hospitals. However, these users’ actions
did
show
potential
errors
in
walkthroughs
with
expertise-probing scenarios. For example, the majority
of users did not notice the data density problem asso-
ciated with coloured regions; furthermore, only one
user explored different boundary levels in order to
examine the hotspot apparent on the map.
The requirements analysis with academic epide-
miologists and the investigations with health analysts
were summarized in two workflows to reflect their
respective practices (see Figure 3).
Academic users progressed through cycles of check-
ing and validation tasks to satisfy themselves that the
patterns on map displays and accompanying statistical
analysis would support valid conclusions, rather than
being misled by hotspots in small areas, or by inap-
propriate and sparse distributions. In contrast, health
analysts had a much simpler workflow focused on
inspection of results displayed on maps with limited
use of statistical tests. They did not appear to be con-
cerned with such validation steps; instead, they were
more interested in exploring the implications of visible
patterns on the map display.
In summary, the results of the evaluation study
pointed to three main conclusions:

(i)
Health
analysts
adopted
different
workflows
from the academic epidemiologists. This reflects
different research questions; for example, aca-
demic epidemiologists are interested in finding
general trends and causal influences between
several variables, whereas the health analysts
requested
simpler,
location-based
questions
reflecting their concerns with local health issues.
(ii)
Use of the statistics was often incomplete and
sometimes even incorrect, depending on the
level of statistical expertise. In particular, some
health analyst users exhibited a ‘confirmation
bias’, employing statistics that confirm rather
than contradict their hypotheses. Some partici-
pants did not engage in data analysis, assuming
that the system would ‘know best’. As a result
they could misinterpret data and draw incorrect
conclusions (rationale gap).

Q

Academic Epidemiologist Workflow
Academic Epidemiologist Workflow

Select
Dataset(s)

Create
Query

Check
Results
Distribution

Modify
Ranges

View
Map
Display

Apply
Statistical
Tests

Draw
Conclusions
Check
Area
Distributions
Change
Area
Selections

Health Analyst Workflow
Health Analyst Workflow

Select
Dataset(s)

Create
Query

Inspect
Map
Display

Apply
Statistical
tests

hotspots

Conclusions

Key

Draw
Conclusions

Activity
Sequence

optional sequence

Figure 3. Academic user and heath analyst workflows,
illustrated as data flow diagrams to show major activities
organized in a workflow sequence.

8

(iii)
There was a need for more local geographical
detail so that the health analysts could exploit
their detailed local knowledge to interpret pat-
terns apparent on the maps. For example, they
were interested in plotting the locations of par-
ticular services or amenities to see if these related
to the occurrence or outcome of diseases.

A statistics advisor component assisted health ana-
lyts to query, evaluate and explore datasets, while a
visualization expert component encoded the value
ranges on map and graph displays to optimize pattern
analysis. These advisors were motivated by the require-
ment to caution against unsafe inferences being drawn
from sparse or awkwardly distributed data in map dis-
plays, and to save the users effort in choosing visual
display coding. To bridge the rationale gap, we yoked
the research questions and workflows to pre-set config-
urations of displays. This design was also motivated by
the display combination pattern, so users could view
concurrent juxtaposed visualizations of maps and
graphs, to encourage comprehension of the underlying
data models.

User interface design and implementation

The workflows from the two user communities posed
problems in how to allocate somewhat different sets of
the requirements to each user community. Producing

two versions of ADVISES would lead to maintenance
concerns and incur the additional expense of duplicat-
ing software processes. The solution adopted was to
develop a layered architecture with a core functionality
targeted at the health analyst users, with an outer layer
of functionality for the academic users who required
additional statistical analysis. Exposure of the func-
tions was controlled by menu configuration on the user
interface.
Users form queries as high-level question types.
Then, queries are elaborated by selecting one or more
subject populations from the available datasets with
variables such as age, gender, socio-demographics, life-
style and medical history followed by the desired mea-
sures, which are usually body mass index (BMI) and
other obesity metrics. Queries are organized in menu-
picking lists (see Figure 4), which can be combined
with query-by-pointing to map areas and use of sliders
to set value ranges; hence queries can be composed
flexibly and iteratively. The location questions are ela-
borated with specializations to create display overlays
that support the health analysts’ desires to investigate
local implications of hotspots, such as proximity to doc-
tors’ surgeries, hospitals and schools.
All queries can be constrained by map areas, and
overlays selected for additional spatial data, e.g. point
location of health centres or sports facilities. Query
range sliders become active once the population and
measures variables are selected (e.g. for age, the BMI

1. Select Question Type
2. Select Population Variables

Comparison, Association
Difference, Trend
Location

Gender
Age (range)
Socio-economic status
Clinical history
Occupation
Physical attributes

Body/Mass Index (BMI)
Obesity

Set  value range 
Queries with sliders

Change range splits
by graph sliders

3. Select Measures

4. Choose area
Constraint/ overlay

key
Area
(Ward, SOA, Region)
Proximity
UI operation

Associated 
attributes

Operational
sequence

Optional
operation

Figure 4. Query interface operational sequence. The sequence of user operations is shown by arrows with dotted arcs
representing optional iterations in the sequence.

9

range). The display for the ‘check area density’ task in
the current prototype is illustrated in Figure 5.
The multi-panel display affords rapid data inspec-
tion and exploration of epidemiology datasets, while
colour and patterns in the charts indicate sparse and
non-normal distributions when statistics analyses and
other inferences may be invalid. Incremental analysis
is supported by sliders for value-range queries, so ana-
lysts can carry out sensitivity analysis by changing
range values, e.g. inspect obesity by area by age.
Range category histograms and descriptive statistics
support the ‘check the data distribution’ task. Users
can inspect the shape of the distribution and use skew
and kurtosis metrics to check symmetry and normal-
ity. They can segment a continuous distribution into
discrete categories (e.g. extreme, high, medium or low
BMI) using sliders to subdivide the range. This
enables sensitivity analysis of range-category subdivi-
sions to ensure that, for instance, distribution tails
have sufficient data points for valid statistical analysis.
Box-and-whisker plots30 are coupled to the map
displays so the boxes represent distributions (means,
confidence intervals) within map subareas. These
plots support the ‘check area distributions’ task; for

example, long and thin or short and fat boxes indicate
sparse distributions with high standard deviations
(long and thin) or high kurtosis (short and fat). The
graphs and maps are coordinated and queryable sur-
faces, so users can point and click on subareas of the
map to express a location query. The multi-panel dis-
play affords rapid data inspection and exploration of
epidemiology datasets, while patterns in the charts
indicate sparse and non-normal distributions when
statistical analyses and other inferences may be invalid.

Statistics advisor

The aim of the statistics advisor is to warn health analyst
users about sparse distributions where false inferences
may be drawn from low numbers. However, there are
occasions when looking at low numbers is unavoidable,
for example when investigating a rare disease, so the
advisors are configurable and can be turned off under
user control. Some advice is given passively by high-
lighting areas in the presentations that warrant atten-
tion, with pop-ups to explain why attention is needed.
A monitor alert function compares map area
populations
and
densities
(populations/area)
and

Figure 5. Prototype user interface showing the map–chart display combination for the ‘check area density’ task (For
more detail see video demonstration at www.youtube.com/watch?v=RpMLGmQtRs4).

10

distribution statistics (standard deviation, skew, kurto-
sis) to alert the user when any of these values exceeds
a pre-set threshold. The figure or map area is high-
lighted to warn the user. A pop-up containing the
threshold value appears when the user’s mouse is
placed over the figure/area. The alert reminds the user
about properties of the underlying data distribution,
and thus contributes to closing the rationale gap. As
the validity of distribution depends on the nature of
the dataset, the alert function is configurable so the
rules can be edited to deal with general health (normal
datasets) or rare events (disease epidemiology: non-
normal datasets).

Visualization advisor

Design of the visualization advisor was motivated by
the requirement to display more than one variable on a
map. Visual coding requires psychological knowledge;
however, the knowledge can be formalized so the
expert advisor module automatically codes the range
categories on the maps and graphs. Complex research
questions may involve two or three variables, e.g.
‘What is the distribution of type II diabetes and obesity
for different levels of socio-economic deprivation in
different areas of the North West health region?’ This
association-location question implies visualization of
the average density of diabetes patients and overweight
people
in
each
health
district.
Assuming
range-
category subdivisions by quintiles, the visual coding
has to represent 5 3 3 coding combinations in any
one area.
HCI
knowledge
from
the
visualization
litera-
ture20,31,32 was applied to specification of an auto-
mated visualization coding function. Shape and size
was ruled out as this attribute was constrained by the
map areas, e.g. different line sizes are not reliably dis-
criminated and common area boundaries made this
solution
unworkable.
Three-dimensional
encoding
(e.g. histogram bars on map areas) was avoided
because of the occlusion problem, leaving colour and
texture. Advice on colour coding favoured a single col-
our saturation scale rather than rainbow spectrum
codes.32 Guidance on texture coding was not so spe-
cific, so we decided to use single texture density gradi-
ents (e.g. dot stipples, bar density) rather than several
different textures, to avoid imposing a learning burden
on users.33 Two variables could be represented on one
area, one by colour and the other by texture. As some
colour–texture combinations produced discriminability
problems, ends of the ranges could not be used; how-
ever, this still left sufficient encodings to represent five
or six range categories for each variable (see Figure 6).
The visualization expert inspects metadata associ-
ated with the dataset to determine whether the

variable has a continuous distribution, is discrete or is
an enumerated set. This indicates the number of cate-
gories for each variable, so in the case of continuous
distributions a default quintile range split is assumed.
The visualization expert automatically selects the cod-
ings, favouring colour if only one variable is displayed.
When small map areas are present, a warning is given
that discrimination of categories in small areas may
not be reliable, as the texture gradients will not be easy
to discriminate. Other elements of the design include
an annotation tagger, which enables users to label and
save results displays.

Implementation

The system was implemented in C# using MS
Silverlight for graphics and animating map displays for
trend questions so that successive displays gradually
morphed into each other to enable users to see the
trend change over time within different map areas. A
distributed architecture was adopted and developed as
a set of web services, with major class packages in the
following functional areas:


Dataset access: loads datasets from remote servers.

Map display: loads shape files from the UK land
registry
server
and
displays
maps
using
MS
Charting libraries. Map displays can be overlaid so
point data (e.g. location of health clinics, sports
facilities) can be displayed at appropriate locations.

Charts and statistics display: runs basic statistical
analysis scripts (R script calls) then displays range
split histograms, box-and-whisker plots, etc., using
MS Charting.

Dialogue management: handles the query interface,
interactive query-by-pointing and sliders.

Expert advisor: classes that implement the statistics
and visualization experts, with dataset monitors to
trigger advice.

Map shape files, databases, query handling and sta-
tistical analysis components were remote services;
other components were client resident. However, it is
worth noting that several functions were not imple-
mented, in particular a set of configuration editors that
would have made the ADVISES system into a porta-
ble, flexible toolset that could be configured for differ-
ent domains to support other scientific data-driven
research
requiring
visualization,
e.g.
population
dynamics researchers.

Evaluation: prototypes and process

The prototype was subject to three cycles of evaluation
after
the
requirements
exploration-design
phase.

11

Round one was formative for usability debugging and
design improvement while the second round was more
summative in nature and captured users’ attitudes and
satisfaction ratings for the prototype. In both rounds,
users completed a representative set of tasks that
enabled assessment of system performance. These
tasks were to perform queries on epidemiology data-
sets, display the results on maps and graphs then com-
pare the geographic distribution of obesity in several
healthcare areas. The latter task involved further inter-
active query–display cycles using the sliders to perform
a sensitivity analysis.
During each round of the evaluation, all partici-
pants (eight users: two academic epidemiologists and
six health analysts) quickly and confidently created
their first map and, without being asked to do so, went
on to explore the map, looking at trends, subdividing
data into smaller categories (e.g. males and females),
switching between geographic boundaries, and then
reviewing the associated statistics to help them under-
stand the significance (or otherwise) of observed pat-
terns. The users’ comments were coded as positive
and negative and categorized as impressions, usability

and attitude to future use, as illustrated in Table 1.
The comments were very positive in both evaluations,
although the total net positive comments were similar
in both rounds. One reason for this was that users
made different, new negative comments in round two
after the problems perceived in round one had been
fixed.
Participants found the combination of geographic
visualization and descriptive statistics powerful and
easy to explore:

I love stuff like this; it’s nice having the descriptive stats, when
you put data into [commercial GIS package] it can be
misleading.
(Health analyst 3)

It’s really easy to figure out; it’s at your fingertips.
(Health analyst 4)

After working through the set of tasks, users
were asked about their experiences with the system.
The majority felt that their experiences were positive,
but
some
users
felt
that,
although
they
had
successfully created a map, the system was not
welcoming:

Figure 6. Visual encoding using red–green colour saturation and texture gradients.

12

It’s very blank and a bit unfriendly looking. Once the data is
in it looks much better.
(Health analyst 1)

It’s not clear where to start; there should be a big ‘start here’ sign.
(Health analyst 3)

These comments led to additional design changes
that were tested in the final prototype. The initial map
design was evaluated, and the mixed reaction to the
redesign led to additional changes, which were tested
in the final round of evaluation. Thus, each round of
the evaluation directly influenced the next iteration of
design and development.
In the final evaluation (four users: two health ana-
lysts, two academic users) all tasks were completed
successfully apart from minor difficulties in viewing
statistics and adding point data on maps. The users’
rating of the system on a range of qualities was highly
positive; see Table 2.
Comments were also positive apart from some diffi-
culties relating to features added after round two
(point data on maps) such as controls for turning the
display of leisure facilities on and off, although users
liked the effect:

It’s useful, I’d use schools. I’d like bus routes too.

It’d be useful to use this to look at hospital provision.
(Health analyst 3, 6)

Other comments were positive with suggestions for
further improvements, demonstrating that develop-
ment needs to be a continuous process:

I enjoyed using the system; it’s useful, but it needs titles.

I like having two maps side by side, the two colours and dots,
it’s OK, but a bit crazy, like crazy ladybirds.

I’d like to be able to hide the descriptive statistics so you can see
the map bigger.

I could use this in my job, but it’d be more useful if I could export
the map as a jpeg. The map and legends, and the forest plot.
(Health analyst 2, 4, 5, 6)

The current state of ADVISES is that roll-out of
the product version is currently under way in a pro-
gramme managed by Northwest e-Health funded by
the North West Development Agency to promote col-
laboration between the University of Manchester and
NHS Trusts in the North West of England. This ini-
tiative provides evidence that our approach to user
engagement is appropriate, as our users are prepared
to sponsor the final development of the prototype; this
involves re-engineering some of the code to increase
robustness and reliability as well as implementing the
code in the users’ software environment.
Of the techniques we employed, the combination of
storyboards, scenarios and prototypes integrated in a
UCD
cycle
was
the
key
to
user
engagement.
Visualization of realistic design enables users to critique
and contribute ideas in their own terms without having
to understand software engineering notations. Our
experience has been that even simple notations such as
use cases present a barrier to understanding; further-
more, abstract models are less meaningful for users.
The second reflection is the importance of conversation
and dialogue, especially when it is anchored in the user’s
domain and language. Talking through and demonstrat-
ing working practices are important motivators for end
users. In workshops, conversations have the added
advantage that users outnumber software professionals,

Table 1. Summary of participants’ responses.

Round one responses
Round two responses

Positive
Negative
Positive
Negative

First impressions of the system?
5
3
6
2
System easy to understand?
7
1
7
1
Enjoy using the system?
8
0
8
1
Would you use the system in your job?
7
1
5 (2 possibly)
1
Total net positive comments
22
23

Interviews were transcribed and the participants’ answers coded as positive, negative or neutral. Total net positive comments were
calculated by summing all positive comments, subtracting negative comments, and scoring ‘possible’ as 0.5 positive.

Table 2. Users’ rating of system qualities in the final
(round three) evaluation, where 1 = very poor and
7 = ideal.

Question
Average rating

Overall terrible/wonderful
6
Difficult/easy to understand
5.7
Frustrating/satisfying to use
5.5
Dull/stimulating
6.5
Rigid/flexible
5.5
Difficult/easy to navigate
6

13

and hence have more chance to ‘own’ the dialogue and
thus direct it towards their own goals.

Discussion

The contribution of ADVISES visualization design has
been to explore multiple concurrent views of maps and
graphs to provide flexible support for both health ana-
lysts and academic epidemiologists. Multiple displays
enable different users to scan the maps and graphs
according to their needs, and hence different workflows
can be accommodated without changing the display.
Linking research questions to display templates sup-
ports the users’ workflow more directly, by providing all
the necessary information related to the question and
users’ analysis tasks. Although concurrent multi-panel
displays may appear to increase complexity, none of our
users complained about the displays being too complex.
While multiple concurrent visualizations are provided
by GIS systems and commercial products which have
evolved from Shneiderman’s research,19,34 our contribu-
tion has been to integrate dynamic querying with GIS
as well as introducing high-level ‘questions’ interfaces.
The design has adapted design concepts in the Lifelines
visualizations,21,35 and extended interactive visualization
for spatial as well as temporal data analysis. Map visuali-
zations with colour-coded maps and inter-variable rela-
tional links similar to those of Shneiderman and Aris26

have been developed for cancer research,36 although this
application did not implement dynamic querying and
colour coding was manual rather than automated as in
ADVISES.
Although the elements (graphics, maps, query sli-
ders) of the ADVISES interface in isolation were not
new, their integration in a practical solution was. The
success of ADVISES in migrating towards a product,
sponsored by the NHS user organization, demon-
strates the effectiveness of our approach. ADVISES
shared many design features with the Pennsylvania
Cancer Atlas: both systems have map displays, tem-
poral animations and multiple graphical displays;
although only ADVISES implemented sliders for
dynamic ‘what if?’ queries, and expert advisors are a
testament to its HCI design heritage. However, the
Cancer Atlas did have a population pyramid graph for
epidemiology analysis, which appears to be an omis-
sion from ADVISES. Bhowmick et al.16 report a set of
design guidelines from their experience, including
interactive queries and multiple displays. The conver-
gence of the two systems may have been the conse-
quence of a similar UCD process. The Pennsylvania
Cancer Atlas team carried out three rounds of proto-
typing and evaluation, although they did not report
using storyboards or scenarios.

The mix of designer-led initiative and responding to
changes in user requirements worked well. The basic
design paradigm of multiple displays and dynamically
coupled queries and displays introduced research-
inspired design into health informatics tools. These
design concepts stimulated interest, and hence engage-
ment, among the users. The expert advisor modules,
which were a designer initiative in response to prob-
lems discovered during the requirements analysis, were
not seen as an imposition by the users, as they might
have been; for instance, the statistics advisor might be
viewed as criticizing users’ judgement. We attribute
user acceptance of these ideas to the process of engage-
ment where the problems and proposed solutions were
discussed openly with the users and illustrated in story-
boards and prototypes so that the design implications
were explicit. On the user-led requirements side, sev-
eral aspects of the design arose directly from users’
suggestions: for example, the two maps comparative
displays, changes to the forest plots, and functions for
subdividing continuous distributions into range cate-
gories. Iterative UCD made the changes in response to
users’ requests visible in a short time period, which
was a positive motivation for engagement. Design, or
more realistically emergent transformation of working
practices, evolved throughout the process as users
responded to presentations of the tools, and tools and
tasks co-evolved during the project.
The design process we adopted was inspired by
HCI patterns,37 for example the multi-panel display
affords quick visual scanning, while the alpha slider
yoked query and display is a well-known design in the
visualization community. Clearly many visualization
patterns could be articulated from knowledge pro-
duced
by
the
visualization
research
commu-
nity;20,26,31,32,38 however, such knowledge does not
appear to have been encapsulated in HCI patterns.
One barrier may be the link between the problem con-
text, usually expressed as tasks or scenario, and visua-
lization design. One future area of work may be to
generalize our experience by documenting concrete
scenarios, more general queries intended to map to
information search scenarios, and appropriate visuali-
zation designs as patterns. Generic task and visualiza-
tion
design
frameworks39,40
could
organize
such
patterns into a pattern language.
The visualization tools we produced are not as gen-
eric as automated visual user interface development
tools; however, we believe the combination of high-
level questions linked to appropriate display templates
provided a generalizable approach to visualization
design. Although the visualization design was not par-
ticularly novel, the high-level query interface with
question types such as ‘trend’, ‘association’ and ‘dif-
ference’ was more innovative. Our implementation

14

linked to each question type with pre-set combinations
of charts and maps, such as trend being linked to a
series of maps for time-based queries. In future work
we intend to adapt a more plan-based approach41 to
dynamic configuration of visual displays linked to
more flexible question types. Development of auto-
matic visual coding of variables represents a modest
advance in design of automated visualization tools,
which could be extended to coding a wider range of
data types. The visual coding using colour and texture
has been explored by others,33,38 although texture was
used to code separate categories rather than categories
based on partitioning variable ranges. However, we
believe that users should be able to maintain control
over visualization design, so our approach has been to
develop configurable tools rather than sophisticated
layout planners.
The user-centred approach adopted in ADVISES
shared iterative cycles of storyboards, prototyping and
user evaluation with the web application for obesity
management reported by Stevens et al.,18 who note
the importance of using early prototypes to clarify
design ideas, while acknowledging the importance of
experts in contributing to system models. We also
found that the expert role was essential to ensure a sta-
tistically correct analytic process. The combination of
techniques in a user-centred approach combined with
active user involvement also facilitated acceptance of
new working practices, similar to the experience of
Beuscart-Zephir et al.,17 in re-engineering workflows
in a medication management application. We also con-
cur with their findings that developers and human fac-
tors experts need in-depth understanding of the
domain to realize effective process redesign.
Our users responded positively to their involvement
in the design process; however, time was the main bar-
rier to more in-depth participation. The academic
users were busy but at least co-located in the univer-
sity so arranging requirements analysis sessions was
relatively easy. In contrast, access to the health analysts
on various sites around Manchester was more difficult.
The academic users were engaged in the design pro-
cess more positively and articulated specific require-
ments, such as the need for a ‘statistics advisor’
function as well as design details concerning layout
and format of graphical displays. Health analysts were
less directly engaged and made fewer design sugges-
tions, although they did contribute ideas for the map
and graphical layouts. Generally, the health analysts
preferred simpler user interfaces, whereas the aca-
demic users wanted more functions and complexity.
On reflection, the lower levels of participation of the
health analysts may have been due to lower frequen-
cies of visits and meetings, although there may also
have been a reaction to the design ownership being

perceived as being ‘too academic’. In future we recom-
mend targeting designs on specific users rather than
trying to adopt a ‘one size fits all’ solution.
Our workshop-orientated approach, with a technique
combination of storyboards, scenarios and prototypes,
was successful; however, some key decisions, such as
inclusion of the statistics advisor, reflected the interests
of the academic users rather than the health analysts.
Geographic and organizational separation of the two
user groups led to a ‘two-track’ approach that militated
against joint workshops and hence discussion to recon-
cile divergent stakeholder
views. The user-centred
approach shared iterative cycles of storyboards, proto-
typing and user evaluation with the web application for
obesity management reported by Stevens et al.,18 who
noted the importance of using early prototypes to clarify
design ideas, while acknowledging the importance of
experts in contributing to system models. We also found
that the expert role was essential to ensure a statistically
correct analytical process. The combination of tech-
niques in a user-centred approach combined with active
user involvement also facilitated acceptance of new
working practices, similar to the experience of Beuscart-
Zephir et al.17, in re-engineering workflows in a medica-
tion management application. We also concur with their
findings that developers and human factors experts
need in-depth understanding of the domain to realise
effective process redesign.
The visualization design, while it satisfied the users,
was not innovative and was disappointing for academic
members of the design team who wanted to suggest
more
adventurous
visualizations
using
three-
dimensional and multiple-view design (e.g. refs 22, 23)
and more complex query interfaces. More advanced
visualizations were suggested and rapidly rejected by
the academic epidemiologists, who had firm views that
the visualization should be based on simple maps and
charts. Although the designers were frustrated in their
initial ambitions, the multi-panel, query slider proto-
types were accepted as a considerable advance over the
commercially available GIS packages with separate
charts and maps. Our experience reflects the difficulty
in transferring advanced visualization research into
practice. One interpretation is that practical visualiza-
tion design needs to be driven by thorough require-
ments analysis and user participation, as exemplified by
our approach; an alternative interpretation is that
advanced visualization design needs to be introduced
incrementally as users learn to exploit the potential of
more advanced designs. Our experience also demon-
strates that innovation in visualization design may con-
flict with more conservative user preferences, raising an
interesting question about how far designers should go
in promoting their ideas on the one hand, or serving
the interests of users on the other.

15

The vision of Internet-based e-health support tools
we started with was tempered by the practical con-
straints of implementing distributed services; however,
we contend it was better to have succeeded in deliver-
ing a more localized solution that was valued by stake-
holders than a more ambitious, distributed solution
that might have failed. Indeed, the track record of
innovative solutions in e-science is uneven, with suc-
cess in coordinated communities but failure in areas
with divergent stakeholder interests.42 In our experi-
ence, investing in user engagement paid off in accep-
tance of a limited but effective solution, but scaling
this approach to coordinate interests of multiple dis-
tributed stakeholders is difficult. A common shared
interest may be the prerequisite for success of multi-
party Internet collaborative e-science.
In future work we will extend the statistics advisor
as a more proactive recommender system that suggests
appropriate algorithms to complement statistical anal-
ysis; for example, in spatial representation of disease
data when questions of proximity, gradient over space
and density are important, smoothing algorithms can
be applied to mitigate problems of uneven spatial dis-
tributions.43 LifeLine visualizations21,35 will be inte-
grated with maps for trend questions and we intend to
explore the use of maps with semantic substrate visua-
lizations26 for more complicated associative queries
and bridging the rationale gap. Contextual evaluations
in users’ workplaces will explore the fit of the
ADVISES architecture with the working practices of
diverse stakeholders to deliver effective support for
health informatics. We also intend to make the
ADVISES tools a shared e-science resource so the abil-
ities and insights of both health analysts and academic
researchers in epidemiology can be combined to inves-
tigate both country-wide and local perspectives on epi-
demiological problems. This will require implementing
configuration editors so end users can customize the
tools for different databases, query terminology and
layout of different combinations of (map, charts,
tables, etc.) displays. Integration of such configuration
tools presents a considerable future challenge to realize
an end-user scientific visualization toolkit.