Including the voice of paediatric patients: Cocreation
of an engagement game

Lorynn Teela MSc, PhD candidate1,2,3
Lieke E. Verhagen MSc, Junior researcher1

Mariken P. Gruppen MD, PhD, Pediatrician4
Maria J. Santana PhD, Associate Professor5,6

Martha A. Grootenhuis PhD, Professor Pediatric Psycho‐Oncology7
Lotte Haverman PhD, Principal Investigator1,2,3

1Child and Adolescent Psychiatry and
Psychosocial Care, Emma Children's Hospital,
Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands

2Mental Health, Amsterdam Public Health,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands

3Child development, Amsterdam
Reproduction and Development, Amsterdam,
The Netherlands

4Department of General Pediatrics, Emma
Children's Hospital, Amsterdam UMC,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam,
The Netherlands

5Department of Community Health Sciences,
Cumming School of Medicine, University of
Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada

6Department of Pediatrics, Cumming School
of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary,
AB, Canada

7Psychosocial Research and Care Innovation,
Princess Maxima Center for Pediatric
Oncology, Utrecht, The Netherlands

Correspondence

Lotte Haverman, PhD, Child and Adolescent
Psychiatry & Psychosocial Care, G8‐136,
Emma Children's Hospital, Amsterdam UMC,
Postbox 22660, 1100 DD Amsterdam,
The Netherlands.

Funding information

Stichting Steun Emma; Fonds NutsOhra

2
Methods

A user‐centred design, as described in the literature by Gulliksen
et al.,25 was used. Key principles of an user‐centred design include
user‐focused and active user involvement throughout the entire
development process. These principles were guaranteed by actively
involving all representative users, including adolescents with a
chronic condition, clinicians, researchers, the Patient Alliance for
Rare and Genetic Diseases (VSOP), the Dutch Childhood Cancer
Organization (VKN) and a youth panel of Fonds NutsOhra (FNO).
This youth panel consists of adolescents with a chronic condition,
who contributed with ideas and suggestions to several projects
aiming to improve social engagement in health care. All representa-
tive users were involved in all phases of the design process—from
writing the project plan to the final version of the game. Other
principles, such as prototyping and evaluate use in context, were
applied by developing, testing and continuously adapting the draft
versions of the game. In addition, the draft versions were tested at
every stage of the development process with the end‐users in a
real‐life context. For the development and design of the game, we
collaborated with design agency Studio Dam (professional attitude—
www.studiodam.nl).

The development of the patient engagement game was an
iterative process consisting of three steps (Figure 1):

1862

1. Identification of important themes for adolescents regarding their
illness, treatment, hospital care and influence on daily life and
preferences for an engagement game. The identified themes will
serve as a starting point for the development of the patient
engagement game.

2. Evaluation of the draft version of the game.

3. Testing usability in clinical practice.

Each step resulted in the development/improvement of the game
and provided input for the next step.

2.1
Step 1: Identification of important themes for
adolescents in health care and preferences for an
engagement game

For the first step, adolescents (12–18 years) with a chronic condition,
under treatment at the Emma Children's Hospital Amsterdam UMC,
were invited to participate in 60‐min focus groups and individual
interviews (30–60 min) to identify important themes for adolescents
in health care. Adolescents were recruited for this study by their
clinician in June and July 2017. Additionally, patients who were part
of the research panel of the KLIK patient‐reported outcome
measures (PROM) portal (www.hetklikt.nu) were approached by the
research team.26 The KLIK research panel consists of patients who
have indicated, during registration for the KLIK PROM portal, that
they would like to be approached for research projects in the Emma
Children's Hospital.

During the focus groups and interviews, the elicitation technique
‘Complain and Cheer wall’27 was used. Adolescents were invited to
write down things they did not like about living with a chronic
condition, their treatment and the hospital care on the ‘Complain
wall’ and things they did like on the ‘Cheer wall’. Thereafter, topics
were discussed and grouped into themes by the adolescents and
discussion leader following the Metaplan method (a workshop
technique used to form a common understanding).28 In addition,
adolescents were asked for their opinion regarding the development
of a patient engagement card game. Data collection was continued
until data saturation was reached. Data saturation was considered
reached when no new themes emerged during the analyses of the

FIGURE 1
The development process of the game All Voices Count.

1863

focus groups. The result of these focus groups and interviews was a
list of important themes for adolescents in health care and their
preferences for an engagement game, which was used for the
development of the first draft version of the game.

2.2
Step 2: Evaluation of the draft version of
the game

In the second step, the first draft of the game was tested and
evaluated with adolescents in a fictional context. Again, adolescents
(12–18 years) with a chronic condition, under treatment at the Emma
Children's Hospital Amsterdam UMC, were invited to participate in
these focus groups and individual interviews. Adolescents were
recruited from November 2017 till January 2018 in three ways: (1)
participating adolescents in Step 1 were asked to participate again in
this evaluation, (2) adolescents were approached by their clinician or
(3) adolescents could sign up themselves after reading an information
leaflet in the waiting room.

During 90‐min focus groups and interviews (45–60 min), the
game was played with the adolescents in a fictional context
(opinion about the use of patient‐reported outcome measures
[PROMs]). Afterwards, adolescents were asked to evaluate the
engagement game with the use of traffic light colours. Adoles-
cents were invited to write down what they liked about the game
(green), which parts of the game they were doubting about
(yellow) and which parts of the game they did not like (red).
Adolescents were asked to provide feedback on both the content
and layout of the game. These topics were discussed, and
adolescents were asked for suggestions for improvement and
their opinion about specific aspects of the game (i.e., complete-
ness of the included themes, desired game time and the use of
photos or clip‐arts). Data collection was continued until data
saturation was reached. The result of these focus groups and
interviews was a list of improvements for the game, which was
used to develop a pilot version of the game.

2.3
Step 3: Testing usability in clinical practice

The third step involved usability testing of the pilot version of the
game. In this field test, a pilot workshop was held with patients from
the educational facility (educational support service for patients and
their parents) of the Emma Children's Hospital Amsterdam UMC.
Participating patients were recruited via clinicians of the educational
facility in April 2018.

During the 90‐min pilot workshop, the game was played with the
adolescents to answer a question from the educational facility: ‘What
can the educational facility do (even more) for you to ensure that
things go even better at school?’. Afterwards, adolescents were asked
to evaluate the engagement game using traffic light colours and were
asked for suggestions for improvement. The result was that insight
was gained into the usability of the engagement game and a list of
improvements was obtained for the game, which was used to
develop a final version of the game.

For all steps, participating adolescents and their parents (for
adolescents <16 years) provided written informed consent and a
sociodemographic questionnaire (i.e., age, gender, type of chronic
disease) was completed by parents. Participants received a gift card
(with an amount of 10 euro) and compensation for their travel
expenses. Additionally, all focus groups, interviews and the pilot
workshop were audio‐recorded, transcribed verbatim and analysed in
MAXQDA29 following the methodology for thematic analysis.30 The
focus groups, interviews and pilot workshop were conducted by two
members of the research team. These members have been trained in
conducting qualitative research.

3
RESULTS

The results are reported for every step of the development process.
In total, 23 adolescents (range: 12–18 years, 57% female) partici-
pated in the cocreation of the patient engagement game, of whom
nine adolescents participated in multiple steps (Table 1).

3.1
Step 1: Identification of important themes for
adolescents in health care and preferences for an
engagement game

In total, 15 adolescents (mean age: 15.0 years, range 12–18 years,
60% female) participated in four focus groups and four interviews
(Table 1). Ten major themes for adolescents regarding their illness,
treatment and hospital care were identified: visiting the hospital,
participating, disease and treatment, social environment, feelings,
dealing with staff, acceptation, autonomy, disclosure and chronically
ill peers (Table 2). Most of the adolescents liked the idea of a patient
engagement card game. A few adolescents mentioned that they
would prefer an online game. Based on the identified themes, a draft
version of the game was developed by design agency Studio Dam, in
consultation with the research team consisting of psychologists and
medical doctors, representatives of the youth panel of FNO and the
patient associations (VSOP, VKN).

3.2
Step 2: Evaluation of the draft version of
the game

The opinion of 13 adolescents (mean age: 15.5 years, range: 13–18
years, 61.5% female, Table 1) was asked about the draft version
(Figure 2) of the engagement game in three focus groups and five
interviews. Overall, the adolescents were positive about the game as
it gave them the opportunity to get involved and it helped them to
express their views. They indicated that the use of themes and
images made it easier for most adolescents to associate and think of
other topics to express their opinion on. The game element was

1864

appreciated; it was fun, exciting and motivates competition. Further-
more, the design of the game was attractive and it was easy to play.
Suggestions for improvement were about the explanation of the
game and the images on the playing cards. Although adolescents
mentioned a preference for images rather than clip‐arts, the majority
mentioned that the images on the cards were not clear and that the
persons in the images were too old, preventing them from relating to
the depicted situation. Therefore, we adapted the images and tried to
match the age group of 12–18 years. A few adolescents suggested
the addition of keywords about the situations to the playing cards,
but we decided not to because it can reduce the possibility of free
association. Furthermore, adolescents indicated that a map with an
overview of the themes would be helpful. In addition, a few
adolescents made some suggestions to improve the design of the
game, for example, changing the rules of the game or creating an
online version. These suggestions were discussed with the research
team, the design agency and the representative of the youth panel.
We decided to change the images, the layout of the playing cards,
the rules of the game and the game explanation, and we added an
personal overview card of the themes and associated subthemes.
This card clarifies to adolescents what kinds of subthemes are
related to the specific themes (Table 3). Finally, we discussed the
naming of the themes within the project group, as we noticed that
the naming did not always match the perception of adolescents. We
decided to rename the themes to make them more appealing and
understandable for adolescents: my hospital, I can (not) do this, my
disease & treatment, me & others, I feel this, the people in my
hospital, I am okay, I do (not do) it myself, talk about it and just like
me (Table 2).

3.3
Step 3: Testing usability in clinical practice

The pilot version (Figure 2) of the game was tested for usability by
four patients (mean age: 14.5 years, range: 13–16 years, 50% female;
Table 1) in clinical practice. During this pilot workshop, the
adolescents gave their opinion about a question of the educational
facility, and a report on this workshop has been presented to
the education facility to help them improve their daily clinical care.
At the end of the workshop, the adolescents gave their opinion about
the engagement game. All adolescents were enthusiastic about the
game and enjoyed giving their opinion. Although it was difficult for
some adolescents to give an opinion on all themes, the cards helped
adolescents to come up with ideas about topics to talk about.
The adolescents mentioned that not all themes were applicable for
the educational facility. Therefore, we added some instructions to the
game manual for professionals about the selection of themes and the
minimum number of themes to be included in the game (Table 3).
Furthermore, adolescents suggested the addition of keywords about
the situations to the playing cards. In consultation with the research
team, we decided to add the theme name to all playing cards.
Adolescents
evaluated
the
overview
card
of
the
themes
(as
developed and added after Step 2) positively; however, we noticed

FIGURE 2
Overview of the different versions of the engagement
game during the development process.

1866

TABLE 3
Overview of the feedback of adolescents and the adjustments that were made to the game (Steps 2 and 3).

aMentioned by adolescents in two or more focus groups/interviews.

1867

that these personal maps were distracting and reduced the group
feeling. By introducing the themes on a game board (Table 3), the
focus of all players is on the game, and they are invited to help each
other as not all words are visible from every corner. Finally, we
changed the colours (brighter colours) of the themes and cards and
after that a final version of the engagement game, called All Voices
Count, was ready (Box 1). To support clinicians with the use of
All Voices count, we developed a game manual, a website (www.
allestemmentellen.nl) and a training.

5
CONCLUSION

In conclusion, we developed a patient engagement game called All
Voices Count, working together with all stakeholders. This game
lowers the barrier to include the voice of adolescents in decision‐
making about hospital care, research and policy.

Lotte Haverman conceived the study. Lorynn Teela and Lieke E.
Verhagen carried out the focus groups and interviews and performed
the qualitative analyses. The first draft of the manuscript was written
by Lorynn Teela. Mariken P. Gruppen, Maria J. Santana, Martha A.
Grootenhuis and Lotte Haverman handled the supervision. All
authors critically revised the manuscript for intellectual content and
approved the final version of the manuscript.