Original Paper

A Smartphone App to Reduce Sugar-Sweetened Beverage
Consumption Among Young Adults in Australian Remote
Indigenous Communities: Design, Formative Evaluation and
User-Testing

Emma Tonkin1,2, PhD; Lauren Jeffs1,2, BFS&N, GCertHP; Thomas Philip Wycherley1,2, PhD; Carol Maher2, PhD;
Ross Smith3, PhD; Jonathon Hart3; Beau Cubillo1,4, B Hum Nut; Julie Brimblecombe1, PhD

1Nutrition Program, Wellbeing and Preventable Chronic Disease, Menzies School of Health Research, Casuarina, Northern Territory, Australia
2Centre for Population Health Research, School of Health Sciences, University of South Australia, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia
3Wearable Computer Laboratory, School of Information Technology and Mathematical Sciences, University of South Australia, Mawson Lakes, South
Australia, Australia
4Nutrition and Dietetics, College of Nursing and Health Sciences, Flinders University, Bedford Park, South Australia, Australia

Emma Tonkin, PhD
Nutrition Program
Wellbeing and Preventable Chronic Disease
Menzies School of Health Research
PO Box 41096
Casuarina, Northern Territory, 0811
Australia
Phone: 61 889468514
Fax: 61 889468464

Methods

Preliminary Work

Prior to conducting this study, a scoping review [2] was
performed to identify best practice methods for app development
and end-user testing. The scoping review identified numerous
app features that were successfully used to promote app
engagement in adolescents, young adults and disadvantaged
communities that were applicable to this study. Additionally,
it highlighted key technical design elements important to
consider during app development, such as app functionality
without Internet connection. The research protocols for this
study were subsequently designed based on the scoping review
recommendations that were tailored to enable their application
in the unique RIC setting.

This study was approved by the “Human Research Ethics
Committee of Northern Territory Department of Health and
Menzies School of Research” (HREC 20162659). All
participants provided written, informed consent before
participation.

Study Design

The study was conducted in 2 phases. The structure is outlined
below, and the methodological details of each component are
further elaborated in the “data collection methods” section.

Phase 1: Formative Research

The formative research phase aimed to inform preliminary app
features, content, and structure. It included the following 3
components: (1) a simulated grocery-selection activity with
think aloud (henceforth “think aloud” shop); (2) a semistructured
interview regarding eating behaviors; and (3) a questionnaire
outlining current smartphone and app use and paper prototyping
activity.

Phase 2: Preliminary End-User Testing

An early pilot app was developed using information from both
the initial scoping review [2] and preliminary analyses of the
data collected in phase 1 (please see images supplied in
Multimedia Appendix 1). Features and content of the early pilot
app relate to the constructs of the Theory of Planned Behavior
(TPB): attitudes, subjective norms, and perceived behavioral
control [19,20]. The app contained a log-in screen for the user
to enter individual information that could be used to estimate
energy balance and associated weight changes. Screens for
selecting and tracking regularly consumed drinks and progress
screens presenting information about the sugar and energy
consumed in the past month from drinks were included in an
effort to impact control beliefs, and therefore, positively
influence users’ perceived behavioral control over SSB
consumption [19]. Team challenges aimed at supporting
nutrition improvement were incorporated to influence normative
beliefs, and therefore, adjust subjective norms around the
consumption of SSBs [19]. Finally, a quiz-style game was
included with the aim of positively influencing attitudes toward
SSB consumption, and therefore, behavioral beliefs and intention
to change [19,20]. The preliminary end-user testing phase aimed
to trial the functionality and acceptability of the developed early
pilot app. It included the following 2 components: (1) think
aloud prototype test and (2) user satisfaction semistructured
interview.

Setting

The study was conducted in 2 RICs in the Northern Territory,
Australia. The communities were purposively selected to
represent diversity in culture, geographic location (coastal vs
inland), and remoteness (339 and 890 km from the capital of
the Northern Territory, Darwin). Community authority or
cultural safety groups within communities were approached
and provided with information on the project to ensure
community support and advice on the study process. Following
approval from the relevant community authority or cultural
safety group, project information was provided to key
community leaders, services, and groups. Data collection for
the formative research phase took place between September
and November 2016, with end-user testing in December 2016.

Recruitment and Sampling

Purposive sampling was used to recruit 10 participants from
each community for each research phase, with researchers

positioning themselves and study materials at prominent
locations in the community, including the community store and
recreational areas. Participants who completed phase 1 were
invited to also complete phase 2; however, new participants
were recruited for phase 2 when existing participants were
unable to be followed up. Eligible participants were Aboriginal
and/or Torres Strait Islander adults aged between 18 and 35
years who were active smartphone users (ie, use a
messaging/chat system at least 3 times per week and/or other
phone features) and who had planned to reside in the community
until December 2016. Sampling aimed to recruit a balance of
genders and participants of a variety of ages, languages, and
family groups.

Data Collection and Analysis Methods

Formative Research

The formative research phase involved the following 3
components: a think aloud shop, a semistructured interview
exploring food behaviors, and a brief questionnaire examining
smartphone use with a paper prototyping activity [21]. Two
researchers collected data (LJ and BC), 1 researcher from each
gender to work with participants of the same gender to ensure
cultural norms were respected. The 3 parts of the formative
research were carried out sequentially with each participant in
1 session, and sessions ranged from 20 to 60 min in length. A
local interpreter was available to assist when required.
Participants chose the location for each session and sessions
were completed individually, in pairs, or in groups at the
participants’ discretion. Additionally, during the interviews,
many participants were accompanied by children, partners, or
friends. All sessions were audio-recorded, transcribed verbatim
by 1 researcher (LJ), de-identified, and imported into NVivo
11 (QSR International, Doncaster) for analysis. Analysis varied
by study component.

Think Aloud Shop
The think aloud shop activity was included to collect data related
to the determinants of food choice for young adults living in
RICs. These data were collected to identify key nutrition features
and content for the app. Think aloud methods are increasingly
used in nutrition research to gain insight into food
decision-making processes [22-24]. These methods are based
on the foundational work of Ericsson and Simon [25] and
involve participants completing a task while verbally narrating
their thoughts to elicit the sequence and information involved
in processing the task. In nutrition research, the original method
from Ericsson and Simon is typically adapted to suit the research
aims and setting, the setting often being an accompanied shop
[26]. While an accompanied shop scenario was considered ideal
by the research team, this was logistically unachievable in the
RIC setting for a number of reasons that are elaborated in the
Discussion. As such, participants were asked to shop using a
paper supermarket catalogue while thinking aloud. The
catalogue used for the think aloud task extensively advertised
SSB in prime positioning, as well as other healthier alternatives
such as bottled water. A modified version of the think aloud
training described by Barnett et al [22] was used to familiarize
participants with the method [27,28]. Standardized prompts
such as “what are you thinking?” were used to remind

participants to think aloud when they had fallen silent [22]. The
think aloud task was completed when participants stated they
were finished. Thematic analysis of the think aloud shop
transcripts focused on identifying reasons for food choice. Two
researchers (LJ and BC) separately coded the transcripts and
developed a list of themes related to food choice emerging from
the data. The separate lists were then merged and definitions
for each theme were agreed upon and defined in a codebook.
Using this codebook, 2 researchers (LJ and ET) then recoded
all transcripts, ensuring analyst triangulation [29]. A high level
of agreement in coding was achieved, and disagreements were
discussed until a consensus decision was reached.

Semistructured Interview
The semistructured interview (Multimedia Appendix 2) aimed
to collect data related to eating behavior and food attitudes.
These data were collected to determine approaches to app design
to best support behavior change in this population group. The
interview schedule was designed using the constructs of the
TPB [19,20]. The questions explored social identity associated
with food, self-efficacy, knowledge, and intention to make
dietary changes, and supports and barriers to previous attempts
to changing eating behavior. Analysis of the interview transcripts
was carried out by 2 researchers (LJ and ET). The transcripts
were segmented into sections based on question, and the
responses to each question summarized. Most participants
provided yes/no responses and also elaborated with further
explanation. Summaries of the responses for each question were
synthesized and grouped according to the constructs of the TPB
for presentation.

Smartphone Use Questionnaire and Paper Prototyping
Activity
A questionnaire examining current smartphone and app use
elicited key data to inform foundational app functionality
(Multimedia Appendix 3). Questions were developed by
research team members with experience working in RICs to
specifically target known phone behaviors unique to the RIC
setting. The questionnaire was administered verbally to ensure
adequate understanding of all questions. The paper prototyping
method has been used in previous app development scenarios
[30] to involve target users in the development of app features
and styling. This method involves the researcher using trigger
materials (eg, images showing features and capabilities of
health-related apps) to encourage participants to build an app
prototype. In some cases, due to constraints related to location,
environmental factors, and the presence of young children, it
was necessary to modify the paper prototyping activity. In these
instances, the activity was altered to instead present participants
with different trigger materials (see examples in Figure 1) and
ask for their preferences with reasoning. As the paper
prototyping activity was conducted similarly to a structured
interview, transcripts were analyzed by question, and responses
to both the paper prototyping activity and questionnaire were
aggregated and summarized numerically by 1 researcher (LJ).

Qualitative data from the paper prototyping activity has been
added where appropriate.

End-User Testing

End-user testing involved the following 2 components: usability
testing of the early pilot app using the think aloud method [25],
followed by a brief interview regarding comprehension and
satisfaction.

Think Aloud Usability Testing
Think aloud is a common approach to assess software usability
[31,32] and app prototype testing [21]. Think aloud sessions
were conducted with 10 participants from each community as
Nielsen [31] showed that there are diminishing returns for each
think aloud test conducted beyond 7 participants in the context
of software usability testing, and this is consistent with other
studies [33,34]. Participants were familiarized with the think
aloud method using the same procedure as in the phase 1 think
aloud shop. Participants were then asked to download the app
and carry out a series of tasks using the app while thinking
aloud. This involved each participant working through each
screen of the app (eg, “log-in screen” and “games screen”) and
being prompted to think aloud while doing so. Sessions were
audio-recorded and researchers noted actions and issues with
usability, comprehension, and satisfaction. The protocol
identified that, if necessary, participants would be asked to
elaborate on these issues in a short interview after all tasks were
complete, not while thinking aloud, to preserve an uninterrupted
stream of information processing [25].

Interview
User satisfaction was then assessed using a structured,
audio-recorded interview with the end-user participants
(Multimedia Appendix 4). This interview involved verbal
administration of a modified version of the System Usability
Scale (SUS) [35] as it has been shown to be a robust tool across
many user interfaces [36] and used in other app development
projects [30,37]. In addition to SUS, questions were adapted
from the Computer System Usability Questionnaire [38].
Modifications to these standard questionnaires were necessary
to ensure comprehension for participants in the RIC setting.
Modifications included exchanging technical words, and those
that experts suggested would not be comprehended, with words
that would be understood (eg, “this system” was replaced with
“the app” and “well-integrated” was replaced with “worked
well together”). The researcher assessed comprehension when
administering the instrument and further rephrased questions
to ensure comprehension as necessary.

Analysis of the think aloud usability testing and user satisfaction
interview transcripts focused on the themes of usability,
comprehension, and satisfaction, and was carried out by 1
researcher (ET). In addition to the transcripts, the researchers’
notes on these themes from testing sessions were also included
in the analysis. Data were organized according to app screen
and synthesized under the main themes for presentation here.

Results

Participant Details

Ten participants from each of the 2 communities completed the
formative research phase; 4 also completed the end-user testing
phase, as did 16 new participants. Participant characteristics are
provided in Table 1.

The following sections report the findings for each of the 2
research phases, organized by study component.

Formative Research

The formative research phase collected data related to drivers
of food choice, eating behavior, attitudes toward dietary change,
and smartphone use to inform app content and functionality.

Think Aloud Shop

Eight major determinants of food choice were identified through
the think aloud shop activity. Taste was the most frequently
vocalized reason for food choice, with 17 participants (85%)
referring to positive taste attributes (sweet, salty, crunchy) on
50 occasions throughout the sessions. Family was another key
driver, with children’s preferences frequently motivating choice.
Health also appeared to be front of mind for 15 participants
(75%); however, sometimes health was considered but not acted
on; for example, “It’s got nice flavor, I know it’s got too much
salt and fat, I know that, I just get ’em when we are hungry.”
For younger participants (18-25 years), the ability to share or
use food during social activity was an important consideration
and often motivated choice. Nine (45%) participants made food
choices driven by price during the shop, with foods either
considered to be cheap or of good value.

Convenience was another factor considered by 6 participants
(30%), and this related to either the ease and speed of meal
preparation, or alternatively that the food was useful for taking
on bush trips (eg, conveniently packaged and heat tolerant). The
final major factors motivating food choices were familiarity
with a product and repeatedly purchasing it as part of a regular
shop and the longevity of a product in the sense that it could
last until the next shop or pay.

Semistructured Interview

Control Beliefs and Perceived Behavioral Control
When discussing making changes to their eating habits, 10 of
19 participants (53%) would like to involve family and friends.
Furthermore, 9 of 19 participants (47%) preferred to make
changes alone; however, with 1 participant demonstrating her
reasoning using the example of smoking:

Cause some families are smokers too and instead of
encouraging you to stop smoking, they’ll keep on
smoking beside you and making you want to smoke,
cause that’s what happening to me now.
Most participants (16/20, 80%) identified that there are drinks
that they would find difficult to give up, soft drinks (defined
here as carbonated drinks, either unsweetened, sweetened, or
artificially sweetened) being the main type of drink mentioned
(14/20, 70%). However, others considered changing their
drinking habits to be easy, particularly when they had a strong
motivation:

Participant: I quit [cola soft drink brand] 2 weeks
ago...Cause I just had too...I’m always thinking about
the other two [her children].
Researcher: What did you change to?
Participant: [diet cola soft drink]
Researcher: Was that an easy change or hard
change?
Participant: Easy.

One participant mentioned that flyers and reminders around the
community would help her stay on track with dietary changes.

Behavioral Beliefs and Attitudes
Many (11/20, 55%) participants did not believe that what they
eat affects their body and mind, and these same participants
also did not worry about their dietary habits. Seven of these
same participants also did not find anything about food and
drink interesting or worth learning more about:

I know about the drinks because I went to the factory.
I went when I was, we went with school trip. I know
about drinks how many sugar they got and how many
thing they got [sic]. I know about that.
The other 9 of the 20 participants (45%) did, however, believe
that dietary habits impacted health, reporting worrying about
food choices:

Sometimes I worry to eat good foods...we might get
sick like from the other foods.
This group did find information about food and drink interesting
and wanted more specific information related to recipes,
cooking, and food composition:

I would, yeah, be happy to learn more especially when
comes down to recipes and mixing and yeah that sort
of stuff. Pretty much basic but there is more to it.
Other responses indicated a need for more resources related to
food choice:

Yeah, to you know when you go out maybe or when
you’re at the shop or somewhere and you need
something that you need, and you know with the sheet
and show you what you can eat.

Normative Beliefs and Subjective Norms
When discussing foods that made participants feel strong and
proud, most described bush foods (“bush tucker”), fishing, and
hunting for animals such as barramundi, turtle, bush turkey, and

kangaroo with family and friends. In contrast to these foods,
some participants discussed drinking sugary drinks:

I’m normally addicted to um [cola soft drink
brand]...I drink [cola soft drink brand] whenever I’m
out.
Water and fruit was also frequently mentioned. In terms of
learning about healthy eating, most participants (7/12, 58%)
reported being taught the most from their family, whereas others
specifically mentioned the health service (2/12, 17%), their
friends (1/12, 8%), the store (1/12, 8%), and their work (1/12,
8%).

Behavioral Intention
Participants were evenly split regarding whether they would
like to change their eating behaviors in any way (yes, n=7; no,
n=7). However, it was clear that “change” was a difficult
concept for these participants. Translators highlighted that it
was hard to explain to participants, and 1 participant verbalized
the difficulty when answering the question:

That’s a hard one. But if I were to change someone,
hang on, how do I put it? Sorry what’s the question
again?
Despite this, most participants described having attempted
dietary change before (12/20, 60%), typically motivated by
health, as shown in the quote below:

I want to go back ’cause I’m overweight. That’s what
I want to do...Make myself lighter, cause when I was
light I was alright, I can do everything, you know, do
anything. But at the moment I’m stuck with my fatness
and I need to lose it all

Smartphone Use Questionnaire and Paper Prototyping
Activity

The details of smartphone and app use can be found in Table
2. Generally, the brand of phone was determined by factors
outside the participant’s control, such as it being the only brand
available at the store at that time, or it was a gift. Participants
most commonly used their smartphones for SMS text messaging
(short message service, SMS) or calls (19/20, 95%) and games
(16/20, 80%), with less common uses being to watch movies
(8/20, 40%), do banking (5/20, 25%), access Centrelink (5/20,
25%), play music (4/20, 20%), and access email or social media
(3/20, 15%). More than half of the participants (11/20, 55%)
did not loan their phone to others, whereas 7/20 (35%) did loan
their phone to family, typically their children, and 2 of 20 (10%)
allowed others to use their phone for calls. The majority of
participants used multiple languages when texting (Table 2),
such as Rembarranga, Kriol, Warlpiri, and Guringji. Only a few
participants owned other information technology (IT) devices:
3 of 20 (15%) owned iPads and 2 of 20 (10%) owned laptops.
Some participants referred to owning tablets or laptops that
were no longer functional. Games, YouTube, and banking apps

were the most common apps used, and additional details of app
use can be found in Table 2.

During the paper prototyping activity, participants suggested
ideas for a health app for their community, with the most
common ideas being an app on how to be strong, healthy, and
fit (4/20, 20%), an app to provide information on good/bad
foods (4/20, 20%), a food/health games app (3/20, 15%), a quiz
app (2/20, 10%), and an app with cooking ideas/recipes (2/20,
10%). A number of participants elaborated as follows:

A health app, maybe in [local language] too, with a
quiz game you know in [local language]. Talk
about...just a little guessing game how much you
reckon in [cola soft drink brand] an all that, ’cause
asking them is trying to get an idea of that person in
answering back.
So, if it’s going to be health wise, it’s just something
to do with fitness, like marathon running or footy
game or something, something to do with sports with
fitness.
Specific app features that participants wanted within an app
included games (3/11, 27%), audio/music (3/11, 27%), videos
(2/11, 18%), and e-stories (2/11, 18%). One participant preferred
Aboriginal art and the colors of the Aboriginal flag (red, yellow,
and black) to be featured.

The following sections describe findings relevant to specific
app screens. As this activity was participant-led as much as
possible, not all participants contributed to all sections.

Log-In and Profile Screen
Only 1/20 participant indicated they were happy to sign in via
Facebook, with most other participants not holding a Facebook
account. Although 9 participants had no objection to include
their height and weight in their app profile, many did not know
their anthropometric measurements and therefore suggested
these figures would have been guessed. Three participants
wanted to keep their height and weight information private.
Four participants liked the idea of inspirational images and
suggested these could include sport, food, or personal photos.

Drink Selection and Recording Drinks Screen
Six participants said they would like to use an app to record
their drinks. A number of participants elaborated on this
question: 1 participant would like to record their drinks for a
week, another 1 day at a time, 1 participant suggested this would
be easy, and another mentioned it would be difficult to
remember to do but would be useful if you remembered. Two
participants would be happy to share their drink history;
however, 1 participant was asked if they would still want to
share even if they had consumed “bad” drinks and they
responded, “no...some...I will share with my closest friends.”
Most participants (4, 57%) preferred drinks to be displayed as
a picture of a bottle with words. Participants preferred grouped
icons to a scroll-through function for selecting drinks.

Accurately recording drinks consumed was highlighted as a
problem as the researcher identified that 3 participants were
sharing bottled drinks with family members during the activity.
This was discussed with 1 participant as shown in the following
quotes:

Participant: Well if it was a little can I would maybe
give them about that bit...Just a few sips and if it was
bottle sometime I would only have half or just store
it up for myself.
Researcher: Would that make it hard if you were
recoding your drinks, do you think that would make
it hard sharing and just drinking half?
Participant: I reckon yeah. Yep
Researcher: Do you think, how can we get around
that in the app?
Participant: Oh that’s a hard one now, maybe if there
was a sip included, or how many sip you reckon; one,
two sips. Or if it’s like scull [ie, drinking a lot very
quickly], then scull.

Feedback/Progress Screen
Participants suggested to have their progress displayed in body
weight gain (kilograms) prevented, money saved, and volume

of sugar intake prevented. Most participants (10/16, 63%)
preferred sugar to be displayed as teaspoons, rather than bags
(3/16, 19%), cups (1/16, 6%), sugar cubes (1/16, 6%), or as a
percentage of volume/energy (3/16, 19%). Three participants
thought a leader board was a good idea, with 1 noting this could
be based on water consumption.

Challenges Screen
Both participants who were asked said they would like to
complete a challenge and notify their friends and family. They
both preferred to select from a list of challenges rather than
develop a challenge themselves, participate “sometimes...yeah
when I feel like it,” and suggested prizes could be real money
(AU $50-100). One participant suggested some motivational
messages that would be provided by the app, which were as
follows:

To keep going like with what we’re doing, like to
change.
Say to me to be strong and keep going.
Give my kids change a bit [suggest to me to implement
changes with my children], like for me as well.
From the 3 components of the formative research phase
combined, a list of commonly selected beverage choices was
compiled and is presented in Table 3.

End-User Testing

The usability and participant comprehension and satisfaction
with the early pilot app were assessed in the end-user testing
phase. Briefly, screens included general log-in and profile
screens, screens for recording SSB intake (drinks selection and
recording screens), screens demonstrating progress/feedback
related to SSB consumption, a screen enabling users to complete
challenges related to reducing SSB consumption, and games
(Multimedia Appendix 1). Here, we report findings from the
think aloud testing most translatable to other development
projects, and the responses to the user satisfaction interview are
graphically presented in Figure 2.

Think Aloud Usability Testing

Overall the app was considered usable, albeit slow, given that
it was an early prototype. Besides the issues arising from
participant unfamiliarity with apps in general (eg, difficulty
using scroll functions and navigating using a ribbon menu),

many participants struggled to grasp the concept of the app.
However, once it was explained it was well received and many
participants commented that it would be of great benefit to their
community, especially for people with type 2 diabetes and
children. Generally, there was an app component that every
participant enjoyed, whether it was the quiz, challenges, or
simply entering information about consumed drinks. Most
participants reported their satisfaction would be increased with
additional use of sound within the app, including talking voices
providing information, explanations, and stories; music; and
notification sounds such as “bing.” One participant noted that
more role modeling through the use of images with people
choosing different drinks would be motivational. A number of
male participants suggested that enhancing links to sport and
bush tucker would increase interest. Additionally, many
participants reported it would be more useful if the app scope
was extended to include food. Finally, many participants referred
to wanting to include family in some way within the app,
especially their children.

The following sections describe findings relevant to specific
app components that may be transferrable to other app
development projects.

Log-In and Profile Screen
It was confirmed that using a Facebook log-in was not feasible
as again there were a low number of Facebook users in the
sample. In addition, self-reported anthropometric information
(for body weight change and energy balance feature estimates)
was unlikely to be accurate. Most participants found profile
setup difficult due to the use of scroll functions. Some
participants reported that having to go in and out of settings to
change profile information, including regular drinks, made the
app confusing and frustrating to use. Notifications were also
not well understood as a concept, but once explained participants
commonly set their ideal notification receipt time as midmorning
and were pleased with the customizability of this feature.

Drink Selection and Recording Drinks Screen
Again, many participants struggled with the concept of selecting
“regular” drinks and then adding daily consumption in a later
screen (see Multimedia Appendix 1, screens 3, 4, and 5). They
appeared to think they had to have consumed a particular drink
that day to add it, rather than simply selecting usual drinks
consumed over an extended period. Many suggested the addition
of hot drinks, such as tea with sugar, was needed to make app
use worthwhile. Generally, most participants found it easy to
differentiate (intentionally nonbranded) drink types based on
shape (can, small, or big bottle) and color (see Multimedia
Appendix 1, screen 3), but many suggested including logos
would further assist recognition.

Feedback/Progress Screen
Progress reported as teaspoons of sugar was well received;
however energy (presented as “kJs”) was not understood as a
concept, and some participants wanted to see total drinks

consumed in bottles/liters. Presenting progress in monthly
increments did not seem to be useful, with shorter time periods
preferred, such as daily or weekly. It was again confirmed that
many participants would have liked to see progress reported as
change in body weight, although it was unclear whether they
wanted this projected based on energy within drinks, or if they
wanted to track their actual body weight. Some suggested a
talking voice to explain their progress would assist
comprehension. Finally, some participants wanted suggestions
of better choices at the shop based on their entries.

Challenges Screen
The challenges were initially not well understood as a concept,
but once explained participants were eager to try them. They
thought presenting images with the challenges was fun and
enhanced comprehension. As with the progress screen, many
wanted more explanation as to why these challenges would
help, preferably verbally. Participants were seeking a greater
response from the app upon reporting completion of a challenge;
again noises, flashing, ticks, and visual messages such as “good
work.”

Games
Overall, the quiz feature was well comprehended, worked well
and had high reported satisfaction. Some participants wanted
feedback on their guesses to be clearer, including noises as well
as visuals such as a tick or cross. A minority did not interpret
the subtle color change of the correct answer as feedback
(Multimedia Appendix 1, images 7 and 8). Many participants
reported that including more games such as the quiz would
increase their interest and frequency of use of the app.

Discussion

Principal Findings

This study used a consultative user-centered approach to identify
key considerations for app design that can be used to inform
app development for disadvantaged and nonurban populations,
specifically young adults living in RICs. A number of important
insights regarding app functionality have been illuminated, as
have considerations for features and content to ensure user
engagement and comprehension in disadvantaged, nonurban
populations. Additionally, important learnings related to carrying
out best practice app development research have been
highlighted through the process of conducting this research.
These findings are discussed in the context of prior work in the
following sections, and Textbox 1
outlines concrete
recommendations arising from the research that are translatable
to a wide range of app development projects.

Comparison With Prior Work

The findings support previous work emphasizing that a
user-centered design process is critical to developing a
functional app [39-41]. This is starkly demonstrated here, where
despite high rates of Facebook update in the Australian
population, only 1 participant reported the willingness to use a
Facebook log-in to access the app in the formative testing, and
no participants had a functioning Facebook account to log-in
with during the prototype testing. Use of Facebook log-ins is
routine in app development, thought to minimize user burden.
However in this setting exclusive use of a Facebook log-in
would have excluded most of the target user group. Similarly,
it was found that the types of phones used by participants were
determined by those available in the RIC store; thus, initial
groundwork to establish what these are is essential for
optimizing apps for these target users. Additionally, the choice
to develop a mobile app was reinforced as few participants had
either access to other IT devices or consistent Internet

availability for Web browser–based interventions that require
constant Internet connection, unlike a mobile app. Therefore,
despite the increased use of smartphone technology in RICs [5],
it was established that characteristics of smartphone use are
currently different in a number of small but critical ways when
compared with urban, young adult populations. These findings,
therefore, highlight that thorough formative research is vital for
app development projects in other disadvantaged, nonurban
populations.

Strategies for fostering engagement with both apps and dietary
change in a disadvantaged, nonurban population were also
identified. The participants in this study were evenly divided
in their desire to involve family and friends in any potential
dietary change.

Previous literature has shown that competition, team, and social
interaction were useful for motivating app engagement across
a variety of population groups [30,37,42-46]; however, research
with young adult populations emphasizes this must be voluntary
[46-49]. Therefore, providing users with the option to include
others through an opt-in approach to sharing and leader boards,
and making both personal and group challenges available, is
critical to ensure those users who do not find social support
within the app as necessary for change are not alienated from
the app. It also appeared from the formative semistructured
interview responses that a large number of participants were
not aware of the need to, or not motivated to, change their SSB
consumption behaviors. While the behavioral theory used in
designing the study, and therefore, the pilot app was TPB, these
data emerging from the formative work are usefully explored
using the Transtheoretical Model of health behavior change
[50]. It appears that half the participants were in a
“precontemplative” stage of change, whereas the remaining
participants were at other stages along the behavior change
pathway, potentially making them more open to, and therefore
engaged with, app content.

Textbox 1. Recommendations for app development projects targeting disadvantaged and nonurban populations arising from this study.

Project development recommendations

•
Prioritize the conduct of comprehensive formative research in project planning

•
Work in development teams that include members with in-depth local knowledge

•
Utilize mixed data collection methods (quantitative and qualitative) and triangulate methods where possible

•
Consider the potential for the availability of technology and patterns of use to differ greatly in the target group compared with urban populations,
and therefore, include this in formative data collection

App development recommendations

•
Include nonwritten communication strategies extensively throughout the app to aid comprehension (eg, audio of talking, inclusion of audio cues
such as “beeps” and “dings”)

•
Include colorful, animated feedback throughout the app to foster engagement

•
Include local jargon where possible (eg, in this case, “sip” and “skull”)

•
Include games and tailor these to the target population through language, color, sound, and content

•
Include only tangible health language (eg, spoons of sugar, not calories)

•
Ensure social aspects of the app are opt-in

•
Ensure the app is disseminated in a supportive context (eg, through a health provider)

This suggests that it would be useful to use the Transtheoretical
Model alongside TPB to structure app content and features to
cater for users at all stages of the behavior change cycle,
particularly features that draw participants in, despite a lack of
intention to change target behaviors. One option to engage this
group of users is the inclusion of games with an inherent
educational element, with games commonly being used in apps
targeted toward low socioeconomic status and adolescent
populations to enhance engagement [2,51,52]. During all stages
of this research, it was demonstrated that even simple quiz
games were enjoyed, consistent with findings from others
[53-55], and in this, participant group games were the second
most common reason for phone use. Thus, the inclusion of
games in any app targeted within RICs or similar disadvantaged,
nonurban populations appears to be essential, especially for
initiating and maintaining engagement of users in a
precontemplative stage of change. Other app content such as
feedback and progress information will be more useful to users
in “determination,” “action,” and “maintenance” stages of
change.

A key advantage of a user-centered design approach is to tailor
apps to specific target populations to enhance not only
engagement but also comprehension [2,40]. The findings suggest
audio features, sounds, and voice-delivered explanations would
augment comprehension across all app screens in this user
group. It was also evident in the prototype testing that
participants struggled to grasp the overall concept of the app
before it was explicitly described. This may be explained by
the fact that the participants were presented the pilot app
somewhat out of context; for example, it was not suggested by
a friend or health worker as might be the case in a real-world
scenario. This suggests that dissemination of future apps needs
to be contextually embedded, with many potential avenues
available. Apps could be presented and explained to users at
clinic visits [56], through sporting team coaches or schools [57],
or as part of larger interventions [58]. Another design
consideration related to comprehension was the need to
streamline the app as much as possible. This is consistent with
previous literature suggesting that complex setup and log-ins
inhibit use [46,48,49,59]. As the need for streamlining
potentially presents a competing priority to the aforementioned
need for customizability, piloting of apps with target users will
be essential to achieve a successful balance.

A number of unique challenges impact everyday life in RICs
and provide context for these findings. Many RICs are serviced
by a single food store that sells a limited range of packaged,
fresh, and takeaway foods [60]. These stores often have
restricted opening hours, closing at late notice for important
community events. Similarly, idiosyncratic behaviors related
to smartphone use result from the nearest location to buy and
service IT devices often being hundreds of kilometers away.

The social dynamics of RICs too are not comparable with the
urban environments in which many apps are developed and
tested, as many communities are composed of only a few
hundred people [61], with many related. Finally, many
Indigenous Australians enter parenthood earlier than
nonIndigenous Australians [61,62], dramatically altering the
outlook, priorities, and eating behaviors of this young adult
group compared with their nonIndigenous counterparts. As
such, the value of this research extends beyond this project alone
to others who are exploring eating behaviors and smartphone
use in disadvantaged, nonurban settings, and the user-centered
development approach employed in this work is a major strength
of the research.

Limitations

These unique qualities of RICs, however, impacted how
best-practice app development methods could be implemented,
generating limits to the generalizability and comparability of
the research findings but strengths regarding validity and
authenticity of the data. Given that for most participants English
was a third, fourth, or fifth language, with much of the
terminology used in the context of app development simply
untranslatable, the modification of the end-user testing methods
enabled participant comprehension, and therefore, the collection
of useful and insightful data; however, responses cannot be
scaled and compared with similar projects. Similarly, the limited
opening hours of the 1 community store, combined with the
small population resulting in participant discomfort with
thinking aloud in the store, meant modification of the think
aloud shop activity was required. While this prevents nuanced
environmental impacts of the store environment from being
included in the drivers of food choice, it ensured the data
collection was completed at the participant’s convenience,
comfort, and in relative privacy, thus enhancing data quality
overall. In addition, a major strength of the project was the
triangulation of methods and combination of qualitative and
quantitative methods and analysis [29]. For example, without
all 3 of the components in the formative research phase, the
comprehensive list of SSBs consumed in RICs (Table 3) could
not have been generated. This provides an important lesson for
future research. Therefore, the detailed methods and research
tools provided in this report may serve as a roadmap for future
user-centered app development projects.

Conclusions

This research provides critical insights for the development of
apps targeted toward young adults in disadvantaged populations
and nonurban settings. It also serves as a framework for future
app development projects using a consultative user-centered
design approach and supports calls for the increased use of this
strategy in projects developing apps for health behavior change.