Original Paper

Bridging the Communication Gap Between People With Cognitive
Impairments and Their Caregivers Using mHealth Apps:
User-Centered Design and Evaluation Study With People With
22q11 Deletion Syndrome

Martijn Van Dooren1, MSc; Robin De Croon1, PhD; Ann Swillen2,3, PhD; Katrien Verbert1, PhD

1Department of Computer Science, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
2Department of Human Genetics, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
3Center for Human Genetics, University Hospital Gasthuisberg Leuven, Leuven, Belgium

Robin De Croon, PhD
Department of Computer Science
KU Leuven
Celestijnenlaan 200A
Leuven, 3001
Belgium
Phone: 32 16 37 39 76

Methods

In the next parts, the full methodology used in this research is
explained, referring to the overall study design, the participants
in the research, the way data is analyzed, and the ethics approval
granted.

Study Design

This research incorporates an iterative, user-centered design
process. By dividing the design process into different phases,
insightful feedback from both experts and users is gathered.
This research is split up into 2 main phases: a design phase that
incorporates a low-level prototype and an evaluation phase that
incorporates a fully working proof of concept. The latter again
consists of 3 different parts: an initial interview that incorporates
a first version of the proof of concept, a trial period, and a
concluding interview. A visual overview of this study design
can be found in Figure 1.

As a starting point for this research, a physical tool that was
developed to support families with children with rare genetic
syndromes is used as a starting point. The physical tool
“Together we put the puzzle” launched in March 2020 [27].
The tool is currently regularly used in genetic counseling, mainly
by clinical orthopedists, when parents and children need
psychoeducation about their syndrome. Besides this, 50 families
use the tool at home, and about 30 early intervention services,
clinical genetic centers, special education schools, and
rehabilitation centers are currently working with the
psychoeducational tool (puzzle and booklet). Since April 2022,
the tool has also been available in English, and 50 different
copies have been sent to medical doctors (clinical geneticists,
neuropediatricians, psychiatrists, etc) and allied health
professionals (psychologists, remedial therapists, etc) working
in the field of neurodevelopmental disorders due to a copy
number variant (NDD-CNVs) across Europe.

Design Phase: Evaluation With Medical Experts and
Human-Computer Interaction Experts Using a
Low-Fidelity Paper Prototype

Using the concepts upon which the physical tool “Together we
put the puzzle” is based, 2 prototypes are developed on paper.
These low-fidelity prototypes are evaluated with both medical
experts who have experience in the treatment of children with
22q11 DS and use “Together we put the puzzle” in practice and
with experts in the human-computer interaction (HCI) domain.
The latter was done to gain insight into the most prominent
usability issues. The feedback was gathered in a web-based
one-to-one think-aloud session of 45 minutes in which the 2
prototypes were shown to the users.

Evaluation Phase: User Evaluation With a Fully
Working Proof of Concept

The second phase consists of 3 different parts. By conducting
both interviews and allowing for a trial period, both qualitative
and quantitative results are collected and analyzed. All different
parts are conducted with the same participating families. The
next paragraphs elaborate further upon the different parts of this
evaluation phase.

Interviews Incorporating a Fully Working Proof of Concept
Based upon the evaluation of the paper prototype, a fully
working proof of concept is developed using Meteor.js as the
underlying cross-platform web architecture. This ensured the
proof of concept was compatible with a variety of devices, such
as smartphones and tablets, and supported all popular operating
systems (eg, iOS and Android). Moreover, the proof-of-concept
supported offline caching to prevent any network connectivity
issues. Individual semistructured interviews of 60 minutes with
young people with 22q11 DS and their parents are conducted
at their own homes.

Trial Period
After the initial first interviews, the families can use the proof
of concept in a trial period lasting 2-4 weeks until the next
interview. Families are asked to use the app at least once during
this period.

Concluding Interviews
During a second individual, semistructured interview session
of 45 minutes, families give final feedback. These interviews
again take place at their own houses. In these concluding
sessions, new insights can be gained after considering the
possibility of using the app during a trial period, and feedback
from the earlier interview sessions might be confirmed further.

Participants

During the 2 phases of the study, different groups of participants
take part in the study. In the design phase, both medical experts
in the field of 22q11 DS and diseases that lead to cognitive
impairments and HCI experts are involved. In the evaluation
phase, young people with 22q11 DS and their parents are
involved.

The medical experts that take part in this research are 2 medical
experts that have a proven track record in the field of 22q11 DS
and diseases with other cognitive impairments. Besides this,
the feedback of 1 female and 2 male HCI experts is gathered in
the design phase.

The group of people participating in the evaluation phase are
young people with 22q11 DS and their parents and siblings.
These young people are required to be between 8 and 23 years
of age and need to have taken part in a physical session where
the original puzzle was used at least once in their previous
treatment. The latter is important, as this research does not want
to focus on the contents and workings of the resource and does

not want to intervene medically. The parents of the young people
did not need to adhere to specific conditions.

Data Synthesis and Analysis

During the design phase, feedback is gathered about the
workings of the low-level paper prototype. Difficulties, possible
extensions, and positive feedback are part of this feedback.
These findings, in combination with the low-level paper
prototype, formed the basis for the development of the proof of
concept.

A total of 2 main types of results are acquired in the evaluation
phase of the research. First, qualitative results are obtained from
both interviews. Besides this, additional quantitative data is
obtained from the logs that are collected during the use of the
app in the trial period.

Qualitative results are analyzed using thematic analysis [28].
Results are collected and categorized according to the following
themes: (1) feedback about the app “as is,” (2) difficulties, (3)
comparison between physical and digital tool, (4) extensions,
(5) intention, and (6) other.

Quantitative analysis was used to answer questions about the
average session length of users and all the different
functionalities that were or were not used by families during
the trial period.

Ethics Approval

As this study involves vulnerable participants due to their
medical condition and cognitive impairment, ethics approval
had to be given by the Ethical Committee for Research at KU
Leuven and UZ Leuven to conduct this research. The committee
approved the study in March 2022, and it is identified by
S-number S66151. Besides approval by the committee, informed
consent was obtained from all participants.

Results

Overview

This section discusses the most important results from the
different parts of the evaluation phase of the research. For the
evaluation phase, a total of 8 families were recruited. Table 1
presents more specific details about the different families.

Table 1. Overview of the participating families.

Brothers and sisters, gender, and age (years)
Gender of the child
Age of the child (years)
ID

F 6
Fa
9
1

M 1, M 3, M 5, F 10
Mb
8
2

M 13, F 16
F
18
3

F 22
M
22
4

F 7
F
10
5

F 13
F
18
6

F 7, M 11, M 13
F
10
7

F 13
M
16
8

aF: Female.
bM: Male.

Interviews Incorporating Proof of Concept

Overview

During the first semistructured interviews, the first version of
the fully working proof of concept is used. An overview of this
proof of concept can be found in Figure 2. The app exists out
of an onboarding process, functionalities for parents and

siblings, functionalities for the person with 22q11 DS, and the
possibility to collectively put the puzzle. The functionalities for
children exist out of getting answers to frequently asked
questions, rating themselves on some skills with stars, and
personalizing the app by choosing a color and an avatar. The
feedback on the proof of concept is presented according to the
categories mentioned earlier.

Feedback About the App “as is”

Using the app in general is easy for every child that participates
in the study (8/8, 100%). The possibility to choose your own
color and avatar is highly appreciated by 87.5% (7/8). Children
focus heavily on the visible part of the screen; when presented
lists to scroll through, children often choose 1 of the visible
parts and seem to minimize scrolling (5/8, 62.5%). If buttons
are not visible on the screen immediately, some confusion arises

in a few cases (2/8, 25%). Besides this, audiovisual resources
show a high impact and get the preference of all the children
but one (7/8, 87.5%). Overall, the app receives highly positive
feedback from both children and parents, who acknowledge the
value such an app can have (8/8, 100%). A striking example of
this is one of the younger children (aged 10 years) answering
the final question, “Do you have any additional comments you
want to add to our conversation?” with, “Will you not forget to
let us know where we can find the app so I can use it in the

future?” or multiple parents mentioning, “I’m sure this will help
a lot of other families.”

Difficulties

The main difficulties that arise can be classified into 2 main
themes. First, everything text-related should be thoroughly
thought about. Difficult words and long sentences cause
problems and a loss of engagement during the use of the app,
mainly for younger children (5/8, 62.5%). Besides this, as
mentioned before, when buttons are not immediately visible on
the screen, this can cause confusion as well (2/8, 25%).

Comparison Between Physical and Digital Tool

When comparing the physical and digital tool, families
sometimes explicitly mention preferring the digital version (4/8,
50%). The burden of using this tool is lower, often because of
practical arguments. Using a physical tool simply requires more
effort and energy. One of the parents states:

Just having to walk to the closet in the other room
and taking the puzzle out is already a burden to use
it whereas this is not the case with a mobile
application.
Besides, families indicate that the fact that the puzzle is saved
creates new opportunities. As everything that is done in the app
can be undone, families also indicate they would use
functionalities quicker than in the physical case (3/8, 37.5%).
For example, only 4 blank puzzle pieces are provided in the
physical tool, whereas these are unlimited in the app. This leads
to families being less afraid to create their own puzzle pieces.
Finally, some of the families indicate they do not think a phone
is the appropriate medium to use as a tool for communication
support within the whole family because of the simple reason
that the screen is too small. Being able to use the app on a tablet
or even on a computer could solve this issue (3/8, 37.5%).

Extensions

The main extensions that come up are additional information
for parents, brothers, and sisters (8/8, 100%), the possibility for

brothers and sisters to lay their own puzzle (3/8, 37.5%), and
introducing a feedback system for asked questions in the app
(3/8, 37.5%).

Intention

All children but 1 indicated they were interested in further use
of the app during the interview itself (7/8, 87.5%). Parents also
say they see the additional benefits. In families where children
are already older, they indicate the need for the app is not as
high, but they do see the value in a similar app for families with
younger children (1/8, 12.5%).

Other

During the interviews, the Facebook group of the parent
association is mentioned multiple times. However, the subjective
and more negatively focused nature of this information leads
to a lot of people not wanting to be active in this context. They
mention the fact that they would have more trust in an app
created by a trusted third party like a hospital or government
institution (4/8, 50%). Finally, in every family, at the end of the
interview, parents emphasized the importance or added value
of this kind of research (8/8, 100%).

Quantitative Results From the Logs Generated During
the Trial Period

While evaluating the usage of the app by looking at the
generated logs, a few things became very apparent. A total of
2 families with older children (both 18 years of age) did not use
the app during the trial period, even though this was asked at
the end of the previous interview and in an email that was sent
shortly after the interview. However, in families that did use
the app, half of the sessions were 26 minutes or longer, with 2
sessions even lasting 53 and 61 minutes. No technological issues
were reported or logged. An overview of the different sessions
per family and their duration can be found in Figure 3.

When looking at the functionalities that were used by children
and their parents, it can be observed that, overall, the puzzle got
a lot of attention.

Concluding Interview

The families with older children that did not use the app during
the trial period indicated they did not have the need to do so.
As the syndrome is not an active subject anymore within the
family, the need for communication support apps is also
lessened. However, they both indicated that if a more urgent
situation came up, they would use the app as a tool to support
them in their conversations.

In families that did use the app, it was spontaneously mentioned
that they had talked about things they had never talked about
before. However, one family indicated that right now the puzzle
was not yet interactive enough to keep the children’s attention
while using it. No additional difficulties came up, except for
the fact that one time the child did not understand why the
puzzle piece could be made larger or smaller. Children keep
preferring the digital puzzle. Finally, one child proposes to
extend the app with the possibility of being able to capture
pictures themselves to use as images for the puzzle pieces.

Last but not least, it was further confirmed that there is a great
need to further involve siblings. Giving them an equally
important role in the app is a step forward. There is also a great
need for informing siblings, and besides, the ability for every
member to put the puzzle together based on their own
experiences creates starting points for new, valuable
conversations.

Discussion

Principal Findings

To summarize our findings, young people with 22q11 DS and
their families highly value the developed mHealth app as a
supporting tool in communication and for gaining additional
information. This confirms the need for these kinds of solutions
for families with children with cognitive impairments
[15,29-31]. It is highly encouraged that institutions like hospitals
or governments take action and start the development of this
kind of tool. One should keep in mind that combining powers
is a better approach than developing stand-alone apps that all
need individual maintenance. This is especially true for apps

such as the one discussed in this research, as it shows value for
a lot of different target groups.

In general, people with 22q11 DS show few difficulties in using
the developed mobile app. This confirms the conclusion from
other research that remote interventions with this target group
can be successful [21]. It also confirms the earlier presumption
that no motorical difficulties would arise, as children with Down
syndrome were shown to be able to use mobile apps as well in
earlier research [22,23].

Furthermore, while doing interviews with people with 22q11
DS, a couple of things stood out. The fact they are pleasers [15]
shows when answering the questions in the interviews. It
happens regularly when a child indicates they understand
something, whereas if asked to perform a certain action, it
becomes clear they do not understand this at all. The verbal IQ
of these children is often higher than their performance IQ, but
this holds the potential risk of overestimating their capacities
[32,33].

One of the strengths of this research is that it combines the
confirmation of an important need with concrete considerations
when developing for people with cognitive disabilities, like
people with 22q11 DS. The latter are extensively discussed in
the following paragraphs.

Considerations When Developing Mobile Apps for
People With Cognitive Impairments

Overview

This research provides insights that should be considered when
developing a mobile app for people with cognitive disabilities
in the context of bridging the communication gap. These insights
can serve as general guidelines. The insights are discussed
according to the three-step structure displayed in Figure 4 below:
(1) what are the most prominent usage barriers to using mHealth
apps, and how can one overcome these? (2) How to achieve
desired results, in this case, lowering the communication burden
within families and providing information to families? (3) What
are the important implications in the context of having continual
added value for the target group?

Usage Barriers

First and foremost, from this research, it is clear that if the
guidelines for developing for the web for people with cognitive
impairments are followed when developing mobile apps [34,35],
usage barriers are limited. However, one area where it is
necessary to be extra cautious is everything related to text. The
research shows that using too much text or too difficult words
leads to a loss of engagement and interest among young people
with 22q11 DS. However, other important design considerations
are shown to be important to make sure the mobile app can be
easily used. When designing specifically for young people with
22q11 DS, these considerations should be taken into account:

•
Limit the actions needed to 1 action per screen.
•
Keep all the necessary information directly visible on the
screen without scrolling.
•
Use audiovisual means wherever possible.
•
Avoid long sentences and large collections of text.
•
Pay close attention to the words you use; the easier, the
better.
•
Use grids over lists (earlier research concluded this as well
[36]).

Finally, specifically in the context of lowering the
communication burden by providing a tool that can be used
together with the whole family, some participants indicate that
a mobile phone might not be the right medium due to the limited
screen size. Families prefer to use a larger screen in this specific
situation; for example, using a tablet offers more potential in
this area.

Achieving Desired Results: Lowering the
Communication Burden

With the goal of lowering the communication burden, the
concept of recognition played a key role. By creating points of
recognition using a mobile app, conversation starters are offered

to families to talk about more difficult subjects. It was indicated
by participants that having these starting points for conversations
is in itself enough to lower the communication burden. To
maximize the lowering of the communication burden, one can
look for various ways to introduce these points of recognition
and conversation starters, not only through the existing puzzle
pieces, but also, for example, by including testimonials and
videos of other people with the same syndrome.

The concept of recognition that appears can be found in tools
created for other target groups as well. One could argue that
reminiscence is a specific kind of recognition. For example,
stimulating reminiscence through technology with older adults
is found to have a positive effect on communication both in
people with and without cognitive impairments [37,38].
Similarly, in this research, using technology to make people
think not about situations in the past but about situations in the
present appears to be an important element that can stimulate
conversations.

Besides, in this research, the very important role played by the
brothers and sisters of the child with 22q11 DS appeared. It is
important to involve these siblings heavily, as they both have
their own questions and challenges but are also some of the
people who know the child with 22q11 DS best [39-41]. This
research implements some recommendations for practice, like
encouraging siblings’curiosity about the mindset of their brother
or sister with a disorder and inviting the sibling to discuss issues
regarding feeling normal and feeling different [41]. It also
confirms the fact that feedback from siblings is highly valuable
during research itself [41].

Finally, in the field of communication, it should be noted that
families tend to use a mobile app on a more individual basis
than a physical tool. Conversations occur not only synchronously
while using the app together but also asynchronously. For
example, children find things they think are interesting while

using the app and afterwards tell their parents about them and
start new conversations.

Achieving Desired Results: Providing Information

For the goal of providing information to people with 22q11 DS
and their caregivers, one should be conscious of the fact that
not all children with 22q11 DS have the need to have a deeper
understanding of why things are the way they are. This is largely
attributed to having cognitive impairments [42,43]. However,
when presenting information to them, using video and
information at their level of thinking are crucial aspects to being
successful in this goal.

When 
presenting 
clinical 
information 
to 
parents, 
a
question-answer system split up into different categories seems
like a potential way to go. What they think is especially
important is a trusted third party that provides the information.
Therefore, it should be encouraged that official institutions with
knowledge about 22q11 DS are the creators of these kinds of
apps and provide the necessary maintenance. An important
consideration for practice also involves the fact that parents are
not only interested in clinical information. They are as interested
in the practical consequences of having to manage a child with
22q11 DS regarding taxes, institutions, support organizations,
and other related topics.

Bringing Continual Added Value

Having continual added value has been shown to be a complex
topic in this research. From the feedback and effective usage
of the app, it becomes clear that not every family needs regular
conversations about the syndrome. What families need are tools
that can support them at the moments they need them. In
families with younger children, this will be a more permanent
situation, whereas in families with older children, only at the
most urgent points in time will an app be used.

However, just having the option of using a digital tool like the
one in this research is in itself already a way to bring continual
added value. Families indicate they would more quickly use a
digital tool than a physical tool, solely because of the lower
practical burdens of using it.

Last but not least, in order to boost engagement, personalization
has been shown both in previous research [44] and in this study
to be an important aspect for the success of an app.

Limitations

A few important limitations need to be pointed out in this
research. First, although 8 different families with children with
22q11 DS took part in the research, the quantitative analysis of
the logs with more participants could lead to even more valuable
insights. Nonetheless, our participants provide important
perspectives that enhance our understanding of their situation.
Involving the families provided additional information and
firsthand knowledge gained through years of experience and
interaction with health professionals. We employed a mixed
methods approach, combining qualitative methods like in-depth
interviews with quantitative data after real-world usage, enabling
a comprehensive exploration of participants’ experiences and
needs. However, the trial period in this study can be perceived
as relatively short. On the other hand, the trial period did provide
us with valuable additional insights that would not have been
collected with interviews alone. This study serves as an
exploratory investigation, laying the groundwork for future
research and informing studies with larger sample sizes, leading
to a gradual expansion of knowledge in the field.

Conclusions

In this research, an iterative, user-centered design process is
carried out. Based on the design phase, a fully working proof
of concept of a mobile app is developed with the goal of
bridging the communication gap between people with 22q11
DS and their caregivers. This proof of concept is evaluated
during the evaluation phase. The need for these kinds of apps
is confirmed. All participating families express their gratitude
and mention the added value for other families. Therefore, it is
highly encouraged for institutions to act and develop an app to
be used in practice. Furthermore, considerations when
developing for people with 22q11 DS, or more broadly, people
with cognitive impairments, are proposed. First, one should
keep design principles in mind to overcome usage barriers.
Next, recognition is a key concept when stimulating
conversations through mobile apps. Third, information should
be provided by a trusted source, and not only clinical
information brings added value. Finally, having the possibility
of using a digital tool that can be personalized brings continual
added value.