RESEARCH ARTICLE
Open Access

Involving end-users in the design of an
audit and feedback intervention in the
emergency department setting – a mixed
methods study

Welmoed K. van Deen1,2*
, Edward S. Cho3, Kathryn Pustolski4, Dennis Wixon4, Shona Lamb3,
Thomas W. Valente5 and Michael Menchine6

Methods
Setting
This mixed methods study took place in the Los Angeles
County + University of Southern California (LAC+USC)
Medical Center ED. LAC+USC is a large public hospital
owned and operated by the LAC Department of Health
Services and is a major teaching hospital. The University
of Southern California (USC) provides most of the attend-
ing services at the hospital. The ED is staffed by approxi-
mately 60 attending physicians and 70 ED residents. With
over 100,000 patient visits per year, this ED is one of the

Page 2 of 13

largest in the country and serves predominantly uninsured
and underinsured populations. The median LOS in 2016
was approximately 9 h for admitted patients and 6 h for
discharged patients, which is well above the LOS observed
in other EDs serving un- and underinsured populations
[30]. Additionally, there was substantial variation between
providers in LOS and utilization metrics; for example, the
interquartile range (IQR) of the median LOS per provider
was 6–9 h and the IQR of the % patients with a CT scan
was 10–30%.

Human-centered design approach
We employed a human-centered design approach to in-
form the development of a performance feedback dash-
board
for
attending
physicians.
The
goal
of
the
performance dashboard was to reduce overall LOS by
changing attending physicians’ practice patterns. Before
developing the initial design, we performed a series of
60-min semi-structured interviews with ED leadership
and ED attending physicians. Leadership interviews were
performed to understand the strategic goals of the de-
partment and how a dashboard with specific perform-
ance measures could help attain those goals. Attending
physician interviews were conducted to obtain end-user
input on the measures to include and the design and
functionality of the dashboard as well as to identify bar-
riers to its implementation. The interview guides were
developed specifically for this study (Additional file 1).
In total, two leadership and six attending physician in-
terviews were performed to inform the initial design.
The ED leaders were ED physicians whose primary re-
sponsibility was leadership but who also worked as at-
tending physicians in this ED. We used a purposive
sampling strategy to ensure a diverse representation of
ED physicians. We included both male and female physi-
cians with various levels of experience and different re-
sponsibilities (e.g. clinical, educational, academic, and
administrative). Physicians employed by both USC and
by the LA County Department of Health Services were
included because incentive structures are different in the
two settings. All participants were required to have
worked in this ED for a minimum of 2 years to ensure
they had a thorough understanding of the ED workflow.
Twelve attending physicians were invited to participate,
of which six completed interviews. Interviews were re-
corded and transcribed before analysis. Interviewees re-
ceived a $25 gift card for their participation.
All transcripts were analyzed for comments related to
relevant peer-comparison metrics, desired functionality,
and perceived barriers. Based on the interview results, a
guide was developed that specified design requirements
for the performance dashboard. A team with experience
in human-centered design developed (DW and KP) a
front-end prototype in Axure RP PRO 8 (Axure Software

Solutions, Inc., San Diego, CA). The design-team (DW,
KP, ESC, WKvD) met on a bi-weekly basis to review the
design and discuss appropriate solutions for design chal-
lenges. After the front-end prototype was developed
using insights from the initial round of interviews, add-
itional feedback was sought in a second round of 45-min
interviews with five attending physicians, during which
iterative improvements were made to the design.

Survey
We conducted pre- and post-surveys (Additional file 2) 6
weeks apart to test whether the performance feedback
dashboard (1) increases physicians’ motivation to make fas-
ter decisions about the patients’ management and (2) de-
creases physicians’ likelihood to order tests in a specific
scenario; two outcomes that could lead to reductions in
ED LOS. Screenshots of the prototype dashboard devel-
oped during the human-centered design process were dis-
played prior to the post-survey. Questions related to the
culture and social network in the ED were included in the
pre-survey, and feedback on the usability of the dashboard
was obtained in the post-survey. Both surveys were hosted
in Qualtrics (Provo, UT) and were electronically distrib-
uted to the 56 attending physicians that were active in the
ED at the time the pre-survey was sent out. The
pre-survey was sent out on January 1, 2018, with three re-
minders in the following month. The post-survey was sent
out on March 13, 2018, with two reminders in the follow-
ing month. Two OpenTable gift cards with $150 value
were
raffled among participants as an incentive to
complete the pre-survey. In the post-survey, a $5 Starbucks
gift card was offered to each participant as an incentive.

Measures
The primary outcome was the effect of the performance
feedback dashboard on physicians’ motivation to make a
quick disposition decision (i.e. the moment the physician
decides whether the patients will be admitted to the hos-
pital or discharged from the ED). To measure motivation,
we used a set of measures derived from Self-Determination
Theory which posits that perceived value/usefulness, com-
petence, and autonomy support are important factors for
motivation [15]. We used the Value/Usefulness and Com-
petence subscales of the Intrinsic Motivation Inventory
and the six-question version of the Work Climate Ques-
tionnaire for Perceived Autonomy Support [31], which
have been used and validated in a variety of settings includ-
ing educational settings, sports psychology, and the work-
place environment [32, 33]. All questions were rated on a
seven-point Likert scale ranging from “Not at all true” to
“Very true”. These questions were included in both the
pre- and post-survey.
To estimate changes in physicians’ practice patterns,
we focused on test-ordering, which is a known predictor

Page 3 of 13

of LOS and is directly influenced by physicians’ deci-
sions [1, 5]. To assess physicians’ likelihood of ordering
diagnostics tests, we included a vignette adapted from
Kool et al. [34] in which the need for imaging is pur-
posefully ambiguous. After reviewing the vignette, physi-
cians were asked whether they would order diagnostic
imaging, and if so, what type of diagnostic order. The vi-
gnette was included in both the pre- and post-survey.
To evaluate the design of the prototype performance
dashboard in the post-survey, we assessed the perceived
usefulness and ease of use based on the Technology Ac-
ceptance Model [20]. The Technology Acceptance Model
has been used extensively to evaluate physician acceptance
of health technology [35, 36]. Questions such as “I believe
that the performance feedback tool is flexible to interact
with” were scored on a seven-point Likert-scale ranging
from “Disagree strongly” and “Agree strongly”. We also
assessed physicians’ perception of the importance of the
metrics included in the dashboard and physicians’ per-
ceptions of their ability to affect these measures on the
same seven-point Likert-scale. Lastly, we asked physicians
a Net Promotor Score question, which is widely used in
various industries to understand the quality of the product
or service: “How likely are you to recommend this per-
formance feedback tool to your colleagues and peers to
visualize and improve their performance as ED physi-
cians?” with an eleven-point response scale ranging from
“Not likely at all” to “Extremely likely.” We also asked for
suggestions to improve the tool and inquired about add-
itional physician comments.
To assess the ED culture, we asked physicians about
their perceptions of the social, technical, and environmen-
tal aspects of their workplace in the pre-survey. We used
the first thirteen questions of the Safety Attitudes and
Safety Climate Questionnaire, which has been extensively
psychometrically validated [21, 37]. These thirteen ques-
tions specifically address the teamwork and safety climate.
All questions were scored on a five-point Likert scale ran-
ging from “Disagree strongly” to “Agree strongly”, with an
N/A option for each question. To describe the underlying
social network, we included the question “Who do you dis-
cuss problems with at work?” which returns social network
data indicating specifically who communicates with whom
in the organization [38]. Understanding this network is
important if there are cultural barriers that limit the adop-
tion of an intervention [39]. Up to seven names could be
selected from a pre-specified list of ED provider-names,
including those in leadership roles. See Additional file 2
for the complete surveys.

Statistical analysis
To assess the importance of end-user involvement in the
development process, respondents were categorized as
(1) directly involved in the dashboard development

(interviewees, co-author MM), (2) not directly involved
in the development but ≥30% of their network was in-
volved, or (3) not directly involved and < 30% of their
network was involved. The social network question was
used to create a model that assessed the level of expos-
ure that each participant had to people who were in-
volved in the development of the dashboard. Exposure
was defined as the percentage of nominated people who
were involved in the development [23].
Centrality measures for the social network analysis
(in-degree, out-degree, closeness, and betweenness) were
calculated using the igraph library [40]. Out-degree is the
number of people someone selected in the network ques-
tion; in-degree is the number of times a person was se-
lected by someone else; closeness measures the average
distance someone has to everyone else in the network; and
betweenness is a measure of how often each person lies
on the shortest paths connecting others [41]. People with
high betweenness scores are thought to be key in the early
adoption of innovation, people with a high in-degree are
‘popular’ figures in the network that are important for the
innovation to spread to the early majority, and people with
a high closeness score are thought to be important for an
innovation to spread to a large amount of people [41].
Descriptive statistics were used to describe the sample
and survey results. Pre- and post-survey data were com-
pared using a Wilcoxon Ranked Sum test for continuous
measures and the McNemar’s Test for categorical vari-
ables. The Kruskal-Wallis Test was used to compare
change-scores between groups. A Spearman correlation
coefficient was used to describe relations between con-
tinuous data. Rho correlations coefficients of > 0.7 were
considered
strong
correlations,
coefficients
between
0.5–0.7
were
considered
moderate,
and
coefficients
between 0.3 and 0.5 were considered weak. A p-value
of < 0.05 was considered significant. Analyses were per-
formed in SAS 9.4 (Cary, NC).

Results
Human-centered design approach - interviews
A total of eight semi-structured interviews were per-
formed to guide the initial design of the performance
feedback dashboard between May and August 2017
(Additional file 3: Table S1). Half of the interviewees
were male, their median time since starting residency
was 12 years (range 9–45), and their median length of
employment in the current ED was 8 years (range 2–31).
Two of the interviewees had primarily leadership roles,
three primarily clinical responsibilities, and three pri-
marily academic responsibilities. Two were employed by
the LA County Department of Health and six by USC.
The median duration of the interviews was 57 min
(range 35–77). Thematic saturation was achieved after

Page 4 of 13

seven interviews; no new themes emerged in the eighth
interview.

Dashboard content – metrics
Numerous metrics were discussed in the interviews, in-
cluding the number of patients, their discharge dispos-
ition, and a variety of length of stay, utilization, and
outcomes measures (Additional file 3: Table S2). Overall,
the time between the moment a physician first sees the
patient until the moment a disposition decision is made
(i.e. decision to admit a patient to the hospital or dis-
charge from the ED), was perceived to be the most rele-
vant LOS metric. “Provider to decision time. Yeah, I
think that’s an important metric, I think that there’s
probably some wiggle room in there. In general, I think
that’s an important part of our job is to have a dispos-
ition decision within whatever time frame we deem to be
appropriate.” (Interview 7).
Additionally, test utilization, including CT scans, MR
scans, and labs, was thought to be of interest, especially
if compared to peer utilization. “I think the number of
yes [sic], I order 500 CT-scans in a year, and somebody
else orders three, would be interesting. It would be inter-
esting to know the false positives and the false [nega-
tives].” (Interview 5). Interviewees also expressed an
interest to know the outcomes of their decisions, or
what happened to patients after they left the ED:
“Bounce backs, maybe? Stuff that’s, like, more subjective,
like, you know, your decisions on the patient. [ …] you
admit someone to the floor and they die. Should they
have gone to the ICU? Or you discharge them and they
die. [ …] That’d be nice to know.” (Interview 2).

Dashboard content – comparisons
Interviewees expressed the importance of comparing
their data to others and of including historic trends. “So
ideally [the data] would be where you are, where you
were the previous month, or the previous time last year.
And then where the department is.” (Interview 8). Ideally
data would have to be aggregated on a weekly or
monthly basis, as a day would not provide useful infor-
mation because shifts vary day to day, while a year
would be too long to remember. “[ …] if you wait too
long then it doesn’t make any sense to you because you’re
like, ‘That happened in September of last year. I don’t
care. I don’t know what happened then.’ If you do it every
day, then they’re kind of like,‘Well, how am I supposed to
know what I’m supposed to change?’” (Interview 2). In-
terviewees wanted to receive their data compared to
their peers in a blinded fashion. Some expressed discom-
fort with others seeing their data: “I’m personally um,
scared you know, scared to be compared with others.”
(Interview 3). Others didn’t think it would be necessary
to share the data openly to achieve change: “We serve as

our sort of biggest critics already and that for us to see it
is enough to be like a blow to an ego where you can say,
‘Oh wow, I’m that slow compared to my colleagues?’ ”
(Interview 7).

Dashboard functionality
Three key themes emerged in the discussions about de-
sired functionality of the performance feedback dash-
board. First, participants emphasized the need for the
dashboard to be easily accessible to increase the likeli-
hood that people would actually use the dashboard. “If
it’s like one more thing to do, I might not do it. It would
have, it would have to be something that was like every
time you logged in it popped up or something, or I would
not look at it. Yeah. I’m not gonna go seek out that infor-
mation.” (Interview 4). On the other hand, physicians
did want to be able to drill down the data further to
know what happened during specific shifts or with spe-
cific patients. “Ideally for people that have unscheduled
returns, I would like to see why ... I would like their
name, their medical record number so I could look them
up and also then what happened to them on the return
visit.” (Interview 8). Lastly, interviewees expressed that
they would like to see a certain level of customization to
define metrics of interest for them: “a good dashboard
should give you the ability to, um, customize it, customize
the view and the parameters that you look at for your,
for your position at that time. Um, and you should be
able to change that on the fly.” (Interview 1).

Barriers and unintended consequences
A variety of concerns were brought up during the inter-
views. A performance dashboard might increase phys-
ician stress levels, dehumanize the patient experience,
and potentially negatively affect the quality and safety of
care: “Yeah, if I’m seeing four patients an hour and I
need to have a dispo [disposition decision] on each of
them within an hour and a half or two hours or what-
ever the ED group tells you is the right metric then prob-
ably I’m cutting a lot of corners not having substance of
conversations with the patient, not providing great pa-
tient care.” (Interview 7). Additional concerns were re-
lated to physicians’ responsibility to teach the many
residents in the ED, which could be negatively affected.
“A lot of times we give the residents a lot of leeway to
think things through. And part of that is that we haven’t
had to move on a very like super-fast time process. [ …]
if you’re having time in the ED as something you’re
thinking about more than necessarily clinical accuracy,
it’s ... it is gonna change the way we practice with super-
vision.” (Interview 4).
Data accuracy was a concern as well, given that elec-
tronic medical record (EMR) data might not always be
accurate. “All of your metrics are only as good as the

Page 5 of 13

people putting them in, and that’s always gonna be, you
know, um, an issue with accuracy [ …]. ” (Interview 1).
Interviewees also expressed the need to correct for the
acuity of patients seen and the shift. “Oh, if you work
more night shifts you’re gonna see more of them [more
challenging cases]. Probably have to control for shift in
some way.” (Interview 4). Additionally, concerns were
expressed regarding gaming of the system and problems
with attribution of patients to the right physician, espe-
cially in a teaching hospital with many residents. “When
they’re finally put in to a room, they very well may see a
different resident and attending at that point. So, there
may be three different [physicians involved]. And that’s
not even counting change of shift.” (Interview 8).

Human centered design – initial design and iterative
improvement
Based on the interviews, we designed an initial version of
the performance feedback dashboard between August and
November 2017, which was then iteratively improved in
two additional design cycles based on additional end-user
feedback from five physicians in November and December
2017 (Additional file 3: Table S1). The first major iteration
was developed after three additional interviews; the sec-
ond and last major iteration was developed after another
two interviews that revealed only minor required changes
(Table 1), after which the design process was finalized.
The design incorporates a monthly summary email that
includes a few selected measures to ensure the data is easy
to access (Additional file 3: Figure S1). A link would be
provided to an interactive performance dashboard with a
variety of measures that can be accessed on demand
(Additional file 3: Figure S2), to give physicians the oppor-
tunity to dive deeper into the data if desired. The inter-
active dashboard includes three pages: a “Personal” page
showing a physician’s individual performance compared to
their peers, an “Emergency Department” page showing the
performance of the ED overall as a reference, and a “My
Favorites” page that displays measures selected by individ-
ual physicians (Fig. 1). During the iterative interviews, tabs
were added to the pages to allow physicians to drill down
by the timing of shift and the area of care within the ED as
this reflects the severity of the cases, thereby providing an
opportunity to adjust for case-mix. Table 1 gives a
complete overview of the design considerations in the
human-centered design process and the iterative improve-
ments made.
The selection of measures for the dashboard was in-
formed by audit and feedback best practices [12–14] and
on information obtained during interviews in accordance
with a human-centered design approach [18]. We specif-
ically ensured a selection of measures that are actionable
to physicians as this is a known requirement for effective
audit and feedback interventions [13, 14]. The primary

goal of the dashboard was to reduce overall patient LOS.
However, to increase actionability of the measure, we fo-
cused on the time that can be influenced directly by
physicians. In initial versions, this was the time from
first physician to the time the physician makes the dis-
position decision (i.e. decision to admit to hospital, ob-
servation, or discharge). After additional interviews, we
modified this to the time from when the patient is
roomed until the disposition decision is made, as this
more accurately represents the period directly influenced
by the attending physician.
Test utilization data, including the percentage of pa-
tients with a CT scan, MR scan, ultrasound, and lab test,
were included because they affect LOS and are directly
controlled by the physician. The number of requested
consultations was not included as the data were not read-
ily available in the EMR. Outcome data were included to
address concerns about unintended consequences related
to the quality of care if the focus was merely on LOS and
test utilization. Initially, we included 72-h return rates and
number of deaths. However, deaths were excluded from
later versions in response to concerns about the reliability
of EMR-derived death-data. Hospital LOS after admission
was included as a proxy measure of appropriateness of
admission, with the assumption that a short LOS might
indicate that the patient did not need to be admitted. The
total number of patients with the breakdown by timing of
shift, area of care, and discharge disposition was included
to provide more context about the patient population
seen. During iterative rounds of improvements, we added
detailed definitions of the measures used and clarified
section headers to improve comprehension and trust in
the dashboard.
It was decided to report data by monthly intervals to
minimize the effect of day-to-day random variation, but
to also ensure physicians still remember what happened
during a given period. Comparison data were provided
on the “Emergency Department” page showing summary
measures for the entire ED. On initial designs, compari-
son data was shown on the “Personal” page as a ranking
that included blinded peer data to provide physicians
with achievable goals for improvement. However, further
feedback made it clear that a ranking was not perceived
as appropriate because the highest or lowest score does
not necessarily indicate the best or the worst perform-
ance. Instead, it was decided to show the interquartile
range of all physicians.

Survey
In total, 19 attending physicians (34%) responded to
both pre- and post-surveys. Forty-two physicians (75%)
responded to the pre-survey which included the clinical
vignette and measures for value/interest, perceived com-
petence, autonomy support, teamwork climate, and

Page 6 of 13

Table 1 Design decisions made during human-centered design

Interview observations
Design solution - initial design
Rationale
Iterative improvement based on
follow-up interviews

Metrics

a) Summary measures
n patients, n patients by area, n
patients by shift, n patients by
discharge disposition

To give physicians an overview of the
patients they saw in a month. Show
the area of care and shifts as it might
affect case mix

b) Length of stay metrics
Provider to decision time, overall
LOSa (median)
Overall LOS is most important for ED,
but provider-decision time is easier to
influence by provider

‘Provider to decision time’ changed to
‘Room to decision time’ as patients might
see another provider in the waiting area
(iteration 1)

c) Utilization of tests
CT, MR, US, lab utilization (%)
Can be affected by physician and is
known to affect LOS

d) Outcomes
72-h return rates, deaths (%), LOS
after admission (median)
To address concerns about negative
outcomes, return-rates and deaths
were included. LOS after admission
was included as a proxy measure of
appropriateness of admissions

Removed deaths as an outcome as it is not
feasible to reliably obtain data from EMR
(iteration 1)

Comparisons

a) Over time
Monthly intervals
Balance between too frequent reports
with random variation and too
infrequent where physicians don’t
remember what happened

b) To peers
Blinded ranking (e.g. ‘your ranking
46/60’, with outcomes of peers
with better or worse numbers
shown).
Overall ED medians are shown on
separate page

Blinded since all interviewed
physicians agreed un-blinded was not
desired/needed. A ranking showing
neighboring peers was included to
give physicians an attainable goal

Changed the ranking to interquartile range
of peers instead, since the optimum rate is
likely someplace in the middle, outliers in
either direction can be a problem (iteration 1)

Functionality

a) Ease of access
Monthly email summary with 3
measures that can be selected by
ED leadership based on priorities

Easy to access

b) Drilldown functionality Option to access full dashboard
through a link in monthly email
Drilldown functionality
Added tabs to drill down based on the
type of shift (e.g. night) and assigned area.
(iteration 1)

c) Customization
Physicians can select measures to
show up on their own favorites
page
Leadership can select measures in
monthly email

Customization options for individual
physicians and leadership based on
ED priorities

Barriers

a) Adverse consequences
on quality of care
Inclusion of outcomes on
dashboard
To avoid focus only on throughput
and utilization measures, which might
result in adverse consequences

b) Conflicting teaching
responsibilities
–
As this was not the goal of the
dashboard, no measures related to
teaching were included

c) Data accuracy
–
Extensive validation of data is required
Included definition of the measures on the
dashboard.
Made section headers very clear (iteration 2)

d) Case-mix adjustment
Show total number of patients
during different shifts and in
different areas of care.

By showing these measures,
physicians can put other measures in
context.

Added tabs to drilldown by area of care
and type of shift (iteration 1)

Abbreviations: CT computed tomography scan, ED emergency department, EMR electronic medical record, n number, MR magnetic resonance imaging, US ultrasound
aOverall LOS is only shown on the overall ED page, not on individual physician dashboards

Page 7 of 13

safety climate. Twenty-one physicians (37.5%) responded
to the post-survey which included a mockup of the per-
formance feedback dashboard, the clinical vignette, mea-
sures for value/interest, perceived competence, autonomy
support, and the perceived usefulness of the dashboard
and the perceived ease of use (Additional file 3: Table S3).
Of the 19 physicians that responded to both surveys, 5
had been involved in the development of the dashboard, 7
physicians had more than 30% of their direct network in-
volved in the development, 5 physicians had less than 30%
of their direct network involved, and 2 did not answer the
network question. Physicians with less exposure to those
involved in the development process tended to have less
experience and physicians who were directly involved in
the development tended to have a more central position
in the ED social network. Although all groups selected a
roughly equal number of people to ask for advice (out-de-
gree), physicians who were involved in the development
were selected more frequently by others (in-degree), and
had numerically higher betweenness scores. Closeness
scores were similar between groups (Table 2).

When comparing pre- and post-survey responses to
the clinical vignette, we did not observe any differences
in the percentage of physicians who would order im-
aging after seeing the prototype dashboard (12/19 pre
and 14/19 post; p = 0.69). There were also no significant
changes in the self-determination theory-based motiv-
ation measures; median pre- and post-values for value/
usefulness were 4.4 (IQR 4.2–5.2) and 5.0 (IQR 4.0–5.8),
respectively (p = 0.21); the perceived competence values
were 5.5 (IQR 4.3–6.0) and 5.0 (IQR 4.0–6.3), respect-
ively (p = 0.88); and the autonomy support values were
5.0 (IQR 2.8–5.7) and 4.0 (IQR 3.0–6.0), respectively
(p = 0.83). We then assessed changes in sub-groups
based on the level of exposure to people involved in the
development process as determined by the social net-
work analysis. We found that higher exposure was sig-
nificantly associated with changes in the perceived
value/usefulness of making quick disposition decisions
(p = 0.048) after seeing the dashboard. The perceived
value/usefulness-score of physicians who were directly
involved in the development rose by a median of 0.6

Fig. 1 Top section of performance feedback dashboard. The top section of the designed prototype performance feedback dashboard. The name
Jane Doe is a false name

Page 8 of 13

points, while the score of physicians with low exposure
(< 30% of network was involved) decreased by a median of
0.4 points. Similarly, physicians’ perceived competence in
making quick disposition decisions increased in those
physicians who were actively involved, and decreased in
those with low exposure (NS, p = 0.059). No differences
between groups were observed in change-scores for au-
tonomy support by ED leadership (Fig. 2). No correlation
was observed between the physicians’ perception of the
culture in the ED and change scores (Table 3).
While the importance of the metrics on the dashboard
was generally rated highly (median 6 out of 7, IQR 4–6)
and physicians reported they could affect the measures (median 6 out of 7, IQR 5–6), the perceived usefulness of
the overall dashboard was only rated a median of 4 out of
7 (IQR 3–4.5). The median ease of use rating was 5 out of

7 (IQR 4.3–5.5) and physicians rated the likelihood they
would recommend the dashboard to their peers as 6 out of
10 (IQR 5–7). When looking at specific subgroups, we
found that physicians with little exposure to those involved
in the development process rated the importance of the
metrics significantly lower than others (p = 0.02, Table 4).
A trend towards lower scores for perceived usefulness, ease
of use, and likelihood to recommend the dashboard was
found in these physicians as well (Table 4). Additionally,
moderate correlations between the perceived safety climate
and positive evaluations of the dashboard were observed.
No correlation was observed between perceived teamwork
climate and positive evaluations of the dashboard, except
for the ability to affect measures (Table 3).
Physicians’ comments in the survey were analyzed
qualitatively. Several physicians commented that the

Table 2 Characteristics of survey respondents

Involved
≥30% of network involveda
< 30% of network involveda
p-value

(n = 5)
(n = 7)
(n = 5)

Male gender – n (%)
3/5
5/7
4/5
1

Years experience – median (IQR)
10 (10–15)
10 (9–14)
4 (3–9)
0.15

Years in this ED – median (IQR)
10 (6–13)
7 (2–9)
2 (1–5)
0.29

Network centrality measuresa

- Out-degree – median (IQR)
6 (4–7)
5 (3–7)
6 (5–7)
0.88

- In-degree – median (IQR)
6 (4–6)
3 (2–4)
3 (2–6)
0.43

- Closeness – median (IQR)
0.29 (0.25–0.31)
0.30 (0.25–0.33)
0.32 (0.29–0.34)
0.66

- Betweenness – median (IQR)
158 (129–197)
112 (59–204)
88 (34–100)
0.30

Characteristics of physicians who responded to both pre- and post-survey, categorized by involvement in the design process: those who were involved in the
development, those of which ≥30% of their network was involved in the development, and those of which < 30% of their network was involved. Two physicians did not
finish the social network question and were not included in the social network analyses
Abbreviations: ED emergency department, IQR interquartile range, n number
aNetwork measures were calculated based on the question “Who do you discuss problems with at work?”

Fig. 2 The effects of the performance feedback dashboard on motivation. The effect of the prototype performance feedback dashboard on perceived
value/usefulness of making quick disposition decisions, perceived competence in making quick disposition decisions, and perceived autonomy
support from emergency department leadership in physicians who were involved in the development (Inv, n = 5), those of which ≥30% of their
network was involved in the development (≥30%, n = 7, high exposure), and those with < 30% (< 30%, n = 4, low exposure). Horizontal bars represent
the group average. Each dot represents a unique observation

Page 9 of 13

ability to have measures available would be a “step up”,
would “provide an incentive”, or would be “interesting”.
The visual design of the performance dashboard was de-
scribed with words such as “clear”, “easy to understand”,
“pleasant to look at”, and “user friendly”, though one
physician commented it was “big brother controlling”.
Other concerns were related to data accuracy, negative
consequences on patient care or work culture, and the
effect on the teaching environment. Lastly, while bench-
marks were visualized on the dashboard using an inter-
quartile range, several physicians commented that a
benchmark would be needed in the dashboard for it to
be useful, implying that a more intuitive design to dis-
play this information needs to be considered.

Discussion
This study described the development of a front-end
prototype performance feedback dashboard to deliver
feedback to attending physicians about their perform-
ance with the goal of reducing patient LOS in the ED.
We employed a human-centered design approach to en-
sure we developed a dashboard that fits the end-users

needs. This approach guided the selection of measures,
development of functionality, and visualization of data.
During the eleven interviews performed as part of the
human-centered design process, a variety of barriers
were identified that we attempted to address in the de-
sign. Additionally, we found preliminary evidence that
the social network in which the intervention is devel-
oped and implemented is likely to be of key importance
to the adoption of the intervention and the achievement
of the intended changes in physicians’ practice patterns.
The involvement of end-users in the design of the
dashboard allowed us to select relevant measures. Par-
ticularly, it helped us select measures that were per-
ceived as actionable and under control of the physician.
It also helped identify appropriate comparisons and clear
visualizations. The multiple interviews before and during
development provided insights about the importance of
having drilldown functionality, both to increase trust in
the data as well as to correct for confounding variables
such as patient acuity. While we were able to address a
variety of concerns that came up during the design
process, other issues were not sufficiently addressed

Table 3 Correlation between climate and outcome measures

Pre-post (Δ) motivation measures
Dashboard evaluation metrics

Δ Value/usefulness
Δ Competence
Δ Autonomy
support
Usefulness
Ease
of use
Importance
of metrics
Ability to
affect metrics
Recommend

Teamwork climate
−0.02 (0.95)
0.33 (0.19)
−0.43 (0.07)
−0.07 (0.78)
0.26 (0.30)
0.05 (0.84)
0.48 (0.046)
−0.03 (0.92)

Safety climate
0.24 (0.34)
0.41 (0.09)
0.10 (0.69)
0.55 (0.019)
0.50 (0.035)
0.54 (0.021)
0.71 (0.001)
0.52 (0.028)

Spearman correlation coefficients (p-value); Significant values in bold. Motivation measures are derived from Self-Determination Theory

Table 4 Quantitative assessment of the performance feedback dashboard

Outcomes
Median (IQR)
Overall
(n = 21)
Involved
(n = 5)
≥30% of network involveda

(n = 7)
< 30% of network involveda

(n = 5)
p-value
Kruskal-Wallis test

Perceived usefulness (1–7)
4 (3–4.5)
4.3 (4.2–4.5)
4.2 (4–5.7)
3.5 (2–4)
0.36

Perceived ease of use (1–7)
5 (4.3–5.5)
5.5 (5–6.2)
5 (4.3–6)
4.3 (3.8–5)
0.12

Importance of metrics (1–7)

- LOS
6 (4–6)
6 (5–6)
6 (6–7)
4 (4–4)
0.03

- time to disposition decision
6 (5–6)
6 (6–7)
6 (6–7)
4 (2–4)
0.02

- tests ordered
6 (5–6)
5 (5–6)
6 (6–7)
4 (2–5)
0.03

- metrics overall
6 (4–6)
5 (5–6)
6 (6–7)
3 (2–4)
0.02

Ability to affect metrics (1–7)

- LOS
5 (4–6)
6 (5–7)
6 (5–6)
5 (4–6)
0.30

- time to disposition decision
6 (5–6)
6 (5–7)
6 (5–6)
6 (5–6)
0.85

- tests ordered
6 (5–7)
6 (5–7)
6 (5–7)
6 (6–6)
0.97

- overall metrics
6 (5–6)
6 (5–7)
6 (5–6)
5 (4–6)
0.30

Recommend (0–10)
6 (5–7)
7 (6–7)
6 (5–8)
3 (2–5)
0.16

Post-survey results of the assessment of the performance feedback dashboard. Separate for physicians who were involved in the development, those of which ≥
30% of the people they discuss problems with were involved (high exposure), and those with < 30% (low exposure). No network data was available for the 2
physicians who didn’t fill out the pre-survey and for 2 physicians who didn’t fill out the network question
Abbreviations: IQR interquartile range, LOS length of stay, n number
aBased on the question “Who do you discuss problems with at work?”

Page 10 of 13

according to post-survey results. Interviewees expressed
concerns about the application of a performance-feed-
back tool in an educational setting, in which they also
have the responsibility to teach residents. This is consist-
ent with prior findings that clear goals need to be
aligned with audit and feedback interventions [14]. An-
other recurring barrier was the lack of trust in EMR
data. This too is consistent with prior studies, and a var-
iety of strategies are available to improve the accuracy
of, and trust in, EMR data for quality improvement pur-
poses [42, 43].
We showed preliminary evidence that the ED/work-
place culture may be important for the adoption of tech-
nology.
Physicians
who
reported
higher
scores
on
questions about safety climate based on questions such
as “I would feel safe being treated here as a patient” and
“The culture in this clinical area makes it easy to learn
from the errors of others,” also reported higher scores
for acceptability of the dashboard. This suggests that
nurturing a culture that supports learning from errors is
important for acceptance of performance feedback. Add-
itionally, we showed data that suggests that the involve-
ment of end-users in the design can lead to higher
acceptability and increased motivation to change. Not
only were those involved in the design more likely to re-
port higher acceptance scores, this effect also appeared
to be disseminated through their social network; con-
versely, physicians with little exposure to those involved
in the design of the dashboard reported lower accept-
ance of the dashboard compared to those who had
higher levels of exposure. Similarly, the dashboard had a
positive effect on motivation of those involved in the de-
sign and a negative effect on those with little exposure.
These findings are consistent with other studies showing
that social networks have important roles in dissemin-
ation of innovation and behavior change [22, 27–29].
This implies that it might be important to strategically
select the people involved in the design process based
on their position in the social network.
While these preliminary findings offer useful insights,
the sample size is small and with only 19 of 56 partici-
pants responding to both surveys, there is likely a selec-
tion
bias.
Therefore,
these
results
should
not
be
interpreted as a proof of concept, but rather as prelimin-
ary evidence that needs to be further explored in future
studies. Additionally, physicians who were included in the
design process had more experience than those who were
not involved and had a more central position in the ED
social network. This is likely due to our purposive sample
selection strategy along with the selection bias introduced
by the participation of only about half of the physicians
that were invited. We purposefully excluded physicians
with less than 2 years of experience in this ED because we
expected those to have less insight regarding the needs

and workflows of the ED. Moreover, our study only in-
cluded attending physicians at a single site, limiting
generalizability to other settings and other healthcare pro-
viders such as nurse practitioners. Furthermore, while we
were able to test the effect of this prototype dashboard on
physicians’ motivation to make faster disposition deci-
sions, the prototype did not include real, personalized data
which likely decreased the observed impact.
Lastly, we would like to acknowledge that caution
should be exercised when attempting to implement a
performance dashboard such as the one developed in
this study. Both intended and unintended consequences
should be monitored closely, for example through the
inclusion of balancing measures. This is especially im-
portant when appropriateness measures are not readily
available for metrics such as test utilization and LOS in
the ED; reductions in test ordering may not always be
appropriate and reductions in LOS might not always im-
prove quality of care even if they may increase patient
satisfaction. While we included 72-h return rates as a
balancing measure on the dashboard, several other po-
tential unintended consequences were identified in the
interview
process,
including
physician
stress
levels,
dehumanization of the patient experience, effects on
teaching, and effects on quality and safety of care.

Conclusions
In summary, this small pilot study in a single ED showed
the feasibility of designing a performance feedback dash-
board using a human-centered design approach over the
course of 8 months. Additionally, we showed preliminary
evidence suggesting that both the culture and social net-
work can be leveraged to facilitate the adoption and en-
hance the effect of such an intervention. A social
network
analysis
prior
to
the
initiation
of
the
human-centered design process could help identify the
right stakeholders to involve in this process and increase
the likelihood of successful implementation. This evi-
dence, along with the observation that data quality and
unclear goals are barriers to acceptance, shows that im-
plementation of an audit and feedback intervention can-
not happen in a vacuum; this type of intervention
requires close collaboration of senior leadership, de-
signers, researchers, IT, and end-users.