Study Protocol for the Development
of a European eHealth Platform to
Improve Quality of Life in Individuals
With Huntington’s Disease and Their
Partners (HD-eHelp Study): A
User-Centered Design Approach

Pearl J. C. van Lonkhuizen 1,2,3*, Niko J. H. Vegt 1,2, Eline Meijer 1,2, Erik van Duijn 3,4,
Susanne T. de Bot 5, Jiˇrí Klempíˇr 6, Wiebke Frank 7, G. Bernhard Landwehrmeyer 7,
Alzbeta Mühlbäck 7, Jennifer Hoblyn 8, Ferdinando Squitieri 9, Peter Foley 10,
Niels H. Chavannes 1,2 and Anne-Wil Heemskerk 1,3
on behalf of the HEALTHE-RND
Consortium

METHODS AND ANALYSIS

Study Design
We will employ a UCD approach (48) in which an understanding
of the end-users’ needs, preferences and contexts is pivotal. In
our study, we will include HDGECs, partners and HCPs as
end-users. To optimally align the eHealth platform with their
needs and wishes, end-users will participate in all three phases
of the research and development process (i.e., 1. Exploration;
2. Concept development; 3. Prototype testing). As user-centered
(participatory) design approaches have not been extensively used
or described in HD (34, 50), we provide a detailed description of
how we adjusted this approach to the multiple target groups and
multinational nature of our study in the procedure section.
This study will be coordinated from the Netherlands. Research
sites from the Netherlands, Germany, Czech Republic, Italy,
and Ireland (see Table 1) will be involved to develop and test a
multilingual platform that is suitable within diﬀerent healthcare
systems and cultural contexts. The duration of the study will be
∼18 months, including preparation, data analysis and prototype
development. A large-scale evaluation of the platform in a
randomized controlled trial (RCT) is scheduled, yet beyond the
scope of this study protocol.

Study Sample and Recruitment
Premanifest (preHD) and manifest (mHD) gene expansion
carriers who are living at home, partners of HDGECs, and HCPs
will be invited to participate in this study. Table 2 provides an
overview of the eligibility criteria for each participant group.
We aim to recruit HDGECs from the locally held Enroll-HD
database (https://www.enroll-hd.org/) at the respective research
sites (51). Enroll-HD is a global, on-going observational study
for families aﬀected by HD, collecting longitudinal data on
disease characteristics and progression (51). With over 20,000
participants enrolled worldwide, Enroll-HD provides a large
database of HDGECs for which phenotype and genotype are
well-established, providing additional context for mapping their
desires and needs across diﬀerent disease stages in this study.
HDGECs are not required to have a spouse/partner to participate
in this study and will be selected to cover a wide range of
disease stages.
Partners (i.e., spouses or unregistered/unmarried partners of
premanifest and manifest HDGECs) and HCPs will be recruited
from clinics, HD centers, patient groups and via the research sites’
primary and secondary care networks in the respective countries.
The HCP sample will represent professionals who work in HD
expertise centers and will be selected to cover all major expertise
that is involved in HD care (e.g., neurologists, psychiatrists,
psychologists, social workers, speech and swallowing therapists,
dieticians, occupational therapists, and physiotherapists).
Potentially eligible participants will be informed about
this study (face-to-face or by telephone) by the coordinating
researcher(s) at each site and will receive a study information
package, if interested. After a minimum period of 7 days,
HDGECs will be contacted again and provided with additional
information or clariﬁcation, if needed. Partners and HCPs can
indicate their interest in participation via a response card.
Participants will be invited to the ﬁrst study activity upon receival

of the signed informed consent forms. All participants will
receive travel reimbursement, if applicable.

Sample Size
We estimated the number of participants based on guidelines
for user testing (52), thereby correcting for anticipated attrition
rates. Five participants generally ﬁnd 80 percent of all problems
when testing a moderately complex concept or prototype. This is
more than enough for developing an eHealth platform that can
be tested in an RCT. However, as the target users (i.e., patients
and partners) of the intended eHealth platform are experiencing
very diverse stages of the disease, we include at least 7 participants
per stage (i.e., preHD or mHD) per target group. The study
design allows participants to take part in multiple phases. If
they are unwilling or unable to participate in subsequent phases,
additional participants will be recruited until data saturation (i.e.,
no new insights emerging from newly collected data) is reached
within each study phase (53).
Table 3 provides the estimated number of participants per
phase and per country throughout the study. In total, we aim
to include 20 HDGECs (10 preHD; 10 mHD), 20 partners (10
of preHD; 10 of mHD) and 20 HCPs in the Netherlands. In
Germany, Czech Republic, Italy, and Ireland we aim to include
14 HDGECs (7 preHD; 7 mHD), 14 partners (7 of preHD; 7 of
mHD) and 14 HCPs per country. This will result in the inclusion
of 76 HDGECs (38 preHD; 38 mHD), 76 partners (38 of preHD;
38 of mHD) and 76 HCPs throughout the whole study.

Study Procedures
The diﬀerent study procedures for each UCD phase, and
how we adjusted these to the multinational nature and target

groups of our study, are described in detail below. As the
study is coordinated from the Netherlands, Dutch end-users
will be involved in all phases of the development process.
Due to feasibility and time constraints, end-users in the other
participating countries will only be involved in phase 1 and 3
(see Table 3). This is considered suﬃcient to design and adapt
the eHealth platform to each language and healthcare system.
To prevent a loss of lingual and cultural aspects in concept
development during phase 2, the international project team and
an international Family Patient Expert Panel (FPEP) will be
actively involved throughout phase 2. The panel consists of one
representative from each participating country, appointed by the
respective national HD association. In addition, two people from
the patient advocacy group in the European Reference Network
for Rare Neurological Diseases participate to have additional
disease groups represented.
Throughout the study, regular meetings with the international
project team, a Dutch advisory board of HCPs and the FPEP will
provide guidance to the research and design process. The HCP
advisory board and the FPEP will review study procedures and
materials to ensure suitability and comprehensibility. Prior to the
start of the study in each country, all relevant study materials
will be translated into the respective languages. Guidelines for all
study sessions have been developed. Study sessions will be audio
recorded and conducted by trained staﬀ.

Phase 1: Exploration
We will gather an in-depth understanding of end-users’ needs,
desires and experiences regarding QoL, HD care, and eHealth
possibilities using interviews and generative techniques. As
compared to more conventional qualitative techniques (i.e.,

interviews and focus groups), generative techniques (54), such
as sensitizing assignments and journey mapping, can help to
facilitate a deeper level of understanding (55) and access people’s
tacit knowledge (i.e., easy to act upon but diﬃcult to express
in words) and latent knowledge (i.e., not yet aware of) (56). As
desires, needs and experiences are often concealed in these deeper
levels of knowledge, these techniques provide access to the user’s
hidden world (55) and at the same time help to build empathy
during the design process (57).
All participants will complete a workbook consisting of
sensitizing assignments that encourage them to reﬂect on
their routines, habits and feelings regarding HD and QoL
(e.g., current/future complaints, important conversations and
locations, housing situation and tools used, reﬂection of a day
in their lives). This awareness helps to express their experiences
and needs during semi-structured interviews (in case of HDGECs
and partners) and focus groups (in case of HCPs). Participants
will be asked to complete an assignment every day (∼10 min
per day) for a total of 7 days at home (HDGECs/partners)
or at work (HCPs). Participants can receive daily reminders

by phone/e-mail upon request. The sensitizing assignments
have been co-developed with the HCP advisory board/FPEP
and have been adapted and tailored to each participant group.
To ensure suitability and comprehensibility, the assignments
for HDGECs were pilot tested with one premanifest and one
manifest HDGEC (and spouse). This resulted in some important
adjustments for the workbooks for manifest HDGECs, including
for example landscape instead of portrait orientation, larger font
size, more writing space, and less suggestive examples to avoid
copying (see Figure 1 for an example of an assignment in the
workbook for manifest HDGECs). Together with the researchers
from the respective sites, the ﬁnal workbooks were adapted to
each language.
The interviews with HDGECs and partners are aimed
at understanding participants’ daily experiences with HD
(caregiving)
and
their
perceptions
of
QoL.
Additionally,
participants will be asked to voice their hopes and dreams
for the future regarding QoL. Interviews will take ∼1.5 h. As
opposed to the face-to-face sessions often seen in UCD, the
interviews and focus groups will be mainly conducted through

online videoconferencing due to the restrictions raised by the
current COVID-19 pandemic. In the case of connectivity issues,
participants will be interviewed by telephone. HCPs will be
asked to talk about their daily work experiences with HD during
focus group sessions of ∼2 h (including breaks). Generative
techniques such as patient journey mapping (58) will be applied
to gain in-depth insights into the experiences of HCPs regarding
HD treatment and challenges and opportunities in providing
HD care. Focus group sessions will consist of a maximum of
six HCPs per session and will be preferably conducted online.
The groups will consist of HCPs with varying expertise in the
respective countries.
HD experts from the participating research sites will provide
additional information on available HD care services and the
current use of eHealth technologies in HD care in their respective
country to complement the information given by participants.

Phase 2: Concept Development
Based on the data gathered in phase 1 from all participating
countries, we will develop concepts (through descriptions
and visualizations) of the eHealth platform together with
the same Dutch participants that participated in the ﬁrst
phase via sensitizing assignments and co-creation sessions. The
sensitizing assignments will follow the same procedures as
described previously. The focus in this phase will be on eHealth
opportunities and possibilities (e.g., an app providing tailored
practical information or a website facilitating a buddy system),
yet the exact content depends on the output gathered during
phase 1. The assignments will be co-developed with the HCP
advisory board/FPEP and will be pilot tested with HDGECs.
During the co-creation sessions with each end-user group,
problems and opportunities for eHealth, as well as solutions
to address these, will be identiﬁed for all groups. Generative
techniques (e.g., making a collage, journey mapping, and/or
mind mapping) will be used to gather information on needs,
motivations, and wishes that might not be easily expressed in

words. Participants will work with tailor-made toolkits (54)
consisting of, for example, paper templates, physical objects, and
stickers with words and images that participants can use to reﬂect
on their experiences with HD, generate ideas for solutions, and
share them with each other (see Figure 2 for an example of
a toolkit used during a research presentation at a Huntington
café). The toolkit materials will be developed and pilot tested
to match the participants’ cognitive and motor skills. For
example, too much material on a table could cognitively overload
participants who have problems with executive functioning. The
co-creation sessions will generally consist of six participants and
may take ∼3 h (including breaks). The sessions are intended
to be performed physically, yet could also be performed online
depending on the COVID-measures at the time.
The outcomes will be further developed by the research team
into several detailed concepts of the eHealth platform, such
as a regular monitoring service or notiﬁcations on the mobile
phone. These concepts will be evaluated by the same participants
during individual concept evaluation sessions of ∼1 h either at
the respective site or online. Low ﬁdelity mock-ups representing
concept features will be used to evaluate the user interaction in
practice. For example, the use of a mobile application will be
mimicked by a paper representation of the interface in which
interface elements are manually altered. The concepts will be
evaluated on desirability, user-experience, and expected eﬀect
on QoL via questions and short interviews. Participants will
be asked to state their preferences regarding the concepts and
evaluate the concepts’ ﬁt into their daily lives. A researcher
will observe the use and interaction with the concept and
take notes of the interaction. The evaluation will result in a
redesign of the concept and design recommendations. During
this process, the international project team and the FPEP will be
actively involved to evaluate concepts on their ﬁt in the diﬀerent
cultures and health systems. This phase can be considered as an
iterative process of designing, evaluating, selecting and adjusting
concepts (59), which ends with deﬁnitive design choices for

prototypes of the eHealth platform (e.g., a deﬁnitive decision on
functionalities and scenarios how the platform is envisioned to
be used).

Phase 3: Prototype Testing
High-ﬁdelity prototypes (i.e., digital representations of a product
with close resemblance to the ﬁnal design), as developed by
the research team, will be reviewed by the same end-users that
participated in the previous phase to assess usability and user-
experience. The procedures for prototype testing are similar to
those described above for concept evaluation. The participants’
responses will be used to remove all major usability issues, such
as an unclear navigation structure, and reﬁne the user experience

(e.g., a friendly or professional look and feel) in an iterative
process. The same participants may be invited to perform a
second round of evaluations on the improved prototype. Each
individual prototype evaluation session will be held either at the
respective site or online, and will take 1 h (with a minimum of 2
weeks in between, if applicable).
As soon as the major usability issues of a prototype are solved
and the participants approve its usefulness, a pre-ﬁnal prototype
will be translated into the respective language. Newly recruited
participants in each country will then evaluate the prototype
during individual “think-aloud” sessions. Each session will take
∼90 min and will be preferably held at home (HDGECs/partners)
or at work (HCPs). End-users will be asked to use and explore the

prototype, reﬂect on their experience, and express their thoughts
(e.g., “What’s this button for?” or “Strange picture”) in the
presence of a researcher. We will explore perceived usefulness,
perceived ease of use, and intention to use. The ﬁndings from
testing the pre-ﬁnal prototype will result in a design proposal,
which will then be further developed into a fully functional
eHealth platform that can be tested in an RCT study.

Additional Measures
To describe the population under study and to provide
additional context to the insights gained, we will collect
sociodemographic information (e.g., gender, age, work situation)
from all participant groups via self-report questionnaires
provided with the sensitizing assignments. In addition, care-
related information will be collected from partners (e.g., years of
taking care of HD aﬀected partner, care tasks) and HCPs (e.g.,
profession, years of working with HD).
For HDGECs we aim to also collect sociodemographic,
clinical, neuropsychiatric, and cognitive data from their last or
upcoming Enroll-HD visit. More particularly, we will collect,
amongst others, CAG repeat length, clinical motor features
of HD [based on the Uniﬁed Huntington’s Disease Rating
Scale (UHDRS) Total Motor Score], years of HD diagnosis (as
reported by rater), independence and functioning in daily living
(UHDRS Total Functional Capacity), functional status (UHDRS
Independence
Scale),
current
medication
use,
behavioral
problems
(Problem
Behaviors
Assessment),
symptoms
of
anxiety and depression (Hospital Anxiety and Depression
Scale),
presence
of
suicidal
ideation/behavior
(Columbia
Suicide Severity Rating Scale), health-related quality of life
(Short Form Health Survey 12), cognitive state (comprehensive
neuropsychological
battery
consisting
of,
amongst
others,
Symbol Digit Modalities Test, categorical verbal ﬂuency and the
Stroop Test). This additional information will provide a better
understanding of speciﬁc disease characteristics and symptoms
for mapping the desires and needs across diﬀerent disease stages.
Detailed information on the Enroll-HD measures and (informed
consent) procedures are described elsewhere (51).

Data Analysis
The collected sociodemographic and clinical data will be used to
describe the population under study and to provide additional
context to the insights gained in each phase. A brief description
of the planned data analysis corresponding with the speciﬁc
procedures per phase is provided below.

Phase 1: Exploration
Qualitative data, consisting of transcripts of interviews/focus
groups, ﬁeld notes and other materials (e.g., ﬁlled out sensitizing
assignments) will be analyzed and interpreted using thematic and
on the wall analysis (54). During on the wall analysis, the oﬃce
wall will be used as a large spreadsheet to label and categorize all
data into clusters of themes and insights. In addition to thematic
analysis, this allows the researchers to absorb the richness of
the data in an unconstrained manner, which is beneﬁcial for
exploring the opportunities of eHealth through a non-linear
thinking process (60). To make sure that all basic elements of QoL

are covered in our ﬁndings, we use the six dimensions of positive
health (61) as a benchmark: bodily functions, mental functions
and perceptions, spiritual dimension, quality of life, social and
societal participation, and daily functioning.
Findings from these analyses on the needs, desires, and
experiences of end-users regarding QoL and HD care from all
countries will be visualized in a patient journey map by the
research team (58). This is a detailed schematic representation
of phases and events in relation to HD and the people involved.
This will be presented to the HCP advisory board, the FPEP and
the international project team to align with (clinical) expert and
end-user perspectives.

Phase 2: Concept Development
The HD patient journey and eHealth ideas resulting from all
countries during phase 1 will be used to identify possible problem
areas and points of innovation that may improve the end-
user’s QoL. Depending on the ﬁndings of phase 1, this may
for example be to support care provision already before the
onset of symptoms. Through generative sessions by the research
team and the previously described co-creation sessions, ideas
will be generated to address the identiﬁed problem areas and
points of innovation. The resulting ideas will be clustered into
a list of eHealth opportunities and strategies. Subsequently,
eHealth concepts will be developed together with end-users in
the co-creation sessions. Based on the qualitative data of the
co-creation sessions, including transcripts, ﬁeld notes and other
study materials (e.g., output of sessions), low ﬁdelity mock-ups
representing concept features will be developed and evaluated.
Qualitative data arising from the concept evaluation sessions
will be reviewed and clustered in themes by the research team
to deﬁne the design requirements for an HD eHealth platform
prototype. The international project team and the FPEP will be
closely involved to provide feedback and evaluate concepts on
their ﬁt in the diﬀerent cultures and languages.

Phase 3: Prototype Testing
The transcripts and ﬁeld notes resulting from the prototype
testing sessions will be reviewed and clustered in themes by the
research team to remove major usability issues and reﬁne the
user experience. Qualitative data of the “think-aloud” sessions
will be clustered on problem severity in order to provide a
comprehensive overview of the strengths and weaknesses of the
HD eHealth platform prototype. This will be used to identify
critical problems to be addressed in the development of the
ﬁnal prototype.
Data from all countries will additionally be analyzed to
evaluate the suitability of the HD eHealth platform within
diﬀerent healthcare systems and acceptability within diﬀerent
cultural contexts. Any additional information or necessary
changes resulting from this analysis will be incorporated.

Data Handling and Storage
Data will be handled conﬁdentially. All study data will be
processed, stored and disposed of in accordance with the General
Data Protection Regulation (62) and all applicable legal and
regulatory requirements at the respective sites. Study sessions will

be audio recorded with permission of the participants. Audio
recordings will be stored on a secure disk at the respective site
and will be deleted as soon as the design process is ﬁnished.
Each study session will be transcribed using intelligent verbatim
transcription. Non-English transcripts and study materials will
be translated to English by researchers at the respective sites.
Data collection will be performed within a secured electronic
case report form (eCRF). To allow secure data management and
transmission between countries, the eCRF will be implemented
in a Data Management System accessible at the respective sites in
each country. The database will only be accessible for authorized
personnel via a unique login and user ID. All participant data
will be pseudonymized and identiﬁable data (e.g., name, e-
mail, address) will be removed prior to uploading. All source
documents will be stored in a secure closet for a certain period
of time depending on the legal and regulatory requirements at
each site.

Beneﬁts and Risks Assessment
No risks or ethical concerns are anticipated. (Serious) adverse
events are not expected due to the non-invasive character of the
study. Participants will reﬂect on their own needs, desires and
expectations regarding the disease and eHealth features during
this study. This might potentially cause distress as it may be
of sensitive nature for some participants given the vulnerability
of this group. The researchers will be experienced and will
oﬀer the participant the opportunity to talk to an HCP in case
the participant will become distressed. At the same time, these
potentially unfavorable eﬀects will be minimized by pilot testing
all materials and study sessions, by mainly focusing on personal
beneﬁts and accomplishments in their management of HD and
by engaging them in the development of the eHealth platform.

DISCUSSION

As a result of the neurodegenerative nature of HD, the disease
causes a progressive decline in functioning and signiﬁcantly
inﬂuences the QoL of both HDGECs and their partners
(3, 8–10, 13). Despite the emergence of HD expertise centers
across Europe (2, 18, 19), we continue to face some important
barriers to HD care provision, including additional costs,
geographic distance of centers and availability/accessibility of
these services in general (2, 13, 18). As the disease progressively
advances over time, challenges to seeking or accessing care
might
arise
(e.g.,
physical
limitations,
increased
burden,
cognitive/neuropsychiatric impairments), leaving those with
the greatest care need behind (20). eHealth provides promising
opportunities to overcome these barriers by improving the
accessibility of care. In the present study, we initiated an
innovative UCD study to capture the needs and wishes of
HDGECs, partners and HCPs in order to develop an eHealth
platform targeting QoL. The eHealth platform will be co-
developed with these end-users by actively involving them
throughout each stage of the design process, thereby tailoring
remote HD service provision to the unique requirements of
HDGECs, partners and HCPs. Given the rare nature of HD,
we aim for an innovative European platform which allows
for remote treatment options, information exchange and

connection of experts to local clinicians beyond regional and
national borders.
Some challenges might arise during the design process,
including diﬀerences in healthcare systems, HD care provision
and cultural context in all countries involved in this study.
We will address these diﬀerences by actively involving the
international project team, the FPEP, and end-users from each
participating country in all design decisions. Furthermore,
diﬀerences in clinical presentations and needs at diﬀerent stages
of the disease might pose additional challenges in developing
a European platform that is both applicable and generalizable
to all participants. By including HDGECs and partners across
different disease stages, as well as HCPs with expertise in HD,
we will be able to gather an overall understanding of the
needs and desires experienced by these groups. The ﬂexibility
of UCD allows us to address a variety in needs in diﬀerent
ways, for instance, by 1. designing universally, 2. designing
more modularly so that speciﬁc features can be added when
needed, or 3. designing for speciﬁc target groups within the
study population. As the HD community is very motivated and
willing to participate in research, we do not expect challenges
with accrual of suﬃcient participants in each country. Lastly,
online study sessions as opposed to face-to-face sessions might
pose some challenges, including connection issues, diﬃculties in
capturing non-verbal communication, or perceived (emotional)
distance between participant and researcher. We pilot-tested the
sensitizing assignments and online interviews with a premanifest
and manifest HDGECs (and spouse) and both agreed that
online interviews were convenient and saved travel time. None
had diﬃculties with setting up the connection, yet technical
issues should be considered and an alternative way to conduct
the interview (such as calling by phone) should be present
prior to starting the interviews. At the same time, conducting
these sessions remotely already provides a great opportunity for
participants to experience online services, which greatly ﬁts with
the nature of what we are designing. In addition, this could be
beneﬁcial later on when using telehealth services, especially in the
light of the shift toward a more blended care approach due to the
ongoing COVID-19 pandemic (63).
Some unique aspects of this study are worth mentioning as
well. Although eHealth seems promising in other neurological
and neurodegenerative diseases (e.g., dementia, Parkinson’s
disease, multiple sclerosis) (23–30), the studies examining the
beneﬁts of eHealth in HD are limited (31–34) and often
hampered by methodological challenges. In particular, these
studies failed to use telehealth systems speciﬁcally designed to
ﬁt the unique perspectives and needs of HDGECs and their
families, which can ultimately aﬀect uptake later on (22, 37, 39).
Actively involving end-users and addressing their needs when
designing eHealth applications can be considered crucial in a
disease as complex and rare as HD. In UCD, the end-user’s needs
are key in the choice and design of features of an application,
which is important given the devastating challenges these people
face and the variety in needs they might experience. Another
unique aspect of this study is the inclusion of a partner group.
HD does not only aﬀect the individual but also the people
in their environment. Partners of HDGECs have their own
experiences and needs with regard to their QoL that should not be

overlooked. Moreover, as HD already has a tremendous impact
on the QoL and needs/wishes of those aﬀected in an early stage
(e.g., tested gene positive, no symptoms) (3, 9, 11), we believe
it is paramount to include the perspectives and needs of both
HDGECs and their partners across diﬀerent disease stages in this
innovate UCD approach. By also actively involving HCPs with
expertise in HD, some additional challenges that might arise in
engaging HDGECs in eHealth applications can be considered in
advance, such as progression in symptoms that impact needs and
wishes experienced, apathy, anosognosia, denial (18), or motor
impairments. Including HCPs also ensures that relevant clinical
expertise will be integrated, and, at the same time, stimulates the
future dissemination of knowledge and connection of experts.
The eHealth platform will therefore be tailored to the unique
requirements of HDGECs, partners and HCPs. We expect that
this will greatly beneﬁt future uptake, as functionalities that
are desired from a user perspective will be included, and user
experience and usability of the platform will be tested (37, 38, 40–
42).
To conclude, an innovative European eHealth platform for
HDGECs and partners will be developed based on their needs,
wishes and desires, following a UCD approach. This approach
allows for a personalized, tailored care platform suitable to
all languages and diﬀerent healthcare systems involved. After
development of the platform, the eHealth intervention will be
evaluated on eﬀectiveness, feasibility and user experience in an
RCT (this is not part of the UCD protocol as described in
this article). We expect that an eHealth platform will enhance
current HD supportive care services across Europe by making
high-quality care accessible outside specialized centers (requiring
individuals to travel) in the participants’ homes, thereby
circumventing still existing barriers in HD care provision. We
intend to implement the platform, provided that the evaluation
shows positive results, to ensure free availability for patients and
their partners after the study. As HD is a very complex and rare
disease, future studies in other rare diseases might also beneﬁt
from the adaptations to, and the results of, the participatory UCD
approach described here when designing and developing eHealth
applications to enhance their supportive care services worldwide.