User-centered design of feedback regarding
health-related behaviors derived from
wearables: An approach targeting older adults
and persons living with neurodegenerative
disease

Karen Van Ooteghem1
, F Elizabeth Godkin1
, Vanessa Thai1,
Kit B Beyer1, Benjamin F Cornish1, Kyle S Weber1, Hannah Bernstein2,
Soha O Kheiri3
, Richard H Swartz4,5, Brian Tan6, William E McIlroy1

and Angela C Roberts7,8,9

Methods

The study was conducted in two phases (Figure 1).
The development phase focused on an iterative co-design
and development process with the goal of generating a

person-centered feedback report targeting health behaviors,
using data derived from wearable sensors. In the second
phase of the project, the team evaluated the acceptability,
useability and impact of the feedback report in a sample of
older adults and persons living with CVD or NDD. The
study was conducted within the Ontario Neurodegenerative
Disease Research Initiative (ONDRI; ondri.ca), namely the
Remote
Monitoring
in
Neurodegenerative
Disease
(ReMiNDD)
study43
and
the
Health
in
Aging,
Neurodegenerative Diseases and Dementias in Ontario
(HANDDS-ONT) study (Figure 1).
Co-design objectives and approach. The goal was to
design an end-user accessible feedback report, comprised
of evidence-informed metrics regarding modiﬁable lifestyle
risk factors44 that could facilitate symptom awareness, self-
management and behavioral change. Our co-design process
also focused on determining optimized delivery methods
for facilitating knowledge uptake and health behavior
changes. Implementation and evaluation of the feedback
report within the ONDRI studies were intended to solicit
feedback from persons with lived experience as a ﬁrst
step toward a future, large-scale, pragmatic implementation
trial.
Our approach consisted of iterative cycles of stakeholder
input. Each cycle consisted of planning, consolidation,
implementation and evaluation stages (Figure 2) where
stakeholder perspectives were integrated into report ver-
sions following a consolidation process to conﬁrm that pro-
posed design features aligned with project objectives using
established criteria (Table 1).
Theoretical framework. Methods were grounded in a
participatory research approach45 that was further informed
by frameworks for health research partnerships46–48 empha-
sizing shared decision making and mutual beneﬁt.48

Participatory research uses methods and tools that ensure
direct and meaningful collaboration with the people
whose interests are the focus of the research. Our approach
was tailored to the needs of older adults and emphasized the
importance of accessibility and tailored engagement in the
planning,
relationship-building,
co-development
and
knowledge translation phases of the project.47

Stakeholder participants. Co-development of the report
included participation by a broad range of NDD stake-
holders. In addition to patient end users, stakeholders
included those in the position to support changes in
health behaviors through individual, health systems and
community
level
actions.
Speciﬁcally,
stakeholders
included persons with lived experience (patients and care
partners), healthcare providers working across a spectrum
of community and tertiary care centers, health charity advo-
cacy/policy representatives, researchers, research funders,
research program management and knowledge translation
experts. These individuals were brought together under
the umbrella of the ONDRI patient and community advis-
ory committee (PCAC).

Wearable sensor data used to derive feedback report
metrics. Data included in the personalized reports were col-
lected from ONDRI study participants who wore an array of
biosensors 24-hours per day over the course of 7–10 days to
monitor
their
health
behaviors.
The
sensor
set
was
comprised of inertial measurement units mounted on the
wrist and ankle (unilaterally or bilaterally, study dependent),
as well as a chest-worn sensor containing both a triaxial accel-
erometer and continuous electrocardiography. The sensor set
and wear locations were chosen for their ability to evaluate
multiple domains of health relevant to clinical care and self-
managementofdiseaseinacomprehensive,uniﬁedmanner.43

Report generation via a purpose-designed analytics
pipeline. The metrics included in the feedback report,
along with summary data frames used for data review,
and the report itself, were generated via a semi-automated,
device-agnostic, analytics pipeline for wearables built by
our group to produce both single- and multi-sensor out-
comes. Currently, the pipeline accepts raw data from any
inertial measurement unit or electrocardiographic device
that provides access to raw data (termed “device-agnostic”).
Brieﬂy, raw sensor data were submitted to a series of quality
assurance/quality
control
(QA/QC)
procedures:
pre-
processed data were automatically checked for signal- and

sampling integrity, and processed data were screened for
device non-wear, multi-sensor synchronization and behav-
ior classiﬁcation using previously published and custom
analytics to derive outcomes of interest based on the
target population (e.g. older adults). Any QA/QC screen
fails were ﬂagged and resolved, and pipeline-produced
summary data frames (Figure 3) were reviewed by trained
analysts in the context of participant-speciﬁc demographic
and clinical information, as well as participant-logged
sleep and activity.
When identiﬁed, any additional ﬂags were logged, and
processing steps reviewed before determining the necessary
action. Unresolved instances (i.e. true behavioral data) were
addressed with customized feedback that was entered into
the report on a per participant basis. Once the data review
was
complete,
a
personalized
feedback
report
was
generated.

Phase 1: feedback development

Cycle 1—prototype report
Planning and consolidation. In Spring 2019, a voluntary
survey was made available at an ONDRI community out-
reach event for an audience comprised persons with lived
experience, family care partners and persons from the com-
munity seeking information on dementia, CVD and NDDs.
The survey asked respondents to identify potential targets
for inclusion in a feedback report (see Appendix 1—
Initial Survey). Five attendees completed the survey
(three NDD, two care partners). Responses were used as a
starting point and considered alongside our additional cri-
teria for reporting (see Figure 2 and Table 1) to determine
what outcomes to include in a prototype feedback report.
To check the face validity of the prototype report, we trian-
gulated its content with our stakeholder group (Figure 4).
Stakeholder reﬂections on the prototype report were inte-
grated as part of the consolidation process (Figure 2).

Wearables
data
collection
and
prototype
report
generation. The prototype version of the feedback report
was implemented and evaluated as part of the ONDRI
ReMiNDD study. ReMiNDD was conducted between
May 2019 and March 2020 and included 39 participants
living with CVD or any of the following NDDs as

diagnosed by a neurologist: PD, AD, MCI, FTD, or ALS
(see Godkin et al.43 for participant and protocol details
including devices used). Importantly, all devices captured

and logged raw data, which were subscribed to a custom
analytics pipeline to derive outcomes related to physical
activity, sleep and mobility (i.e. outcomes generated via
proprietary software provided by device manufacturers
were not included in the report). At the time of enrollment,
participants were told that their participation included
receipt of a personalized feedback report based on data col-
lected during a week-long period of sensor wear. The
ReMiNDD study received ethics approval through the
Sunnybrook Research Institute in Toronto, Ontario (REB
approval:
007–2019),
and
all
participants
provided
written, informed consent.

Preliminary implementation and evaluation. Prototype
feedback reports were mailed to each ReMiNDD study par-
ticipant approximately 3 months following completion of
the in-home sensor wear portion of the study. Included in
the report was a link to an accompanying video that
guided participants through reading and interpreting their
report. A one-page survey was appended to the back of
each feedback report. Thirteen ReMiNDD study partici-
pants completed the voluntary survey, which was offered
to all participants (n = 39) (see Appendix 1 for Prototype
Report Survey and Results).

Cycle 2—version 1 report
Planning and consolidation. Data from Cycle 1 resulted
in several changes being made to the prototype feedback
report to create a revised version of the report for implemen-
tation into a clinical study context. Additional details were

layered into the report including supplementary graphs and
additional evidence-based measures to address the desire
for
more
information
based
on
Cycle
1
feedback
(e.g.
inclusion
of sedentary behavior
and
nighttime
walking). Changes embedded within the draft report
version also addressed the need to account for known pro-
cessing challenges in our groups of interest by including
redundancies in information and ensuring readability by
using multi-modal communication supports (e.g. written
and visual) and reducing language complexity.49,50 All
changes were included in draft form for subsequent
review by research partners before Cycle 2 implementation.
In Fall 2021, the revised feedback report was submitted
to the ONDRI PCAC (Figure 4). A guided focus group
process was used to elucidate collective feedback on key
areas for report implementation including the volume and
type of information, readability for persons living with
NDD and those within their circle of care, and overall
format, layout and organization of the report. Speciﬁc
themes that emerged from their feedback included the
value of having participants understand why they were
receiving feedback and what they might do with the
information and led to the addition of content to describe
the purpose and potential uses of the report. Further, sug-
gestions from the group surrounding the potential need
for participant support with interpretation and a desire to
understand how our wearable sensor approach differs
from commercial activity trackers led to the addition of a
one-on-one virtual visit with each participant, conducted
by a trained member of the study team, to review the feed-
back report (as described below). As in Cycle 1, PCAC
feedback was integrated into Version 1 of the feedback
report following consolidation processes.

Wearables data collection and version 1 report generation.
The Version 1 feedback report was implemented and evaluated
as part of the HANDDS-ONT study (Figure 1); an
Ontario-based, adaptive clinical trial51 in community-dwelling
healthy adults (termed here as “controls”) and persons living
with probable or diagnosed CVD, PD, AD, MCI, FTD or
ALS (termed here as neurodegenerative disease or NDD).
HANDDS-ONT was designed as a fully remote study connect-
ing clinical data with cellular, protein marker and genetic data,
free-living behavioral data measured by wearables and longer-
term health outcome data. Individuals were eligible to partici-
pate in HANDDS-ONT if: (a) they were 18 years of age or
older, with self-reported English proﬁciency at 7/10 on a modi-
ﬁed version of the Language Experience and Proﬁciency
Questionnaire (LEAP-Q);52 (b) had internet or telephone
access; (c) could attend a community-based laboratory to
provide a blood sample; and (d) were under the care of a
primary medical care provider and were willing to put forth
their provider’s name. Participants wore three devices continu-
ously for up to 10 days: an inertial measurement unit on the
dominant (or least affected) wrist and ankle (AX6, Axivity

Ltd, UK) and a chest device including combined electrocardi-
ography and a tri-axial accelerometer (Bittium 360, Bittium
Faros, FI). Similar to the ReMiNDD study, all devices captured
and logged raw data, which were subscribed to a custom analy-
ticspipelinetoderiveoutcomesrelatedtophysicalactivity,sed-
entary behavior, sleep and mobility. The pipeline also
generated the summary data frames for review (Figure 3) and
the participant feedback reports. These outcomes were
chosen for their relationship to chronic disease and brain
health, their importance for self-management of health9 and
their potential for early detection or monitoring of declines in
health.9,44,53–56 Speciﬁcally, the report included the following
parameters: daily volume and patterns of light and moderate-
vigorous physical activity and sedentary behavior, daily
volume and pattern of stepping, step count accumulated in
walkingperiodsofdifferentdurations,totalsleeptime,duration
of additional time in bed and patterns of nighttime behavior.
See Figure 5 for details regarding the Version 1 report. The
HANDDS-ONT study received ethics approval through
Clinical Trials Ontario (Project ID: 3684) with Sunnybrook
Research Institute in Toronto, Ontario as the Board of
Record (REB approval: 2021–1517), and all participants pro-
vided written, informed consent.

Phase 2: version 1 report implementation and
evaluation

Within the HANDDS-ONT study, feedback reports were
returned to study participants in their preferred format
(digital, hard copy or both). Given improvements in the
automation of our personalized report processing pipeline,
the target for turnaround from data ofﬂoad to participant
receipt of the report was 2–4 weeks, depending on
format. Participants also received a 45-minute, one-on-one
review of their report with trained study personnel via
secure video conference. This study visit was structured
to include the following:

1. Playback of a video, which highlighted key features of
the report and oriented participants to the ways in which
the data are presented (e.g. introduction to tables and
ﬁgures).
2. Study personnel-led page-by-page review of participant
data highlighting key takeaways from the report, includ-
ing anchoring detected behaviors to personal activity or
sleep log recordings (where applicable), and to pub-
lished guidelines (tailored to age group). To ensure a
standardized approach across participants, no speciﬁc
recommendations
related
to
participants’
medical
history or disease status were provided. Participants
were encouraged to speak with their doctor before
making health behavior-related changes and to share
the report with others in their circle of care.

3. Time for the participant to seek clarity or to ask ques-
tions about the information contained within the report.

Two weeks after the feedback report review visit, a ﬁnal
study visit was conducted to gather HANDDS-ONT

participant perspectives on the report and probe whether
behavior change and/or information sharing had occurred.
Data were collected using a mixed methods approach,
including both open-ended questions, and a coordinator-
administered survey with questions displayed on-screen.
Any additional comments provided by the participant
were
recorded
verbatim
within
free-text
ﬁelds
(see
Appendix 1 for Version 1 Report Survey and details of
development).

Data analysis

A convenience sample including the ﬁrst forty participants
aged 60 or over enrolled in the HANDDS-ONT study was
used to evaluate version 1 of the feedback report (participa-
tion from 09 December 2021 to 20 May 2022). Descriptive
statistics were used to summarize the data. Data were sum-
marized as whole group responses and stratiﬁed by cohort
(i.e. control versus NDD) and cognitive status (COGhigh
= MoCA ≥26,57 COGlow = MoCA ≤2258) using clinical
data captured within the HANDDS-ONT study. Findings
were also supplemented with illustrative examples akin to
single subject analysis.

Results

Participants

HANDDS-ONT survey respondents included 25 control
participants and 15 participants living with CVD or an
NDD, who were sampled from the study’s ﬁve cohorts as
follows: seven CVD (one with MCI), four AD/MCI, and

four PD. Table 2 summarizes participant demographic and
clinical characteristics.

Feedback report evaluation

Results of the evaluation are shown in Figure 6. Most
survey respondents (82.5%) found the report “somewhat”
or “very easy” to read or understand, and 80% reported
“just the right amount” of information/detail. Some differ-
ences emerged when data were examined by cohort

(NDD versus control) and by cognitive status (COGlow
(n = 7) versus COGhigh (n = 19)), speciﬁcally with
respect to ease of reading or understanding, which was
deemed “somewhat” or “very easy” for a greater proportion
of NDD (93%) versus control (76%) participants, and for a
slightly greater proportion of COGlow (86%) versus
COGhigh (74%) participants. In the context of understand-
ing daily health-related behaviors (i.e. activity, mobility and
sleep), 90% found the feedback report “very helpful” or
“helpful,” and 57.5% of participants made a behavior or

lifestyle change within 2 weeks. When data were examined
by cohort or based on low and high cognitive status, all par-
ticipants living with an NDD or in the COGlow group
found the feedback “very helpful” or “helpful” compared
to a slightly smaller proportion of control participants
(84%) and participants in the COGhigh group (89.5%).
Finally,
differences
emerged
between
COGhigh
and
COGlow groups with respect to the proportion who
reported a lifestyle or behavior change (68% (n = 13)
versus 29% (n = 2), respectively). Examples of lifestyle
or behavior changes reported by participants included
joining a Pilates class and striving to move more throughout
the day (i.e. taking movement breaks), as well as increased
awareness of good sleep habits and monitoring of sedentary
behavior. Of those participants who did not make a lifestyle
change (n = 17), 23.5% (n = 4) did not feel the need to
make a change at the time of the survey, 11.8% (n = 2)
had no interest in making a change at the time of the
survey, 23.5% (n = 4) thought about and took steps
towards making a behavior or lifestyle change (e.g. called
to inquire about a ﬁtness class) and 41.2% (n = 7)
thought about it but did not take steps towards making a
behavior or lifestyle change.
When asked about sharing with others in the partici-
pant’s circle of care, almost all participants (92%) shared
their report with a family member or friend, with the pro-
portion of participants who shared with a family member
or friend slightly higher within the cohort of persons
living with an NDD (100%) compared to the control
cohort (88%). Motivation for sharing with a friend or
family member included wanting to engage partners in
making lifestyle changes, educating and advocating for
change in others, and self-advocacy inclusive of helping
others understand a symptom or requesting speciﬁc
support. When probed about sharing with a home care pro-
vider, personal support worker, or other paid caregiver,
97.5% (n = 39) of survey respondents reported not
having this kind of support person within their circle of
care. Within 2 weeks of receiving their feedback report,
three survey respondents (all living with NDD) had
shared the report with a healthcare provider, with one
respondent scheduling an appointment speciﬁcally to
discuss the report. Of those who did not share with a health-
care provider (n = 37), 35% (n = 13) intended to share at
their next visit. Examples of speciﬁc motivation for
sharing all or part of the report with a healthcare provider
included wanting to share with a therapist to better inform
symptom management and wanting to share with a family
physician to solicit a referral for additional care (e.g.
seeking an appointment with an occupational therapist).
Reasons for not sharing with a healthcare provider included
no concerns emerging from report (n = 14), perceived time
constraints of appointments and/or outside of existing
health priorities (n = 7), and feelings that information
would not be relevant to their care (n = 2).

Although feedback regarding the report was generally
positive, a range of proﬁles did emerge across participants
from those who responded favorably across all dimensions
(i.e. readability, volume, helpfulness, behavior change and
information
sharing)
to
those
who
reported
mixed
responses in terms of interest, uptake or utility. For
example, one participant living with CVD indicated they
found the report very easy to read or understand, and
very helpful for understanding their daily health-related
behaviors. This participant also made several changes to
their behavior because of the feedback report, including
increasing their daily activity levels by going up and
down the stairs and starting to use a cane to increase
balance conﬁdence and facilitate more walking outdoors.
This participant also shared the information with several
people within their circle of care including a friend and
family member, home care provider and multiple health-
care
providers.
When
probed
about
motivation
for
sharing with a home care provider, this participant said,
“I had things that I needed to discuss with them and
couldn’t
always
remember…[the
report]
gave
more
clarity for what I wanted to talk about and what I was
asking for” and suggested that “[the] home care provider
shared this information with her boss to show where I
needed more support in particular areas.” When probed
about motivation for sharing with multiple healthcare pro-
viders, they said, “mainly because my memory and my
ability to put words to what I want to talk about…the
report helped keep my focus in the areas that I wanted to
talk about” and “the report helped me get a referral to an
occupational therapist…bringing the report to my occupa-
tional therapist will help her better understand where to
start off.” A control group participant indicated they
found the report somewhat easy to read or understand
and
very
helpful
for
understanding
their
daily
health-related behaviors. They made changes to their life-
style including a commitment to walking four times per
week and commented on an increased awareness of the
need to break up long sedentary periods with movement.
When probed about motivation for sharing with a friend
or family member, they said, “[I shared the report] to
invite [my] neighbour to help me increase my walking.”
In contrast, another control participant indicated that they
found the report somewhat easy to read or understand,
somewhat
helpful
for
understanding
their
daily
health-related behaviors and reported that although they
thought about it, they did not take steps towards making
any behavior or lifestyle changes. This participant did
not share the report with anyone in their circle of care,
and when asked why they did not share, they said “[I]
did not feel the need to share the report” with a friend or
family member. In terms of reasons for not sharing with
a medical practitioner, they said “[I] haven’t spoken to
[my] doctor in 2 years due to COVID but would likely
share at my next physical.”

Discussion

This study describes the co-design, development and evalu-
ation of an approach to sharing information from wearables
for the purpose of improving self-awareness and self-
management of health-related behaviors. Feedback included
a personalized report delivered in a supportive environment
following a week-long period of multi- sensor wear and
application of custom analytics to the raw sensor data.
Evaluation of the approach suggested the feedback was well-
received by participants and resulted in enhanced self-
awareness and self-management of health, with most partici-
pants reporting increased understanding of health-related
behaviors, engagement in purposeful actions to change beha-
viors and/or sharing (or intention to share) information with
others in their circles of care.
Critical to the development of the report was ensuring its
acceptability and useability. As a group, most respondents
found their report easy to read or understand, with an appro-
priate volume of information, and helpful for understanding
daily health-related behaviors and/or making lifestyle
changes. It should be noted that embedded supports (1:1
consultation and video supplement) may have inﬂuenced
participant responses; however, evaluating the impact of
each of these features was beyond the scope of this study.
Some differences did emerge when participants were strati-
ﬁed by cohort or when subgroups of participants were
extracted to examine outcomes with respect to cognitive
status. A slightly higher proportion of participants living
with an NDD rated the feedback report as helpful compared
to control participants, and a larger proportion of respon-
dents in the group with higher cognition scores reported
making a behavior or lifestyle change compared to those
with lower scores. Lower cognitive ability, however, did
not appear to impact participant ratings regarding ease of
reading and helpfulness or volume of information, suggest-
ing that reports were accessible to all participants. However,
it should be noted that the COGlow group was small, with
only seven respondents. Examining individual participants
revealed variability in reported uptake (behavior changes
and information sharing), even within the same cohort.
For example, two participants from the control cohort
both indicated that the report was helpful and yet, differed
in their intent to make lifestyle changes and interest in
sharing with others in their circles of care. This further
emphasizes
the
importance
of
developing
speciﬁc
methods of feedback reporting to consider the unique
needs and abilities of recipients. That said, participants’
largely
positive
responses
to
personalized
feedback
suggest that the process used to develop the content and
methods for reporting should be considered a template for
translating wearables data into meaningful and actionable
outcomes.
The
current
study
examined
short-term
changes, or intention to change behavior, to investigate
the potential for impact. There is need, however, to

examine the capacity for wearables-derived feedback to
inﬂuence longer-term changes in health-related behavior.
Such work requires examining behavior change in the
context of established models (e.g. transtheoretical model
of behavior change). Previous work suggests that mainten-
ance of a behavior change (e.g. engagement in a physical
activity program) declines over time,59 even following
interventions that employ multiple behavioral change strat-
egies and span several months (e.g. >6 months).60

Wearables-derived feedback may provide a solution to
promote long-term behavior change, and future work
should aim to understand the impact of feedback on main-
tenance of behavior when it is delivered longitudinally, at
time points when people are most susceptible to reverting
their behavior.
Our general approach and the questions used to guide
development of the report were grounded in a desire to
address the “what and how” of information sharing for out-
comes derived from wearable devices, with particular
emphasis on: (a) the types of information to include for
the speciﬁc purpose of improving self-awareness and self-
management of health-related behaviors (the “what”); and
(b) the method of delivery for older adults and persons
living with NDD (the “how”). To this end, the goals of
the report (self-awareness, self-management) and the spe-
ciﬁc needs and perceptions of the target groups were
deﬁned early, with intention, and were central to the devel-
opment process, which included ongoing engagement of
persons with lived experience. It should be acknowledged
that the convenience sample (ﬁrst 40 HANDDS-ONT par-
ticipants) may have biased survey responses to include
those from older adults and persons living with NDD
who were keenly interested in receiving feedback, given
that HANDDS-ONT study recruitment materials noted
the inclusion of a personalized health and activity report.
Further, although some differences emerged when respon-
dents were stratiﬁed, these differences may have been
greater, and the ability to interpret and use information
may have been impacted if the sample included participants
with a larger range of cognitive abilities and physical cap-
acities and/or larger sub-group samples. Finally, since all
participants received a 1:1 consultation and video supple-
ment to aid in interpreting their data, it is possible that
views on readability, helpfulness and volume of informa-
tion would have been less favorable if the reports were
delivered without these supports.
In addition to examining individual behavior change, the
present study examined the potential for impact by probing
the extent to which survey respondents shared or planned to
share their data with others. Most respondents indicated
sharing their report with a family member or friend and
several shared or intended to share with a healthcare pro-
vider. It is important to note that the 2-week timeline for
gathering participant responses speciﬁcally impacted the
extent to which sharing occurred with healthcare providers,

with participants reporting an intention or plan to share at
their next scheduled visit (outside of the study period).
Some participants did not deem the information contained
within the report important for sharing with a healthcare
provider. When probed further, these responses appeared
to be driven by “good performance” that was viewed as
unnecessary for follow-up or the feeling that their health-
care provider was already aware of the types of ﬁndings
contained within their report. The former raises the matter
of ensuring that outcomes perceived to be positive by end
users are consistent with the data and its link to risk, while
the latter emphasizes the need to: (a) consider the target audi-
ence when making decisions about what information or mea-
sures to report; and (b) ensure that potential relevance of the
information for clinical decision making is understood by the
recipient. Other participants identiﬁed real or perceived bar-
riers to sharing with a medical practitioner, including limited
access or appointment time constraints, which may further
support the need to have clinical stakeholders embedded in
the feedback development process when working towards
creating information sharing pipelines that are effectively
and sustainably integrated into health systems/clinical care.
The reasons for sharing, which included a desire to engage
partners in making lifestyle changes and educating/advocat-
ing for others and self, suggest that information sharing about
modiﬁable health-related behaviors has the potential to
empower recipients and to positively impact awareness or
behavior of others.
As noted, two important and pragmatic aspects of the
development and evaluation process detailed within this
paper include the availability of appropriate guidelines to
anchor feedback and use of validated measures suitable
for the context (e.g. clinical versus free-living behavior)
and populations of interest. Guidelines have been estab-
lished surrounding activity and sleep that have been
linked to reduced chronic disease risk and preserved mobil-
ity and health in older adults.32,61 However, continued work
is needed to establish disease-speciﬁc guidelines between
free-living behaviors and health outcomes in persons
living with CVD or NDD that account for speciﬁc symp-
toms and comorbidities. In addition to evidence-informed,
disease-speciﬁc guidelines, it is also imperative that appro-
priate analytic methods are used to ensure validity of
reported outcomes. For example, despite the ubiquitous
use of wrist worn accelerometers to derive physical activity
intensity estimates in free-living settings,62 this method
may be unreliable in older adults or persons living with
NDD due to age- and impairment-related changes in move-
ment.36 Instead, an approach that uses multiple body-worn
sensors to resolve uncertainty,43 as well as age- or
disease-appropriate thresholds for activity intensity classiﬁ-
cation,63–65 can help to improve real-world activity esti-
mates in these groups. Even where known features of a
particular cohort (e.g. muted arm swing in PD) are
accounted for, variability across individuals poses an

additional challenge that requires person-level consider-
ation
of
wearables-derived
data.
Within
the
current
approach, this is addressed using case-based review of
data prior to report generation as a quality assurance
process.
Finally, there is critical need to address scale and sustain-
ability of methods for providing feedback that accommo-
date the heterogeneity that exists in older adults and
persons living with CVD or NDD (including diversity of
background, education, data literacy and experience) and
which considers the critical elements needed for successful
patient and clinical implementation (i.e. end user education
and uptake, data ﬂow and health system integration that
ensures privacy, respects patient autonomy, etc.). In this
study, methods included 1:1 consultation with trained per-
sonnel, which has previously demonstrated success with
respect to uptake of information22 and behavior change66

but which is time and resource intensive. Consideration
should be given to alternate approaches that meet the
need for assistance with data interpretation while reducing
demands, with sensitivity to the possibility that information
contained within the report may cause an individual distress
or that a delivery model that provides insufﬁcient interpret-
ive support could lead recipients to make decisions that
pose a risk to their health or well-being. Such alternatives
may include triaging individuals based on level of support
required as determined by relevant health/clinical data,
with additional methods including providing professional
support on an as-needed basis, leveraging care partner
support, and automating where possible, without comprom-
ising privacy, clarity of the information or access to
resources. The report presented here has been designed to
include layers of information and modules that can be
inserted or removed as well as a video supplement as
methods for managing scope, scale and sustainability.
As advances in this space continue, focus should remain
on ensuring end-user needs are met by grounding work in
co-design frameworks and processes. In the context of a
knowledge-to-action (KTA) framework, the current study
addressed several KTA phases including identifying the
problem of being able to derive meaning from wearables
data and considering barriers and facilitators to adapt trad-
itional metrics and implementation processes for the
purpose of positively impacting behavior change in our
cohorts of interest.67 In addition, where the goal of report-
ing is the use of wearables’ data for speciﬁc clinical appli-
cation (i.e. to guide clinical care), this template for
development and implementation should be expanded to
include clinician stakeholders who engage in co-design of
feedback
processes
optimized
for
clinical
decision
making. Finally, unlike “what” and “how,” the “when” of
information sharing was not systematically investigated in
the
current
study
and
warrants
further
attention
to
examine the optimal time course for delivery of feedback
(point-in-time and longitudinal). Such investigations must

consider characteristics of the individual (e.g. disease sever-
ity, cognitive capacity, mental health status) and speciﬁc
targets for intervention (i.e. self-, or clinical management
of health or disease), and confront the likelihood that the
optimal time course will change for individuals over
the course of their disease, in addition to changes in the
content and method of delivery.

Conclusion

This study provides a person-centered framework and
template for reporting wearables-derived information that
considers the needs and perspectives of older adults and
persons living with NDD. The reporting system serves as
a viable foundation to improve the utility of wearables-
derived information in older adults and individuals with
complex health conditions, including those with cognitive
impairment, and has been built to accommodate continued
development. A key feature of the approach is the use of
raw device data, which permits tailored analytics to
ensure relevant and accurate outputs for different cohorts
and use cases. Continued work within our research group
will result in a publicly available data processing pipeline
for raw data processing and analysis by individuals with
limited programming expertise. Continued analyses of
data from HANDDS-ONT will enable us to better under-
stand the needs of individuals and to describe the accept-
ability and utility of the report more richly by assessing
responses from participants with a broader range of capabil-
ities and grounding them in a published model of health
behavior change. Future work will investigate methods
for scaling the approach in a manner that preserves a com-
mitment to personalization, as well as methods for imple-
menting and evaluating feedback longitudinally to support
behavior change.