Original Paper

Development of a Dynamically Tailored mHealth Intervention
(What Do You Drink) to Reduce Excessive Drinking Among Dutch
Lower-Educated Students: User-Centered Design Approach

Hilde van Keulen1, MSc, PhD; Carmen Voogt2, MSc, PhD; Marloes Kleinjan2,3, MSc, PhD; Jeannet Kramer2, MSc,
PhD; Rosa Andree2, BSc, MSc; Pepijn van Empelen1, MSc, PhD

1Department of Child Health, TNO (Netherlands Organization for Applied Scientific Research), Leiden, Netherlands
2Trimbos Institute (Netherlands Institute for Mental Health and Addiction), Utrecht, Netherlands
3Department of Interdisciplinary Social Sciences, Utrecht University, Utrecht, Netherlands

Hilde van Keulen, MSc, PhD
Department of Child Health
TNO (Netherlands Organization for Applied Scientific Research)
Schipholweg 77-79
Leiden, 2316 ZL
Netherlands
Phone: 31 652803631

Methods

We first describe the final intervention, followed by a
description of the step-by-step systematic development of the
intervention.

WDYD Intervention

WDYD is a dynamically tailored mobile intervention to reduce
excessive drinking among Dutch lower-educated adolescents

JMIR Form Res 2022 | vol. 6 | iss. 8 | e36969 | p. 2

and young adults. WDYD is an 18-week intervention consisting
of 10 sessions. It starts with a weekly session (weeks 0-5),
followed by sessions every 2 weeks (weeks 7 and 9) and finally
every month (weeks 13 and 17). In each session, the participants
can choose from a couple of exercises that have been preselected
to meet their needs, based on their activities and recordings in
the app. The app consists of 39 different exercises in the form
of mini-interventions and 22 brief videos in the form of role
model stories. Screenshots of the intervention are provided in
Figures S1-S16 in Multimedia Appendix 1.

In the first session of WDYD, the program was introduced, and
users gave an estimation of their weekly alcohol consumption,
received normative feedback on alcohol consumption (ie, own
consumption compared with the Dutch guidelines [20]), and
answered a question on whether they will take the challenge of
reducing their alcohol consumption (yes or no, I am not in the
mood or no, I do not want that or no, or I am not sure I can).
Those who answer no receive a movie and can choose 1 of 2
mini-interventions 
targeting 
mood, 
motivation, 
or
self-confidence (depending on their answer) and are asked again,
after the mini-intervention, whether they want to reduce their
alcohol consumption; those who answer yes to the first or second
question are asked to plan how much they would like to drink
for each day of the next week, can view a movie, and can choose
1 of 2 mini-interventions targeting planning. The session ends
with a date and proposed time for the next session. Users who
have set a goal to reduce their drinking are informed that they
will be asked to fill out a diary daily for the next week. When
users chose not to reduce their alcohol consumption, a similar
intervention was repeated in the following sessions. Users who
did not set a goal after 3 sessions were offered the option to
continue with WDYD, take a break for 3 weeks, or stop
receiving invitations for sessions.

When users chose to set an alcohol reduction goal in one of the
sessions, they received daily reminders to fill out a diary to
monitor their alcohol consumption (which was based on alcohol
consumption of the previous day), current mood, the importance
of reaching their self-set goal (to assess motivation), and
perceived confidence in reaching that goal (to assess
self-confidence). In addition, the follow-up sessions consisted
of an overview and feedback of goal progress of the past week
based on the 7 preceding diaries, the option to view a movie
and to choose 1 out of 2 mini-interventions tailored to their
personal situation based on their diary input (ie, when
participants did not meet the goal for at least two days and mood,
importance, or self-confidence had a low score), and the option
to adjust their goal and consequently viewing a movie and
choosing 1 of 2 mini-interventions targeting planning. In
addition to the sessions, users received a notification and could
select 1 of the 2 mini-interventions targeting relapse prevention
(when they had not reached their goal for 3 consecutive days
after having reached at least five goals). When users had not
reached their goal for the last 3 consecutive days and their mood
was low, they received a notification and could select 1 of 2
mini-interventions targeting mood. When users reached their
goal for several days, they received positive reinforcement
messages, and when they did not fill out diaries for a couple of
days, they received compliance-enhancement messages. These,

as well as reminders for the sessions, were offered via push
notifications. In the home menu, 4 exercises were always readily
available as well as 2 movies based on role modeling. For each
session, participants received an invitation (at 7:30 PM or at a
time chosen by participants) and 3 reminders via push
notifications in case a session was not started or ended (ie, days
1, 4, and 7). The invitation for the diaries was sent via push
notification at 11 AM, and a reminder was sent at 5 PM on the
same day; the diary was available for 1 day, so participants were
not able to fill out earlier diaries (approximately 1-minute
completion time per diary).

The WDYD app consisted of 5 menus. The first menu showed
participants when the next session was scheduled, the exercises
they could perform, and movies they could view between
sessions. The second menu showed the participants which
exercises were their favorites. The third menu was the diary.
The fourth menu provided an overview of alcohol intake in the
week based on the diary input. Finally, the fifth menu was a
profile page, in which participants could view their registration
details, read a brief explanation regarding WDYD, and decide
whom to contact via email in case of questions regarding the
app. Screenshots of WDYD are provided in Figures S1-S16 in
Multimedia Appendix 1.

Systematic Development of WDYD

WDYD was systematically developed using IM [19], and a
user-centered design [21] was applied, closely involving the
target group in the intervention development. IM is used to
provide a systematic and detailed description of the development
of WDYD. The IM protocol provides a framework for the
development of health promotion programs. It describes a
step-by-step procedure that supports effective decision-making
and the proper use of theory and empirical evidence. Each step
has a different focus and approach for the use of evidence and
theory [19].

IM Steps

Step 1 of IM consists of a needs assessment. In this step, the
health problem, behavioral and environmental causes of this
problem, and related determinants are identified. In addition,
the overall intervention goals, which are the desired outcomes,
are defined. These health problems and causes have already
been described in the Introduction section, and the related
determinants are described in the Results section (IM step 2).

In step 2, the program objective and desired behavioral outcome
were defined. As part of this step, the performance objectives
of the behavior were formulated, functioning as the subbehaviors
that underlie the program objective and behavioral outcome.
Next, the changeable determinants associated with the
behavioral outcome were identified. Combining the performance
objectives with the determinants resulted in change objectives.
Change objectives are defined as statements of what the target
population should learn to change to achieve the desired
behavioral outcome.

In step 3, theory- and evidence-based methods were linked to
the change objectives for the behavioral outcome. Subsequently,
practical applications were selected and designed to deliver
theory- and evidence-based methods. Practical applications are

JMIR Form Res 2022 | vol. 6 | iss. 8 | e36969 | p. 3

specific techniques for the practical use of theory- and
evidence-based methods in ways that fit the target group and
the context in which the intervention will be delivered. The
parameters for use under which the method would be effective
were considered in the selection of practical applications.

In step 4, the practical applications of the intervention methods
were translated into program production. The intervention
materials were developed and produced in four iterations
according to user-centered design to ensure it fits the needs of
users [21]: (1) analyze user needs via design and concept testing,
(2) test a web-based static prototype, (3) test a web-based
working prototype, and (4) test the concept intervention. In each
iteration, the MBO students were asked to provide input and
feedback for the next iteration.

In step 5, a plan for adoption and implementation was defined,
including a program that would influence the behavior of
individuals who would make decisions regarding adopting and
using the program. Finally, in step 6, the plan for the effect and
process evaluation of the intervention is discussed [19].

Ethics Approval

This study was approved by the Ethical Committee of the
Faculty of Social Sciences of Radboud University Nijmegen
(number ECSW2016-1403-390).

Results

Behavioral Outcome, Performance Objectives,
Determinants, and Change Objectives (IM Step 1)

Behavioral Outcome

The objective of the program is to reduce excessive drinking
among Dutch lower-educated students aged 16 to 24 years. The
desired behavioral outcome of the WDYD intervention was
formulated as follows: Dutch lower-educated students aged 16
to 24 years drink within the normative limits of the Dutch
National Health Council for low-risk drinking [20]. This implies
zero alcohol consumption for adolescents (aged 16-17 years),
and for adults (aged 18-24 years), it implies a mean alcohol
consumption that will not exceed 7 (for women) or 14 (for men)
glasses of standard alcohol units per week and, in case of binge
drinking, ≥4 (for women) or ≥6 (for men) standard alcohol units
on 1 occasion after having received the intervention [10].

Performance Objectives

As part of the systematic development approach (IM step 2
[19]), we defined the performance objectives of the behavior
(subbehaviors that underlie the program objective and behavioral
outcome). The intervention targets are based on self-regulation
principles [17], which break down behavioral outcomes into
subgoals. Performance objectives were formulated in the order
of the behavior change process, including deciding to reduce
alcohol consumption, setting goals, using strategies to achieve
drinking goals, and monitoring and evaluating one’s own alcohol
drinking behavior. The performance objectives are presented
in Table 1.

JMIR Form Res 2022 | vol. 6 | iss. 8 | e36969 | p. 4

Table 1. Matrix of the change objectives of the dynamically tailored mobile What Do You Drink intervention to reduce excessive alcohol drinking
among lower-educated students (aged 16-24 years) in the Netherlands.

Determinant
Performance objective

Social norms
Self-efficacy
Motivation
Risk awareness

Experience positive norms
from peers to reduce alcohol
drinking

Express confidence to re-
duce alcohol drinking
Understand misconceptions
regarding positive expectan-
cies of alcohol consumption;
acknowledge the advantages
of drinking less at short and
long term; express the impor-
tance of drinking less or re-
sponsibly

Acknowledge the long-
term and short-term risks
of alcohol drinking; be
aware of responsible
drinking norms

1. Make the decision to reduce
alcohol drinking

Communicate regarding re-
alistic drinking goals with
peers or buddy; ask for help
from peers or buddy in set-
ting realistic drinking goals

Express confidence in set-
ting realistic drinking goals
Feel committed to self-set
goals
Acknowledge the urge to
set realistic drinking goals;
be aware of drinking
norms

2. Set realistic drinking goals

Communicate regarding
drinking goals with friends
or peers or family or buddy;
resist social pressure to
drink more than the self-set
goals; learn from others how
they effectively reduce
drinking

Express confidence in
achieving drinking goals
Feel motivated to achieve
drinking goals
Be aware of challenging
situations
3. Use effective strategies to
achieve drinking goals

—
—
—a
Be aware of own drinking
behavior
4. Monitor own drinking behav-
ior

5. Evaluate own drinking behavior and set goals

—
Express confidence in
maintaining reduced alco-
hol drinking or adapt goal

Feel that reducing their goal
is (socially) rewarding
Recognize congruence and
discrepancy between own
drinking behavior and set
goals; acknowledge the
urge to maintain reduced
alcohol drinking or adapt
goal

5.1. If successful, maintain
reduced alcohol drinking
or adapt goal (for further
reduction)

Learn from others how they
cope with lapses and revise
used strategies to reduce al-
cohol drinking and adapt
drinking goals

Express confidence to deal
with tempting or challeng-
ing situations; express
confidence to manage neg-
ative feelings

Feel motivated to revise
used strategies to reduce al-
cohol drinking; feel motivat-
ed to adapt drinking goal af-
ter lapse

Recognize congruence and
discrepancy between own
drinking behavior and set
goals

5.2. If unsuccessful
(lapse), revise used strate-
gies in reducing alcohol
drinking or adapt drinking
goal

aNot available (missing data; there were no change objectives made for the combination of this performance objective and determinant).

Determinants

A systematic literature search resulted in 4 changeable
determinants of excessive drinking among adolescents and
young adults: risk awareness, motivation, self-efficacy, and
social norms. These are related to the key targets of SDT for
behavior change (ie, autonomous motivation, competence, and
relatedness) [16,18]. First, those who drink excessively usually
underestimate their amount of drinking as well as the short- and
long-term effects of excessive drinking [22-24]. According to
the precaution adoption process model [25], awareness of the
risk involved in performing a particular behavior is crucial in
taking the first step toward behavioral change. Therefore,
increasing risk awareness may be an effective mechanism for
reducing alcohol consumption.

Second, intrinsic motivation is a risk factor for excessive
drinking among young adults [26]. A Dutch study targeting
alcohol reduction among adolescents and young adults was not

effective for lower-educated students because they were
particularly unmotivated to change their behavior [27]. This
was probably due to the focus on higher-educated students and
those ready to reduce excessive drinking in the intervention.
Increased motivation to drink alcohol also influences drinking
behavior. For instance, a study showed that motivations to drink
alcohol that included positive outcomes of drinking (eg,
socializing and having fun) was related to more drinking [28].
Increasing intrinsic motivation to reduce drinking through an
intervention that suits the needs of the target group and
decreasing motivation to drink alcohol by focusing on socially
evoked alcohol drinking might be effective mechanisms for
behavioral change. On the basis of the SDT [16], intrinsic
motivation is a key factor in the adaptive self-regulation of
behavioral change. In addition, increasing intrinsic motivation
to reduce drinking among adolescents and young adults who
drink excessively is shown to decrease alcohol consumption

JMIR Form Res 2022 | vol. 6 | iss. 8 | e36969 | p. 5

[29,30]. Therefore, increasing intrinsic motivation may be an
effective mechanism for reducing alcohol consumption.

Third, self-efficacy is related to alcohol drinking [26]. Young
adults with low self-efficacy to refuse alcohol drinking are more
likely to engage in heavy drinking [31]. Drinking refusal
self-efficacy is shown to be affected by mood [32]. A negative
mood seems to contribute to a lowered drinking refusal
self-efficacy, resulting in more maladaptive drinking behaviors,
such as uncontrolled excessive drinking [33]. High perceived
self-efficacy in refusing alcohol drinking is shown to result in
less high-risk drinking behaviors [34]. In addition, drinking
refusal self-efficacy is affected by self-efficacy expectations
regarding dealing with social pressure. Thus, enhancing
self-efficacy may be an effective mechanism for reducing
alcohol consumption.

Feeling confident in dealing with social pressure leads to a
decrease in alcohol consumption and binge drinking [27]. Social
norms, the fourth determinant, also comes into play. Social
pressure plays a role in excessive drinking among young adults
[35,36], with social norms perceived by peers in particular
[24,37]. Thus, not only feeling more confident in coping with
social pressure but also addressing the social norms that
correspond with this pressure could function as changeable
factors in decreasing excessive alcohol consumption. Thus,
enhancing self-efficacy may be an effective mechanism for
reducing alcohol consumption.

Change Objectives

To define the change objectives, the performance objectives
were combined with the determinants, resulting in specific goals
that would enhance the behavior change process during the
intervention (eg, express confidence to reduce alcohol drinking).
Table 1 depicts the matrix of the performance objectives, with
the change objectives specified per determinant in the WDYD
intervention. Regarding risk awareness (determinant), when
making the decision to drink less alcohol (performance objective
1), an example of a change objective is that one should be aware
of the short- and long-term risks of alcohol drinking and of
responsible drinking norms. Regarding intrinsic motivation
(determinant), to set realistic drinking goals (performance
objective 2), an example of a change objective is that one should
feel committed to their self-set goals. Regarding self-efficacy
(determinant), when using effective strategies to achieve
drinking goals (performance objective 3), an example of a
change objective is that one should express confidence in
achieving drinking goals. Regarding social norms, when using
effective strategies to achieve drinking goals (performance
objective 3), an example of a change objective is that one should
communicate their goals with others or learn from others how
they effectively reduce drinking.

Selection of Methods and Practical Applications (IM
Step 3)

Theory- and Evidence-Based Methods

Next, we selected theory- and evidence-based methods and their
corresponding practical applications for the intervention (IM
step 3) [19]. Multimedia Appendix 2 provides an overview of
the theory- and evidence-based methods that we selected based

on the change objectives presented in Table 1. Dynamic
tailoring, or just-in-time adaptive intervention (JITAI), was
selected as the overarching method. It ensures not only
personalization of feedback to the individual but also adaptation
based on variations in time. In other words, methods can be
tailored to the situation of a person based on psychological and
behavioral changes over time [38,39]. Dynamic tailoring is
based on the principle of timing of the right type and amount
of support. This requires monitoring of the individual. Dynamic
tailoring or JITAI has been more effective than nondynamic
tailoring or non-JITAI [39,40]. The parameters for use under
which tailoring is effective are that the intervention is tailored
to determinants related to behavior change or relevance (eg,
age, sex, and alcohol consumption). These were applied; the
determinants are described in IM step 2, and the messages are
tailored to users’ age, sex, and current alcohol consumption
based on input from the diaries.

We used theory- and evidence-based methods derived from
self-regulation [17] theories as the broad umbrella, as these
target performance objectives directly, including self-monitoring
[41], behavioral feedback, and goal setting [42]. These methods
have been found to be effective in reducing alcohol consumption
[12,43]. Furthermore, these self-regulatory methods can cause
participants to see the discrepancy between their alcohol
drinking goal and behavior, leading to increased risk awareness.
Other methods applied to increase awareness include normative
feedback and personalized risk information [44].

To increase motivation, we used methods based on motivational
interviewing and self-reward. Motivational interviewing [45]
is an effective method for alcohol reduction interventions
targeting adolescents and young adults [14,46]. Self-reward has
not yet been properly examined as an effective method for
changing behavior [47], but it has shown promising effects on
promoting behavior change and maintenance of physical activity
[48] and fruit consumption [49].

To improve self-efficacy in coping with difficult alcohol-related
situations, we included methods such as coping planning and
relapse prevention. Problem solving is associated with a
reduction in excessive alcohol consumption [50], which includes
coping planning and relapse prevention [51]. Self-efficacy was
also increased through self-persuasion [52] and stress
management [53]. Self-persuasion can reduce alcohol
consumption compared with direct persuasion (ie, providing
arguments) [54]. Research has shown that stress management
can reduce negative emotions and alcohol consumption among
students [55].

To address social norms, modeling and social support were
incorporated into the intervention. Modeling [56,57] has been
shown to be effective when normative information on the
alcohol consumption of peers (eg, negative attitude toward
excessive drinking) is given [58]. Social support [59] has not
yet been properly examined as an effective method for reducing
alcohol consumption. In the context of alcoholics anonymous,
it has been suggested as an effective mechanism in promoting
a sober lifestyle [60] and has also been shown to be an effective
method in various health behavior change interventions [61].

JMIR Form Res 2022 | vol. 6 | iss. 8 | e36969 | p. 6

Practical Applications

The practical application of the chosen methods as part of
WDYD is presented in Multimedia Appendix 2. Here, we
provide examples of the practical applications and the
parameters for use under which the methods are effective. First,
we provide 2 examples regarding performance objective 1
(making the decision to reduce drinking). To increase users’
awareness of possible drinking norms (change objective),
targeting the determinant risk awareness, the method normative
feedback will be applied keeping the parameter for use in mind,
that is, the feedback needs to be individual, follow the behavior
in time, and be specific [62]. In the practical application, users
will receive information regarding their own alcohol
consumption compared with alcohol drinking guidelines [20]
(Figure S1 in Multimedia Appendix 1). To target the
determinants motivation and self-efficacy, the method
motivational interviewing was used by means of several practical
applications in the app while maintaining the parameters for
use, such as a supportive relationship with the client combined
with the evocation of change talk in a manner that is
collaborative, evocative, autonomy supporting, and exploring
rather than confronting, educating, authoritative, and explanative
[62]. The practical applications of this are a value clarification,
importance and confidence rulers, identifying personal strengths,
and looking forward and back. For example, to allow users to
express the importance of drinking less (change objective for
determinant motivation), the practical application values
clarification was used to explore among users important values
and to evoke change talk by examining among users how these
fit with reducing their alcohol consumption. In addition, upon
the interest of the user, examples of values among peers and
how these values relate to reduced drinking were provided
(Figures S2-S5 in Multimedia Appendix 1).

Second, 2 examples of practical applications for performance
objective 2 (set realistic drinking goals) are described. App
users chose their alcohol drinking goals based on their
preferences and abilities to achieve their goals. Users were
encouraged to set smart goals that were specific, measurable,
achievable, relevant, and time bound. The app provided different
exercises to achieve these drinking goals. To enhance expressing
confidence in setting realistic drinking goals (change objective),
targeting the determinant self-efficacy, the method goal setting
was practically applied by asking users to set drinking goals
based on their consumption during the previous week and
checking whether the set goals are realistic (Figure S6 in
Multimedia Appendix 1). The reference period (ie, alcohol
consumption in the past week) and checking whether the set
goals were realistic were included to adhere to the parameters
for use of goal setting (ie, users feel committed to their goal,
and goals are difficult but available within the individual skill
level [62]. To stimulate communication regarding realistic
drinking goals with peers or a buddy and to ask for help in
setting realistic drinking goals by peers or a buddy (change
objectives), targeting the determinant social norms, the method
mobilize social support was chosen. The parameter for the use
of mobilizing social support is, that support for behavior change
is positive and includes caring, trust, openness, and acceptance,
[62]. This was practically applied by stimulating users to choose

a buddy among their friends who could help them reduce alcohol
consumption and to specify how they can help (Figures S7-S10
in Multimedia Appendix 1).

A total of 3 examples of practical applications with regard to
performance objective 3 (use effective strategies to achieve
drinking goals) are described. To promote resistance to social
pressure to drink more than the self-set goals and learning from
others how they effectively reduce drinking (change objectives),
targeting self-efficacy, the method modeling was practically
applied by showing videos and role model stories with tips and
tricks from peers on how they reduce alcohol drinking and how
they say no to alcohol, keeping in mind the parameters for use
of modeling (ie, the user can identify with the model, and the
model needs to be a coping model who provides their own
solutions [62] (Figures S11 and S12 in Multimedia Appendix
1). To promote feeling motivated to achieve drinking goals,
targeting the determinant motivation, the method self-reward
was practically applied by an exercise focusing on how and
when to reward yourself. The parameter for use is that self-praise
or self-reward is prompted if there has been effort or progress
in performing the behavior [63]. This was applied by asking
users to select a behavioral achievement (eg, reaching their goal
for alcohol consumption for 1 day, 3 days, or a week) and to
link a reward to this achievement.

Regarding performance objective 4 (monitor own drinking
behavior), an example of a practical application of the method
self-monitoring to enhance awareness of one’s own drinking
behavior (change objective), targeting the determinants risk
awareness and motivation, was an alcohol drinking diary, along
with a mood diary. The parameters for the use of self-monitoring
are that the monitoring must be of a specific behavior, that the
data must be interpreted and used, and that the reward must be
reinforced to users [62]. This was applied by prompting users
to fill in their diary on a daily basis, specifying how many
glasses of alcohol they drank yesterday and how they are feeling
today. They could also indicate how important they think it is
to reach their alcohol goal for that day and how much confidence
they have in reaching that goal. Users received a notification
for the diary at 11 AM and a reminder at 5 PM when they did
not fill in their diary to promote the use of the dairy. The app
contained a separate page where users were able to see their
diary and progress regarding their alcohol drinking goals. If
users reached their drinking goals for a couple of days in a row,
a positive reinforcement of progress toward goals was prompted
(Figures S13 and S14 in Multimedia Appendix 1).

With regard to performance objective 5 (evaluate own drinking
behavior and set goals), 2 examples of practical applications
are provided. To promote recognition of congruence and
discrepancy between own drinking behavior and set goals
(change objective), targeting the determinant risk awareness,
the method behavioral feedback was applied. The parameter
for use is that feedback needs to be individual, follow the
behavior in time, and be specific [62]. This was applied by
showing the user the discrepancy between the set goals and
drinking behavior in glasses per day of the past week in a graph
(Figure S15 in Multimedia Appendix 1). To stimulate users
expressing confidence in maintaining reduced alcohol
consumption or adapting goals (change objective), targeting the

JMIR Form Res 2022 | vol. 6 | iss. 8 | e36969 | p. 7

determinant self-efficacy, the methods relapse prevention and
planning coping responses were applied. The parameter for use
is that high-risk situations are identified and coping responses
are practiced. This was applied with exercises focusing on
learning from lapses (eg, drinking too much on 1 occasion) and
how to get back on track. For example, in an exercise, users are
stimulated to identify high-risk situations (ie, where, with whom,
their thoughts, feelings, and consequences) and to learn coping
responses (ie, helping thoughts and responses). They can also
see an example of a peer who describes a high-risk situation
and plans a coping response.

Program Production of WDYD (IM Step 4)

WDYD was systematically and iteratively developed in 4 phases
with the active involvement of lower-educated students to
examine what fits their needs (IM step 4) [19], following
user-centered design principles [21]. WDYD was developed by
the Research Institute for Applied Sciences (Nederlandse
organisatie voor Toegepast-Natuurwetenschappelijk Onderzoek),
Trimbos Institute, and Radboud University Nijmegen, and the
software for WDYD was developed by Newstory. Students
from 2 MBO schools participated in the iterative development
of WDYD. They were recruited via a contact person at each
school (ie, a teacher). The students involved in the development
were diverse in terms of sex, age, and alcohol consumption.
Their inputs were included in the following version and were
consecutively pretested. Participants received a gift voucher as
a reward for their participation in the pretests. An advisory board
of relevant stakeholders (Trimbos Institute, Dutch MBO
Council, MBO’s Nova College and Deltion College, Dutch
Foundation Testjeleefstijl, Open University Heerlen, Maastricht
University, and Radboud University Nijmegen) offered
recommendations for the program design, implementation, and
evaluation. WDYD was developed in 4 phases and pretests. The
aim of the pretests was to evaluate the preferences of the
students, that is, their needs and requirements for the program
and their preferred strategies with regard to layout and future
use (eg, channel, frequency, and duration). After each pretest,
feedback was processed in the prototype, and the prototype was
further developed based on recommendations.

The first pretest of WDYD was a concept test consisting of a
scenario of the program and mock-ups of possible strategies
used for improving motivation, self-efficacy, mood, and
planning and for preventing relapse. This concept was tested
through 4 focus group interviews with students who engaged
in excessive drinking (N=23 students). The mean age of the
participants was 17 (range 15-21) years, 52% (12/23) were male,
and they varied according to study type (social care: 6/23, 26%;
car engineering: 5/23, 22%; audiovisual: 3/23, 13%; aviation
and service: 3/23, 13%; legal service: 2/23, 9%; photography:
2/23, 9%; executive secretary: 1/23, 4%; and enforcement: 1/23,
4%). The concept was positively evaluated with a mean grade
of 7.1 on a 10-point scale (1=very bad to 10=excellent; range
6.5-8.5). Students were positive regarding the variety of methods
used and the tone of voice in that they experience an autonomous
choice to reduce their drinking. They perceived the Dutch
guidelines [9] (no alcohol for adolescents and maximum 1
standard drink per day for adults) as somewhat unrealistic, and
most students indicated that they did not want to reduce alcohol

consumption. They experienced feelings of shame in using a
program to reduce their alcohol consumption and did not feel
the need to ask for help to reduce their consumption; they
indicated that it is important that WDYD can be used
individually and privately, and they suggested that an app may
be a good solution for that. Participants indicated that privacy
in the use of the program is crucial, as it accounts for the
experience of freedom or autonomy of choice (with regard to
the decision to reduce alcohol drinking as well as which program
parts they want to use and when). Suggestions for further
development were to enhance personal relevance (eg,
information regarding the purpose and target group of the
program, key focus on coping with challenging situations and
empowerment instead of therapeutic focus, and information
regarding the consequences of alcohol drinking), language (ie,
avoiding therapeutic language and explaining difficult terms,
such as binge drinking), guarantee privacy of use (ie, preference
for the program to be used via an app and not wanting to share
program content with others), and duration and frequency (ie,
they wanted to spend a maximum of 15 minutes per week on
the program; this may be a couple of times per week to, for
example, monitor drinking; they wanted to use it until they
drank less or reached their goal). This concept test resulted in
a production document in which the features, functionalities,
and requirements of WDYD were stated based on the students’
recommendations on the first prototype.

The second pretest consisted of the evaluation of a web-based,
static prototype in 5 focus group interviews, in which the
prototype was evaluated individually (students could scroll
through the pages via a link on their phone and write down their
notes), both individually and classically (the prototype was
presented via a beamer), or vice versa. These mock-ups were
presented as several pages, illustrating the process of navigating
through the app. The questions focused on the practical
applications of the behavior change methods in the app (eg,
exercises, diaries, and notifications) and the design. The sample
consisted of 57% (33/58) male students, the participants’ mean
age was 18.4 (range 16-22) years, and they drank on average
10 glasses of alcohol per week (range 0-56 glasses). More than
half of the sample (30/58, 52%) engaged in binge drinking at
least once a week and drank >7 glasses of alcohol weekly
(30/58, 52%). The app was evaluated with a mean grade of 7.0
on a 10-point scale (1=very bad to 10=excellent; range 4-8.5).
Students were positive regarding the design, user-friendliness,
and monitoring of their drinking behavior. The app was
evaluated as very user intuitive: it was clear what they needed
to do and how they could do it. Some of the exercises were
unclear, especially the titles, pictures, or icons, and the texts
were evaluated as too long. Although we explained difficult
words (ie, binge drinking), students struggled to read them, so
they were better avoided. In addition, participants preferred use
of pictures, icons, and shortened texts. They also suggested
using videos for more variety and providing them with
notifications for completing the diary. They recommended
reducing the amount of text, explaining some exercises more
clearly, using more and better suitable pictures, and using
swiping to navigate through the different pages of the exercises
(instead of the next or previous page buttons). These

JMIR Form Res 2022 | vol. 6 | iss. 8 | e36969 | p. 8

recommendations were processed into a third prototype of the
app.

The third pretest consisted of an evaluation of a web-based
working prototype of the app via an individual interview (N=3
students). Participants were asked to download the app on their
phone and use it daily for a couple of days (including the
weekend). After this, they were called for an evaluation. The
questions were focused on unclarities, navigation, content,
usability, and overall impression. A total of 67% (2/3) of the
students were male, the mean age was 17.3 (range 16-18) years,
they drank an average of 9 glasses of alcohol per week (range
5-12 glasses), 67% (2/3) of the students drank >7 glasses per
week, and no participants engaged in binge drinking (ie, 2 of
the male students drank 5 glasses per day on 2 consecutive days
of the weekend). The prototype was positively evaluated with
a mean grade of 7.3 on a 10-point scale (1=very bad to
10=excellent; range 6-8). The students were positive regarding
the design, navigation, language, and interactive nature of the
app. They were also positive regarding the ease of use and time
for participation. They suggested further reducing the amount
of (informative) texts and improving the visibility of the role
model videos. These recommendations were processed in the
fourth prototype of WDYD.

The fourth pretest consisted of an evaluation of the full product
(ie, the working WDYD app) in individual interviews (N=4
students). Students used the prototype in the form of a mobile
app for at least eight days so that they could have received the
baseline questionnaire, 2 sessions, and notifications to fill out
their diary daily. After this period, they were called for an
evaluation. The interviews focused on the usability and content
of the app. The mean age of the sample was 18.3 (range 17-19)
years, and 50% (2/4) of the students were male. They drank on
average 5.3 glasses of alcohol weekly (range 3-8), 25% (1/4)
drank >7 glasses per week, and 25% (1/4) engaged in binge
drinking at least once a week. The app was evaluated very
positively with a mean grade of 8.2 (1=very bad to 10=excellent;
range 7.8-8.5). At the start, students had somewhat low
expectations of the app, but they were positively surprised: they
were positive regarding informativity, design, user-friendliness
(ie, ease of use and time needed to participate), language (ie,
understandable), notifications (amount and type), and freedom
of choice they experience within the app (eg, the option to view
a video and the option to choose 1 out of 2 exercises). The
number of notifications was evaluated as good, but there was
room for improvement: 1 participant received the notification
although they had already filled in the diary, and 2 participants
received a reminder although they had already filled in the diary;
this needs to be improved in the next version. The preference
for the use of the weekly overview (ie, a graphical overview of
their alcohol consumption of the week based on the diary input)
varied; some participants evaluated it as informative, whereas
others preferred the use of the diary as informative in itself and
indicated that a weekly overview was not needed. The weekly
overview was maintained in the diary, and users could decide
for themselves whether to use this overview. The feedback was
perceived as somewhat brief, but this was not changed because
they only experienced 2 out of the 10 sessions, and during the

preceding pretests, the amount of feedback was perceived as
too much.

Suggestions for improvements were processed into the final
version of WDYD, which was used for the randomized
controlled trial.

Implementation Plan of WDYD (IM Step 5)

To ensure successful implementation (IM step 5) [19] of
WDYD, the target group was intensively and iteratively involved
in the developmental process of the intervention, following
user-based design principles [21]. Students from 2 MBO schools
participated in 4 different pretests (refer to the Program
Production of WDYD subsection). In addition, 2 classes of
MBO students in media design developed short videos in which
role models (ie, students) provided tips and tricks to reduce their
alcohol consumption and to deal with challenges. These videos
were developed in sprint sessions (writing a plan, developing
scripts, and refining the videos), in which students received
feedback from their teacher and 2 developers of WDYD and
made refinements to the plan, scripts, and videos. This resulted
in 22 videos that were incorporated into WDYD as part of
several exercises.

The intervention was developed and implemented in
collaboration with the Trimbos Institute. The Trimbos Institute
was the owner of WDYD from the start, as they manage the
knowledge network for e- and m-mental health in the
Netherlands. This enhanced the opportunity for a broad
implementation of WDYD and integration in interventions
already used by the Trimbos Institute nationally.

Several strategies have been implemented to specifically
stimulate the sustained use of WDYD. Notifications were used
to invite and remind participants to fill in their diary, participate
in a session, and keep up with their alcohol drinking goals
(positive reinforcement messages). This way of prompting a
review of progress toward goals is associated with a reduction
in alcohol consumption frequency [58]. In light of behavioral
maintenance, motivational interviewing was applied to establish
a working alliance and to increase intervention engagement,
intrinsic motivation, and confidence for change [45]. WDYD
not only consisted of several motivational interviewing exercises
(such as values clarification, importance and confidence ruler,
identifying personal strengths, looking forward, and looking
back) but also applied principles of motivational interviewing.
These principles were autonomy support (ie, by providing
participants as much choice as possible, eg, to provide them
with the chance to plan the time to the next session, to provide
the choice to view a video, and to choose 1 out of 2 exercises),
partnership (ie, the input of participants in the diaries and
sessions was the point for departure of the sessions, and
participants were stimulated to provide their opinion or solution
in the exercises), acceptance and compassion (ie, feedback via
push notifications or sessions were written empathetically and
personal, without coercion or blame), and evocation (ie, the
point of departure for feedback within WDYD was the input of
the participant in the diary and sessions; the exercises included
in WDYD were interactive, and participants were encouraged
to elaborate on their own motivation, confidence, planning
strategies, mood, and relapse prevention strategies). In addition,

JMIR Form Res 2022 | vol. 6 | iss. 8 | e36969 | p. 9

dynamic tailoring was implemented to elicit behavior change,
but it was also used to prevent intervention fatigue and,
therefore, induce sustained use [15,38] by withholding from
intervening when a user is not receptive to the intervention (eg,
when a user does not fill in the diary repeatedly, no exercise
will be offered).

Evaluation Plan of WDYD (IM Step 6)

To evaluate the effectiveness of WDYD (IM step 6) [19], a
study protocol was written, and a 2-arm randomized controlled
trial was planned (trial registration: Netherland Trial Registry
NTR6619 [64]). The goal was to randomly assign participants
to the intervention group (ie, WDYD intervention) or the control
group (ie, no intervention). The participants were recruited via
a web-based lifestyle monitor for MBO students [65]. Students
who drank alcohol excessively according to the monitor were
invited to participate in the study. The eligibility criteria for
participation in the study were (1) drinking excessively, that is,
drinking more than the low-risk drinking guidelines
recommended for adolescents (aged 16-17 years) to drink no
alcohol and for adults to drink a maximum of 1 (women) or 2
(men) glasses of standard alcohol units daily, or (2) binge
drinking, that is, drinking ≥4 (for women) or ≥6 (for men)
standard alcohol units on 1 occasion [20]. In addition,
participants had to be aged ≥16 years at the time they signed
up, have to be computer or internet literate, and have to provide
their informed consent before participation in the study.

The primary outcome measures were excessive drinking (yes
or no), binge drinking (yes or no), and the mean weekly alcohol
consumption. The secondary outcome measures were intrinsic
motivation and self-confidence toward reducing alcohol
consumption and the mood of the participant. Outcomes were
assessed at baseline, week 9, and week 33 by using web-based
surveys and ecological momentary assessments [66]. The
ecologic momentary assessments will consist of brief daily diary
measurements, assessed every 6 weeks for 7 consecutive days,
ending after 33 weeks (ie, weeks 1, 7, 13, 19, 25, 31, and 33
after baseline). Participants in the intervention group will
evaluate WDYD in a web-based survey at week 9 after baseline,
and they will receive questions on overall acceptability (mean
grade), usability of the app, information supplied, and design
principles behind the app.

Discussion

Principal Findings

This study provides a comprehensive and detailed description
of the rationale and plan for the development, implementation,
and evaluation of WDYD, a dynamically tailored mobile health
intervention. WDYD was developed to reduce excessive
drinking among lower-educated adolescents and young adults
in the Netherlands. The IM protocol was followed for the
development of WDYD [19]. Furthermore, a user-centered
approach was applied in designing the intervention [21].

Contribution of IM

Poorly described interventions, or black boxes, have long been
criticized in the eHealth field [67,68]. Treatment rationales
within empirical papers are often briefly described in the

methods section, where the theoretical framework, delivery,
behavior change techniques, and content of the intervention are
addressed to a limited extent [19]. The IM approach resulted in
a systematically developed intervention by using theory-driven
and evidence-based methods. The proper description of behavior
change techniques and their practical applications in WDYD
contributed to the replicability of the intervention. Furthermore,
it can inspire researchers to design new interventions [69].

WDYD was developed in response to an earlier web-based,
brief, single-session version of WDYD. This older version
showed nonsignificant results for lower-educated adolescents
and young adults (aged 16-24 years) and pointed out specific
recommendations for improvement [27]. For instance, the new
version of WDYD included exercises for students not ready to
reduce excessive drinking and implement known conditions for
the effectiveness of motivational interviewing (eg, autonomy
support, evoking change talk, and partnership) and a
nonjudgmental tone of voice [45]. The new version of WDYD
was a longer and more intensive intervention, which included
multiple sessions to facilitate improvement in intrinsic
motivation for change as well as goal striving and persistence
[17]. It was based on effective interventions using these
strategies [70,71]. The IM protocol is useful for revising and
updating existing interventions and provides an opportunity to
account for earlier study flaws and limitations.

User-Centered Design

A user-centered design is crucial to maximize the fit of the
intervention with the target group [72]. The user-centered design
approach resulted in the intensive involvement of the target
group in the developmental process of WDYD. The 4 pretests
demonstrated how involving the target group led to an
increasingly suited intervention, resulting in more positive
evaluations of the app. After every pretest, the app was adjusted
according to the feedback and recommendations of the target
group. This led to changes in the design that would have been
easily missed if the target group was not involved in the
developmental process. For instance, the pretests indicated that
students struggled with difficult wordings (eg, binge drinking),
so they were avoided as much as possible. Another example
was that students preferred the use of brief textual feedback in
the app, alternate textual feedback with pictures and icons, and
enhanced variability by including videos. Therefore, we decided
to let students develop videos themselves, which included the
role model stories of students who provided tips to reduce their
alcohol intake and deal with challenges. In addition, textual
feedback was rewritten in a terse style, and pictures and icons
were added.

Limitations

There are some limitations regarding the developmental process
of WDYD. First, the sample sizes of the 2 final pretests were
small. Moreover, not all pretests included excessive drinkers
only, as the focus of these tests was on evaluating usability and
intuitive use. This may explain why participants in the final 2
pretests evaluated the app as more positive (mean grades of
pretests 3 and 4 were 7.3 and 8.2, respectively, compared with
pretests 1 and 2, which were 7.1 and 7.0, respectively).
Therefore, the results of the final 2 pretests should be interpreted

JMIR Form Res 2022 | vol. 6 | iss. 8 | e36969 | p. 10

cautiously. However, having only a handful of students in the
qualitative evaluation allowed for in-depth interviews,
addressing all facets of the app. Second, the final pretest
indicated some flaws with regard to the notifications (eg,
notifications for the diary were sent although participants had
already filled in the diary). This was resolved and thoroughly
tested before implementation in the trial. Third, lower-educated
students appeared to be a very challenging target group; on the
one hand, students indicated in the pretests that they preferred
a brief intervention, to spent a maximum of 15 minutes of their
time for the intervention per week, that the textual feedback
was as brief as possible, and that the intervention included as
much freedom of choice as possible. Therefore, we provided
students with several options (eg, viewing a video and choosing
1 out of 2 tailored exercises). On the other hand, as an

intervention developer, intervention time is essential for
inducing behavior change, and providing users with freedom
of choice increases the risk of lower exposure. In addition,
personal relevance of the app remained a problem throughout
the pretests; even in the fourth pretest, the expectations of
students of the app were low, but when participating, they were
surprised by the app and perceived it as informative and
supportive.

Conclusions

It can be concluded that IM and user-centered design are useful
means to develop an evidence-based and theory-driven
intervention to reduce excessive drinking among lower-educated
students. The target group of lower-educated students who drink
alcohol excessively needs more attention in future research to
design well-suited and effective interventions.