RESEARCH ARTICLE

Home blood pressure data visualization 
for the management of hypertension: using 
human factors and design principles

Pete Wegier1,2,3*†  , Jeffery L. Belden4†, Shannon M. Canfield4, Victoria A. Shaffer5, Sonal J. Patil4, 
Michael L. LeFevre4, K. D. Valentine6,7, Mihail Popescu8, Linsey M. Steege9, Akshay Jain10 and 
Richelle J. Koopman4 

Methods
Our research and design team was assembled to develop 
an optimized BP data display to support clinical decision-
making by patients and physicians. The team includes 
practicing family physicians; a physician member of Joint 
National Commission on Hypertension (JNC-8) and for-
mer chair of the United States Preventive Services Task 
Force (USPSTF) [20]; a data science engineer and medi-
cal informatician with skills in algorithmic processing 
and natural language generation; an industrial and sys-
tems engineer with expertise in human factors in health-
care systems; psychologists with considerable experience 
studying medical decision making; and mixed-methods 
researchers in health information technology use and 
changes in ambulatory practice. This team composition 
brought together multiple expert perspectives for guided

Page 3 of 14
	

discussions and allowed us to make informed, internally 
validated design decisions.

Approach
Inherent in our approach was our mission to design for 
shared physician and patient use to inform shared deci-
sion making around hypertension. We conducted a total 
of five focus groups dedicated to reviewing prototype dis-
plays and iterating on their design, alternating between 
hypertensive patients, and family physicians and internal 
medicine physicians—focus groups 1, 3, and 5 were with 
patients, and focus groups 2 and 4 were with physicians. 
Analysis of focus group qualitative data took place in 
three phases: a team debrief, a rapid preliminary analysis 
immediately following each focus group, and final analy-
sis of compiled data. Patient and physician participants 
returned for three confirmatory focus groups to view and 
comment on the final prototype.
The preliminary qualitative analysis following each 
focus group helped us identify participant responses to 
our designs and to allow for rapid iteration of our pro-
totypes [21]. A more traditional and comprehensive the-
matic analysis [22] of the qualitative data was conducted 
by RJK and SMC, using a deductive realist approach. 
Additional details regarding the data collection and anal-
ysis, and the interview guide, can be found in a related 
paper [17]. Each of the quotes we selected to present here 
were chosen for two reasons: (1) the quotes represented 
common positions held by focus group participants; and 
(2) the quotes drove specific design decisions.

Participants
The University of Missouri Health Sciences Institutional 
Review Board reviewed and approved this study and its 
human subjects’ participation and consent process. We 
recruited Family and Community Medicine (FCM) and 
General Internal Medicine (GIM) physicians from eight 
academic, community-based practices in the Midwest 
of the United States. We contacted their patients—aged 
18 years or older, with a diagnosis of hypertension, and 
identified by their physicians as appropriate to partici-
pate in this study—by a mailed letter, signed by their phy-
sician. During each focus group, prototype displays were 
presented to all participants with minimal briefing to 
gauge the intuitiveness of each design. Participant demo-
graphics are presented in Table 1.

Results
Blood pressure plot
Style of plot
Graphing blood pressure carries additional demands 
compared to a single-number measurement such as body 
weight. A single blood pressure measurement is a pair of 

numbers and considered as such by both clinicians and 
patients. We considered two potential models currently 
in use. First, anesthesiology professionals have graphed 
blood pressure with pen and paper using an inverted 
caret and caret to mark the systolic BP (SBP) and dias-
tolic BP (DBP) values, respectively (Fig.  1). This allows 
for rapid annotation and high information density when 
BP values may be taken every few minutes. Second, 
electronic health records have sometimes adapted the 
anesthesiology visual display model to include a vertical 
connecting line to the DBP and SBP for ease of visual rec-
ognition. While common in anesthesia and critical care 
EHR displays, this style would be rarely seen and thus 
unfamiliar to users in the ambulatory setting. Rather 
than designing for novelty, we decided to stick with what 
would be most familiar to patients and used a simple line 
graph.

Denoting specific sources of BP readings
The raw data in the EHR should reveal the source of 
measurement (home, office, 24-h ambulatory, hospital, 
operative period, emergency medical services, etc.). We 
explored separate symbols to represent each of these 
sources. Additionally, we explored distinct symbols 
to differentiate confirmed/validated (thus more trust-
worthy) home BP measurements versus unconfirmed/

Table 1  Focus group participants’ characteristics

*Response options included additional categories. Only those reported by 
participants are included here

Characteristics*
Patients
Physicians

N
16
24

Gender—% (N)

Female
62 (10)
33 (8)

Male
38 (6)
67 (16)

Age—M (SD)
59 (17.6)
48 (13.6)

Race—% (N)

White
88 (14)
92 (22)

Black/African American
6 (1)
4 (1)

Other
6 (1)
4 (1)

Ethnicity—% (N)

Latino / Latina
0
0

Education (patients—% (N))

Some college or greater
62 (10)

High school or GED
19 (3)

Less than high school
19 (3)

Years in practice (physicians—% (N))

Less than 5 years
29 (7)

6–20 years
33 (8)

21–30 years
21 (5)

More than 30 years
17 (4)

Page 4 of 14

Fig. 1  Sample anesthesia record showing the system of inverted carets to mark SBP and carets to mark DBP. Reproduced with permission from 
University of Nebraska Medical Center

Page 5 of 14
	

unvalidated home measurements. “Home confirmed” 
refers to having clinical staff validate the accuracy of a 
patient’s cuff and measurement technique. Data trust-
worthiness depends on accurate and complete record-
keeping by the patient, the use of proper technique, and 
confirmation of that technique and results by office staff 
using the same equipment.

“I have them come in with the cuff to see how well 
their cuff works with my cuff. I would think con-
firmed versus unconfirmed would be confirmed with 
the nurse runs through the machine, writes down 
some numbers from, you know, hard data, versus 
unconfirmed would be patients calling us in with 
some numbers, ‘cause they could make those up.”
— Round 4, GIM Physician 7

However, we discovered in our focus groups that using 
a different visual symbol for each distinct data source 
added more complexity than needed for the task at 
hand: management of hypertension in the ambulatory 
setting giving priority to home BP values over office BP 
values. For example, inpatient or operative BP values 
were already recognizable by their markedly higher den-
sity—due to frequent measurement—and thus did not 
need symbols distinct from other non-home (clinical) 
BP measurements. Each new symbol gave the impression 
of importance; however, when everything is important, 
nothing stands out.

“I’m not sure that differentiation matters to me that 
much.”
— Round 2, FCM Physician 19

Currently, most BP records are primarily made up of 
office BP measurements, gathered during regular visits. 
We expect this to change in the future as internet-con-
nected home BP cuffs become integrated with patient 
portals and EHRs. Additionally, it is likely that passive 
BP monitoring is in our future as the personal health 
device (e.g., Apple Watch, Fitbit) market is exploding 
in size [23]. We explored rendering office (Fig. 2A) and 
home (Fig. 2B) measurements as separate lines—a 4-line 
paradigm—within the same graph window, with con-
trols to switch the focus between home and office BP 
measurements. Four lines had the potential for overlap 
and visual confusion, so our final design used a 2-line 
paradigm. An initial design connected only home BP 
measurements and left office BP measurements discon-
nected—to emphasize the importance of home meas-
urements and because office measurements would be 
comparatively rare—but this design caused significant 
confusion as to why some points were disconnected. We 
decided on a final design connecting home and office 
BP measurements and relying on only two symbols to 
denote the source of the measurements (circles for home 
measurements and squares for office; Fig. 2C). While we 
decided to include office measurements in our display, 

C
B
A

Fig. 2  Examples of the different styles of BP plots we designed. A and B show the 4-line paradigm, in which office and home measurements are 
plotted on separate lines, with squares and circles denoting office and home measurements, respectively. Users could switch focus between the 
office and home lines—A shows the office measurements in focus and B shows the home measurements in focus. C shows our combined 2-line 
paradigm, with office and home values connected and differentiated by the shape of the data points (squares and circles for office and home 
measurements, respectively)

Page 6 of 14

we recognize that as home BP measurement becomes 
easier and more affordable, the relevance of office values 
may substantially decrease due to the greater robustness 
of home BP measurements and the relative infrequency 
of office measurements. The inclusion of office measure-
ments in such a display may need to be reconsidered in 
future.

Goal ranges
The reader of the graph should be able to perceive at a 
glance whether the BP is in control or not. In existing 
EHRs, goal ranges may not be displayed at all (Fig. 3A) 
or may be shown only as horizontal lines (Fig. 3B). We 
added a band of background color to denote the accept-
able ranges for SBP and DBP, making them visually more 
prominent than single horizontal lines (Fig.  3C). This 
design allows the visual cognition centers to employ the 
pre-attentive attributes of color and 2-dimensional posi-
tion to quickly judge control [16].
Recommendations for goal ranges can vary for special 
adult populations (the elderly, those with diabetes, or 
chronic kidney disease) and may differ among guideline-
issuing organizations, which also revise their guidelines 
every few years. Goal ranges may also need to be person-
alized for patients who have symptoms (dizziness from 
low BP), certain disease states (diabetes), organ dysfunc-
tion (renal impairment), or when BP varies so widely that 
it fluctuates beyond both upper and lower bounds. The 
numeric range covered by the goal range bands was pre-
set the same for all patients at 90–140 SBP and 60–90 
DBP. The focus group participants expressed a strong 
desire for the ability to personalize the BP goal ranges on 
a per patient basis. Later designs added those controls.

“The shading allows us to quickly see if we’re below 
140 and below 90 […] Do I get to adjust my shading 
for the risk of my patient?”
— Round 4, GIM Physician 7

Out of range
A variety of methods were considered to provide visual 
emphasis to values out of range, including using larger 
(Fig.  3D) or colored points (Fig.  3E), or filling the area 

under the line—values above the upper normal range 
with the area under the curve filled a vivid orange color 
(Fig.  3F). Patients and physicians found those colors, 
weights, and fills distracting or unnecessary.

“Right. It [orange squares] doesn’t seem to have 
a purpose. It doesn’t seem to clarify anything; it 
doesn’t seem to add anything to me.”
“… I can see that [orange fill means out of range]. I 
don’t need the orange.”
— Round 1, Patient 17

Color
Initial designs used an all greyscale color palette 
(Fig. 3G). This allowed printing without loss of informa-
tion and reserved color for adding visual emphasis only. 
Our goal range bands initially employed two different 
shades of gray for SBP and DBP, but users found them 
confusing. Focus group testing revealed a strong prefer-
ence for color-coded goal ranges in patients.

“There’s no color in the chart. It, the normal range 
of the graph is small and hard to read. It should be 
enlarged and blown up since those are the normal 
ranges.”
— Round 1, Patient 16

We switched to pastel colors (more subtle, allowing use 
of more saturated colors for highlighting), with orange 
for SBP and blue for DBP, both colorblind safe (Fig. 3H). 
To avoid conflict with our EHR’s color standard for high 
(orange) and low (blue) values, a further iteration used a 
colorblind-safe two-color scheme—mint (#008471) was 
used for the systolic BP measurements and to denote the 
systolic goal range band; cocoa (#9C652B) was used for 
diastolic measurements and the diastolic goal range band 
(Fig. 3I). These latter two designs resulted in the creation 
of a like-with-like paradigm—if the data points and con-
necting line are within the goal range band of matching 
color then the BP is in a healthy range; otherwise the BP 
is too high/low.

“Yes, the color is helpful. I think it’s gonna help, I 
think it would help patients to understand the dif-

Fig. 3  Examples of different approaches to illustrating BP goals ranges and how to communicate if a BP measurement is out of the goal range. 
A shows no goal range and B shows dotted lines as goal ranges; both approaches are used in EHRs and neither are informative for patients 
or physicians. C illustrates our greyscale goal range bands—two different shades of grey are used to denote the systolic and diastolic BP goal 
ranges, with no special affordances to denote out of range values. We tried several techniques to denote out of goal range BP measurements. D 
illustrates the use of larger symbols for out of range values; however, these were difficult to distinguish from in range values unless the symbols 
became obnoxiously large. E used colored symbols and F used colored fills below the line; however, neither option was well received by patients 
or physicians. G, H and I demonstrate our use of color to replace the grey bands and the introduction of the like-with-like paradigm—if the data 
points and connecting line are within the goal range band of matching color then the BP is in a healthy range; otherwise the BP is too high/low

(See figure on next page.)

Page 7 of 14
	

I
H
G

F
E
D

C
B
A

Fig. 3  (See legend on previous page.)

Page 8 of 14

ference between the diastolic range and the systolic 
range, and also you’re tying the blood pressure read-
ings to the color of your target range. I think that is 
helpful.”
— Round 2, FCM Physician 10

Data and how to handle it
Data table

“I would probably almost want to put the numbers 
up there with the lines, you know, displaying, you 
know, what the numbers are…”
— Round 1, Patient 13

Our original prototype designs did not include an asso-
ciated data table as data tables are a universal component 
of EHR designs. However, at our focus groups, a propor-
tion of both patients and physicians preferred to see the 
data table in addition to the graphical displays. For the 
data table, we adopted our host EHR color scheme and 
bold text (dual visual encoding) to denote out of range 
values. In the context of visually adjacent data tables and 
graphical displays, we initially assumed that for each 
data point, there should be a one-to-one correspond-
ence between a table value and a graph data point. We 
encountered several considerations that caused us to 
question that assumption, namely issues with data den-
sity and missing data.

Data density
We believe we are currently in a transitional period for 
home BP measurements. In the past, we inhabited a 
period of data dearth—BP measurements were taken 
only during clinical visits in the office, or during hospi-
talization (whether hospital BPs are even available in an 
outpatient clinic setting is another story). Today we are 
in a period of data nascence—while a fraction of patients 
are able and willing to monitor their BP at home, their 
ability to upload those measurements to an EHR is not 
without technological barriers. We are rapidly approach-
ing a period of data abundance—both wearable and non-
wearable BP monitors become more ubiquitous and data 
standards evolve to allow for automatic and seamless 
uploading of regularly collected patient BPs directly in 
the EHRs of healthcare providers.
The potential for high density home BP measurements 
limits the numeric values that could be presented in the 
line graph and accompanying data table for any given 
length of time—very dense data will require aggregation. 
To address this, we designed a system of data aggrega-
tion to deal with dense measurements (Table  2). Users 
select how much time to show on the display (2 months 
of measurements, 2  years, etc.). The display should be 
able to comfortably accommodate up to 62 data points in 
the line graph and accompanying data table for any given 
length of time (see Table  2 for explanation). If a point 
represents > 1 measurement, there is no visual indication 

Table 2  Data density

Time period 
to display
Maximum number of 
data points to display
Each point 
represents…
Comment

1 day
48
30 min
An Apple Watch measures the wearer’s heart rate every 10 min. It is not inconceivable 
of a future which includes wearables capable of passive BP monitoring at a similar 
interval. If we take a more extreme measurement rate of one measurement every 
10 min, a single point on the display represents the average of three data points of 
recordings

1 week
56
3 h
Each day is represented by eight points on the display

2 weeks
56
6 h
Each day is represented by four points on the display

1 month
62
12 h
Each day is represented by two points, with a maximum of 31 days per month

2 months
62
1 day
The maximum number of days in any 2-month period is 62 (displaying July and August)

4 months
62
2 days
The maximum number of days in any 4-month period is 123

6 months
62
3 days
The maximum number of days in any 6-month period is 184

1 year
54
1 week
At most a year can have 366 days, so every point on the display could represent 6 days. 
However, thinking in terms of weeks is more common which would correspond to a 
maximum of 54 distinct weeks in a calendar year

2 years
54
2 weeks
–

3–5 years
60
1 month
–

 > 5 years
60
2 months
–

 > 10 years
60
4 months
–

 > 15 years
60
6 months
–

 > 30 years
60
1 year
–

Page 9 of 14
	

in the graph, but the value is presented in a bold type-
face in the data table. While such a system will allow us 
to comfortably handle large amounts of data, it requires 
us to educate users that one point on the display does not 
necessarily represent one measurement.

Missing data
The potential for missing data is substantial currently, 
due to a combination of infrequency in office visits where 
measurements can be taken and the variable frequency of 
home measurements both within and between individual 
patients. We propose the following affordances to help 
account for missing data over a particular timeframe in 
the display: if < 10% of consecutive data points would be 
missing, we simply do not plot any points, connect the 
remaining points as we normally would, and leave gaps 
in the data table; if > 10% of consecutive data points are 
missing, we still leave gaps in the data table but we con-
nect remaining points in the line graph with a dashed 
line. Thus, no points are plotted but the amount of miss-
ing data can be inferred from style of the line on the dis-
play (solid vs. dashed). This can be seen in Fig.  5—on 
the left, there is a large amount of missing data visible, 
denoted by a large gap in the data table and a dotted line 
in the graphical display; on the right, there is a small 
amount of missing data, denoted by a small gap in the 
data but a solid line in the graphical display.

Smoothing data
There is evidence that the variability of BP measurements 
has much less clinical significance than the mean BP [24]. 
Additionally, we previously found that patients place sub-
stantial weight on variability and outliers in BP measure-
ments, despite the poor predictive value of those factors 
[18, 19]. To help address this, we used a locally weighted 
scatterplot smoothing (LOWESS) algorithm to smooth 
the data and added this smoothing line to the display 
(Fig. 5). The line graph of (raw) measurements was then 
faded slightly to help the smoothing line stand out. The 
properties of the LOWESS algorithm accounted for 
missing data as well. We conducted several experiments 
on patient perception of the smoothing line and found 
responses to be overwhelmingly positive [19].

Annotations
We had discussed, and participants agreed, that record-
ing behavioral changes (e.g., lifestyle changes) on the dis-
play, as well as metrics related to BP goals (e.g., weight, 
selected lab values), would be helpful.

“Well, I’m trying to figure out how I would use it and 
the only thing I could see would be if there were some 
other intervention besides medication that occurred 

at that point. So you said this is where we started a 
restricted sodium diet or, you know, something like 
that.”
— Round 2, FCM Physician 18

Participants were less receptive to the idea of the anno-
tation presenting an analysis of the information that 
appeared obvious through the graphical representation 
(out of range, number of days BP was high/low, medica-
tion change) but analysis such as average BP over time 
was attractive.

“…when you’re down in the grey area [goal range], 
which appears to be the range that you’re shoot-
ing for, well, you don’t really need the bubble to tell 
you you’re in there because you’re in there. So I just 
think, I don’t know that that adds anything to the 
body of the display.”
— Round 1, Patient 17

We experimented with two approaches to display user-
generated annotations. First, we explored a free-float-
ing-bubble design where annotations were displayed as 
floating bubbles that would hover over the various parts 
of the display. Two schemes were used: (1) a color-coded 
variant, in which different colors of annotation bub-
bles denoted different topics (Fig.  4A); and (2) a grey 
variant, in which all bubbles were grey (Fig. 4B). It was 
eventually determined that the grey variant was prefer-
able—the colored version introduced too many colors to 
the display.
However, a potential concern of the free-floating-bub-
ble design was if annotations became popular, they would 
overwhelm the screen. Additionally, this design intro-
duced certain problems: Where do you put the bubble? 
Does the bubble have to be manually placed by the per-
son making the annotation or is there some internal logic 
that is used?
To avoid these issues, an annotation timeline was intro-
duced (Fig. 4C). Annotations were denoted by a symbol 
placed on this x-axis of the graphical display. When a 
user hovers over the symbol, the text of the annotation 
appears. This second design had several advantages: (1) 
reusing the x-axis of the graphical display meant we did 
not have to increase the complexity of the display; (2) 
hiding annotations until they are hovered over mini-
mized visual clutter; and (3) the design was kept simple—
a user only had to enter a date and the content of the 
annotation.

Medication timeline
We previously designed a medication timeline to 
help visualize polypharmacy, which was found to 
improve physician performance in routine medication

Page 10 of 14

i

C
B
A

Fig. 4  Examples of different ways user annotations could be displayed. A Our color-coded design, where the color of the annotation bubble was 
linked with the type of annotation content. This introduced too many new colors, so we used a single grey scheme shown in (B). Concerns over 
crowding of the display and the logic needed to decide the best location for the annotation bubbles led us to design the annotation timeline seen 
in (C). Here, the presence of annotations is denoted on the x-axis of the graphical display and the annotation bubble appears only when a user 
hovers their cursor over it

Fig. 5  Mock-up of our entire display, including the graphical display and smoothing line, annotations, data table, medication timeline, and scrubber 
bar

Page 11 of 14
	

management (e.g., finding the start date of a new medi-
cation), compared to more traditional tabular displays of 
medication lists [25]. We incorporated this medication 
timeline into our designs for this display (Fig. 5). Many 
patient focus group participants demonstrated an intui-
tive understanding of the display and were able to derive 
meaning across the main BP line graph and the supple-
mental tables. This linking of data allowed them to draw 
conclusions about how changes in medications seems to 
correlate with changes in BP.

“I mean, yeah, it looks like when they started the 
Lisinopril that, you know, the blood pressure started 
going down and stuff from the 10, low dose of a 10 to 
a 20, so they had to increase it to keep it down.”
— Round 3, Patient 1

Scrubber bar
In many modern EHRs cross-categorical displays—which 
show all these elements in a single display—are rare 
and there is a need to switch between displays, which 
increases cognitive load. Our display presents the graphi-
cal display, data table, and medication timeline in a single 
display. We introduced a colored, vertical scrubber bar to 
help both patient and physician users link these elements 
together (Fig. 5). As a user moves their mouse, the ver-
tical scrubber bar tracked the horizontal mouse move-
ments of the user’s cursor across all parts of the display 
(i.e., graphical display, data table, and medication time-
line). Users indicated the scrubber bar allowed them to 
more easily link the data ‘story’ across the graphical dis-
play, data table, and medication timeline.

“I like it, because when you move the mouse it then 
shows you at this point, this is your blood pressure, 
this is the medicine you were on or a combination of 
medications.”
— Round 1, Patient 17

Discussion
Our goal was to design a graphical display to visualize 
temporal trends for an individual patient’s blood pres-
sure, to support shared decision making between the 
patient and their healthcare provider with the aim of 
improving BP control across the population. The primary 
audience for this display is the patient-provider dyad (or 
caregiver-provider dyad) whose shared goal is to achieve 
the long-term goal of improved hypertension control. 
The display needed to clearly show whether BP was con-
trolled compared to a goal range, to make recent trends 
in the BP apparent, to support judgments to improve 
control, and to foster action to achieve control. Design 

decisions were made with the intent of minimizing cog-
nitive load by using principles that leverage fast visual 
cognition [16]. Table 3 presents a summary of all design 
features, related design decisions, and rationale for each 
decision. The focus group responses from patients and 
physicians confirmed the effectiveness of those choices. 
The design was perceived as generally intuitive and brief 
orientation to the tool tended to clarify any remaining 
ambiguities.
We partnered with the Tiger Institute, a technology 
collaborative between the University of Missouri and 
Cerner Corporation, to produce and deploy this as a 
separate display view in our local EHR implementation 
using the SMART on FIHR platform. The SMART (Sub-
stitutable Medical Apps and Reusable Technology) pro-
ject (https://​smart​healt​hit.​org) harnesses the FHIR (Fast 
Healthcare Interoperability Resources) from HL7 (Health 
Level 7) to create open solutions and tools for innovators 
to build applications that can connect to systems using 
the FHIR platform. Using this platform or FHIR stand-
ards, non-commercial or commercial developers could 
deploy the design into other EHRs or Personal Health 
Record platforms.
We explored several considerations where data was out 
of the default goal range or missing. Our guiding prin-
ciples were data transparency and visual simplicity. For 
making effective treatment decisions, adding complex-
ity or granularity seldom improved patient or provider 
understanding of degree of control or whether action was 
needed. The users valued intuitiveness over fine detail.
Smoothing the data in the line graph allowed us to 
emphasize mean blood pressure trends—which most 
accurately predict clinical outcomes—making degree of 
BP control more apparent to our users. Not only is the 
mean more apparent but so are changes in the BP trend. 
The smoothing line helped patients and physicians deem-
phasize variability fluctuations that had low clinical 
significance.

Limitations
First, the work was done in a single academic health care 
organization in two primary care departments (family 
medicine and general internal medicine) where the work-
ing prototype is deployed in a single EHR. However, this 
tool has promise for scaling across the non-commercial 
or commercial EHR environment as the designs could be 
integrated given the right technical supports. Second, we 
took a primary care perspective during the design pro-
cess as the majority of hypertension care is provided in 
the primary care setting [26]. However, we recognize that 
other specialist perspectives may have different require-
ments for how best to visualize BP measurements.

Page 12 of 14

Table 3  Design features, decisions, and rationale

*FG, Focus group; HC, Human factors and cognition; RT, Research team

Design feature
Final design decision
Rationale [Source]*

Blood pressure plot

Style of plot
Use a line graph
Unnecessary to introduce a novel design. Use a format with which all users are already 
familiar. [RT]

Denoting specific sources 
of BP readings
Use two symbols to denote BP data as “home” or “office” readings
Unique symbols for additional possible data sources—beyond home and office measure-
ments—could lead to confusion. [RT]
Physicians reported specific differentiation beyond home and office measurements was 
unnecessary as some sources are already evident due to their density (e.g., high density 
inpatient or operative values). [FG]

2-line paradigm (systolic and diastolic), mixing both home and office readings, with the 
source differentiated by two symbols
4-line paradigm could result in overlap and visual confusion. [RT]

Goal ranges
Add filled goal range bands on the graphical display to denote systolic and diastolic goal 
ranges
Allows of the visual centres of the brain to employ the pre-attentive attributes of color and 
2-dimentsional position to judge control at a glance [16]. [RT]

Create goal ranges which are adjustable on a per patient basis
Goal ranges can vary for special populations or for patients with specific symptoms. [FG]

Out of range
No additional affordances aside from data points being outside the goal range bands
Additional affordances, such as colored points or fills, were found to be distracting or 
unnecessary. [FG]

Color
Add colored goal range bands which match colored systolic and diastolic points and lines
Strong patient preference for use of color. [FG]
Creates a like-with-like paradigm for fast visual processing to determine if points are within 
or outside goal ranges [16]. [RT]

Use a two-color scheme of mint (#008471) for systolic BP measurements and cocoa 
(#9C652B) for diastolic measurements
Color scheme needs to be colorblind-safe and avoid conflict with existing color scheme in 
the EHR. [RT]

Data and how to handle it

Data table
Include a data table to show the corresponding values for each point on the graphical 
display
Preferences of both patients and physicians for the inclusion of a data table with the meas-
urement values. [FG]

Data density
Use a display which can accommodate 62 data points
A future with high density home BP measurements will require a display of sufficient size 
to aggregate and visualize the data. A proposal for data density was developed and 
presented in Table 2. [RT]

Missing data
Use a dashed line on the line graph when > 10% of consecutive data points are missing
The current potential for large amounts of missing data is high as home BP measurement is 
only beginning to become more common and missing data needs to be clearly denoted. 
[RT]

Smoothing data
Use a LOWESS algorithm to smooth data and add smoothing line to graphical display
Patients overweigh the impact of variability and outliers in their BP measurements [18, 19] 
while variability has been shown to have much less clinical significance, compared to 
mean BP [24]. [RT]

Annotations
Add an annotation timeline onto which use-generated annotations can be organized
The research team, patients, and physicians recognized the value of user-generated annota-
tions for tracking behavioral changes impacting BP not easily captured elsewhere. [RT, FG]

Medication timeline
Incorporate a medication timeline so users can understand the impact of medication 
changes on BP measurements
The medication timeline we previously designed [25] can provide users with additional 
context which is currently unavailable. Patients found the timeline was intuitive to use 
and provided additional context to their BP measurements. [RT, FG]

Scrubber bar
Use a scrubber bar which links the various elements of the display
Patients found the scrubber bar helped link the various elements of the display (graphical 
display, data table, and medication timeline) into a more coherent story. [RT, FG]

Page 13 of 14
	

Future directions
Further efforts should include adding the ability to mod-
ify the goal range for special patient categories (diabetes 
or chronic kidney disease), for different age groups (pedi-
atric and geriatric), and to individualize for patients who 
have symptoms (dizziness from low BP) or other special 
characteristics. We recommend further work to include 
provider or patient annotations within the timeline, and 
to develop machine language linguistic summary anno-
tations that would foster action to improve BP control 
(e.g., “Contact your provider soon to consider treatment 
changes to improve BP control.”).

Conclusions
We iteratively developed a data display specifically 
designed to encourage shared decision making between 
hypertensive patients and their healthcare providers. 
This could help us overcome the clinical inertia that often 
results in a lack of treatment intensification, thus lead-
ing to better care for the 35 million Americans who have 
hypertension but do not have their blood pressure under 
control.