Original Paper

Preventing Postpartum Smoking Relapse Among Inner City
Women: Development of a Theory-Based and Evidence-Guided
Text Messaging Intervention

Kuang-Yi Wen1; Suzanne M Miller1; Linda Kilby2; Linda Fleisher3; Tanisha D Belton1; Gem Roy1; Enrique Hernandez4

1Fox Chase Cancer Center/Temple University Health System, Cancer Prevention and Control, Philadelphia, PA, United States
2Manager of the Women, Infants and Children (WIC) Program in Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States
3The Center for Injury Research and Prevention, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States
4Temple University School of Medicine, Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive Sciences, Philadelphia, PA, United States

Suzanne M Miller
Fox Chase Cancer Center/Temple University Health System
Cancer Prevention and Control
333 Cottman Avenue
Philadelphia, PA, 19111
United States
Phone: 1 215 728 4069
Fax: 1 215 214 1651

Methods

Overview

With use of a user-centered approach, the intervention
development followed a series of iterative steps to ensure that
all content was understandable and evidence-based. Guided by
the C-SHIP framework and health communication best practices,
the text messaging intervention was developed through a
systematic process that included needs assessment interviews,
followed by an iterative cycling through text message drafting,
revision through health literacy evaluation, review by target
community interviews via cognitive response interviews,
scientific advisory panel evaluation and feedback, and message
revision, followed in turn by usability testing of the entire
program.

The order of the development processes was established from
our research team’s multimedia intervention development
experience [47,48] and the relevant literature [43,49] to ensure
the integration of formative research, pretesting content, pilot
testing,and the involvement of stakeholders. The following
sections detail each phase of the developmental process. The
final intervention product (Txt2commit) is also described. This
study was approved by the Institutional Review Board at Fox
Chase Cancer Center.

The Cognitive-Social Health Information Processing
Model

Constructs from the C-SHIP model were used to guide the
intervention development strategy and content. The C-SHIP
model offers a unifying theoretical framework for assessing and

JMIR Res Protoc 2014 | vol. 3 | iss. 2 | e20 | p. 2

addressing the psychosocial relapse factors typically experienced
by postpartum women [50-52]. The model is built on cumulative
findings and theorizing from diverse relevant sub-areas of
cognitive-behavioral science and evidence-based psychosocial
interventions, and integrates key cognitive and affective
processes. Guided by this model, we identified 5 areas of
psychosocial relapse risk factors among low-income, minority
women: (1) low knowledge and perceived risk for relapse, (2)
inadequate decisional balance (low pros and high cons of
cessation), (3) high affect (distress), (4) negative beliefs (low
self-efficacy and fatalistic beliefs), and (5) lack of
self-regulatory, practical, and social support strategies. Over
the past decade, a sizable literature has accumulated to support
the role of these factors in undermining smoking behavior,
acting as barriers of self-initiated cessation and enrollment in
smoking programs, and decreasing quit rates and maintenance
of smoking abstinence [18,53-56]

Phase 1: Needs Assessment Individual Interviews

Participants (N=30) were recruited via flyers and staff referrals
at 3 Women, Infants, and Children (WIC) clinics located in the
inner city Philadelphia region. Interested women were invited
to participate if they: (1) were 18 years of age or older, (2) had
quit smoking for at least 1 pregnancy, and (3) had given birth
to at least 1 child in the past 3 years. Interviews lasted
approximately 20 minutes and included specific questions
addressing the experiences, motivators, and techniques that had
helped women maintain smoking abstinence after pregnancy,
as well as personal, social, and environmental factors that
triggered a postpartum relapse. Their mobile phone and text
message use and preferences were also obtained. Upon
completion of the interview, participants received a $20 gift
card as compensation for their time and input.

Following an initial review of the interview transcripts, the
research team developed a coding scheme based on the C-SHIP
model. Responses categorized under C-SHIP were coded into
1 of the 5 psychosocial relapse risk factors. Subcategories in
each domain were established as relevant themes emerged from
the data. The intention behind coding responses into the C-SHIP
processes was to systematically assess the major psychosocial
relapse risk factors and identify the unique pattern of challenges
faced by low-income, inner city women during the postpartum
period.This information was used to guide the development of
the Txt2commit intervention text message content.

Phase 2: Text Message Content Development

As reported above, text message content development was
grounded in the C-SHIP theoretical model and guided by a
formative research approach through a needs assessment
interview phase with the target population. In addition, we
conducted a comprehensive literature review, as well as an
evidence-based guideline search for the potential adoption of
existing materials to adapt to the target population. Content
component constructs included factors such as messages for
increasing awareness of the risks associated with smoking on
infant’s health (knowledge), techniques for controlling exposure
to stressful cues that trigger the urge to lapse/relapse (affective
distress), reinforcing beliefs about the woman’s ability to sustain
smoking absence (self-efficacy), considering the consequences

of continued smoking (decisional balance), and identifying new
behaviors to be substituted for smoking-related activities
(self-regulatory skills). To respond effectively to situations in
which the participant required an instant message to deal with
craving or lapse situations, text messages were developed to
offer strategies and emotional support to cope with craving/lapse
situations and strategies for how to get back on track.

Phase 3: Health Literacy Evaluation

To ensure that the messages were designed for a low
health-literate audience, 2 health literacy experts systematically
evaluated all drafted messages using software and their health
literacy expertise. The program Health Literacy Advisor (Health
Literacy Innovations, LLC) was used to scan and highlight the
text for complex terms, complex health terms, polysyllabic
words (ie, words with more than 3 syllables), and long sentences
(ie, sentences with 12 or more words).The findings from the
health literacy analysis were then evaluated by the 2 health
literacy experts and the research team to further revise the text
messages to improve readability.

Phase 4: Message Review Cognitive Response
Interviews

Following the revisions for health literacy, the messages were
reviewed and vetted by participants (N=30) recruited at the 3
WIC offices with the same eligibility criteria identical to those
of the needs assessment phase.Each participant reviewed 21
messages and was asked to think aloud about the messages,
paraphrase the content, and respond to other inquiries and probes
using the cognitive response technique [57]. Specifically,
participants were asked if messages were relevant to them,
understandable, and helpful in a stressful situation, as well as
whether and how they would change the wording of the
messages. Additionally, they rated each message from 1 (very
poor) to 5 (very good) based on how helpful the message would
be if they were inclined to smoke. Upon completion of the
interview, participants received a $20 gift card as compensation
for their time and input. The interview data and field notes were
reviewed by the research team and messages were subsequently
revised according to the participants’ ratings and comments
through a consensus process. Low-rated messages were flagged
for possible removal.

Phase 5: Text Message Scientific Advisory Panel
Review

A multidisciplinary scientific advisory panel was convened to
provide 
further 
insight 
into 
the 
cultural 
sensitivity,
appropriateness, and message appeal of the intervention for the
target population. The panel (N=7) was composed of smoking
cessation professionals, with expertise in psychosocial behavior,
health communication, WIC management, and community
perspectives. Panel members were provided with a list of
messages (with information on revisions made in the health
literacy evaluation process and suggestions made by
participants), and the C-SHIP coding guide for each message.
Members of the advisory panel evaluated the appropriateness
of the content of each of the messages and provided their
recommended revisions to the wording and readability of each
message from their individual perspective and expertise. The

JMIR Res Protoc 2014 | vol. 3 | iss. 2 | e20 | p. 3

research team then reviewed the advisors’comments and made
necessary modifications to produce the final program.

Phase 6: 1-Week Usability Testing

Ten participants, with the same eligibility criteria identical to
those of the needs assessment phase, were recruited to pretest
the program for usability testing following the scientific advisory
review phase. The program was delivered over 1 week.
Participants were provided with phones equipped with text
messaging service and were instructed as follows: complete
(open and confirm receipt of) 7 system-initiated messages (1
per day), and initiate 3 crave (described below) and 3 lapse
message requests (described below) during the 1-week testing
phase. Participants were debriefed individually by research staff
at the conclusion of the usability testing and received a $20 gift
card as compensation for their time and input. They were asked
to provide the following overall feedback: system-initiated text
message understandability, cultural appropriateness of text
message wording, ease of use of crave and lapse functions, and
problems encountered in use of the program. Each participant
was also asked to provide additional comments concerning the
intrusiveness, timing, and general burden imposed by using the
program. Feedback was compiled and evaluated by the research
team to determine whether adjustments in the messages, system,
or study procedures warranted correction or adjustment, with
subsequent implementation of necessary corrections and
adjustments.

Results

Phase 1: Needs Assessment Interviews

The findings of the needs assessment interviews are reported
elsewhere; participant characteristic information is presented
in Table 1. In summary, participants (N=30) expressed the
following reasons for why they resumed or refrained from
smoking following childbirth: (1) motherhood demands (26/30,
87%), (2) partner and family relationships (22/30, 73%), and
(3) the presence of other smokers in the environment (15/30,
50%). Participants reported 4 main strategies that helped them
cope successfullywith postpartum cravings and relapses,
including being informed of smoking risks (26/30, 86%),
maintaining goal-oriented thoughts (18/30, 60%), thinking about
the pros of quitting (26/30, 87%), and receiving positive social
support from families and friends (27/30, 90%).

With regard to phone habits, most participants (21/30, 70%)
had a home phone, but even more were mobile phone users
(25/30, 83%). In addition, 93% (28/30) of participants reported
that they used their mobile phones for texting, and 83% (25/30)
reported that they texted on a daily basis. However, none of the
participants in this population owned a smartphone. Therefore,
our intervention only used text-messaging delivery, which is
compatible with all models of mobile phones. Furthermore,
when inquiring about their attitudes toward text message styles
for a smoking cessation/relapse program, a more formal tone
of content without the use of common text messaging
abbreviations was preferred because it was thought to increase
the creditability of the program. Information gathered from the
needs assessment interviews was synthesized by the research
team to guide the drafting of the text message content.

Phase 2: Message Development

A pool of 204 messages was initially developed based on the
findings of the needs assessment and a review of the relevant
literature.The emerging themes from the needs assessment
content analysis were also integrated into the message drafting.
The C-SHIP model provided a theoretical guide for message
creation because this model indicates specific areas that are
especially relevant for health interventions. Smoking facts from
several evidence-based resources, including the National Cancer
Institute’s fact sheet concerning the harms of smoking, were
identified and extracted to be included within the messages
where appropriate.

The text messaging intervention developed included 3 main
components: low-frequency messages to be sent during the third
trimester (1 per week for engagement before the start of the
main intervention), high-frequency messages to be sent after
participants had given birth (1 message per day for 1 month),
and messages available upon participant request when
experiencing a craving for a cigarette or a lapse into having
smoked one. The messages were systematically and
comprehensively developed to address each component, so that
some messages were specific to the prenatal or postpartum
period and some to the situation of craving or lapsing. The
drafted messages were coded across the 5 C-SHIP constructs
by the research team.

Phase 3: Health Literacy Review

The initial assessment of the 204 text messages identified a
number of issues, including the use of polysyllabic words,
complex health terms, complex nonmedical terms, and long
sentences. After the 2 health literacy experts reviewed and
modified each message in collaboration with the research team,
a second assessment using Health Literacy Advisor revealed a
significant reduction in the following health literacy problems:
a 72% reduction in polysyllabic words, 79% reduction in
complex health terms, 91% reduction in complex nonmedical
terms, and 47% reduction in long sentences. Most of the
complex terms remaining in the text messages were words that
pertained to the message content and the study, such as tobacco,
smoking, and cancer. During the message review interview
phase described below, these words were specifically tested and
found to be readily recognized by study participants, indicating
that they were not difficult to read or understand.

Phase 4: Message Review Cognitive Response
Interviews

Messages were reviewed by 30 women at 3 different WIC clinic
sites using the cognitive response interview technique. Table 1
displays the sample characteristics. Participants provided
specific comments regarding improvements that could be made
to the messages, as well as their general reaction to each
message. This feedback was used to guide message revisions.
For all but 1message, at least 67% (20/30) of participants found
the messages to be understandable. Messages were generally
viewed as helpful, obtaining a mean rating of 4.2 on a 5-point
scale, and 50% of the messages were highly rated (>4.5).
However, 25 messages received lower ratings, as summarized
in Figure 1.These low-rated messages were subsequently either

JMIR Res Protoc 2014 | vol. 3 | iss. 2 | e20 | p. 4

revised (n=8) or eliminated (n=17). We also received universal
agreement from the participants that 2-3 messages per day would
be appropriate during the postpartum period.

Table 1. Background variables for needs assessment and message review interview sample (N=30).

Message review

n (%)

Needs assessment

n (%)

Variable

Race/ethnicity

6 (20)
6 (20)
Hispanic

4 (13.3)
11 (37)
White

19 (63.3)
12 (40)
African American

1 (3.3)
1 (3.3)
Other

Marital status

23 (76.7)
28 (93.3)
Single

4 (13.3)
2 (6.7)
Married/cohabiting

2 (6.7)
0 (0)
Separated

1 (3.3)
0 (0)
Divorced

Income

18 (60)
17 (56.7)
$0-15,000

11 (36.7)
10 (33.3)
$15,000-30,000

0 (0)
3 (10)
$30,000-45,000

1 (3.3)
0 (0)
$45,000-60,000

Education

5 (16.7)
4 (13.3)
8-11 years

16 (53.3)
14 (46.7)
H.S. grad/GED

2 (6.7)
4 (13.3)
Vocational/tech

7 (23.3)
6 (20)
Some college

0 (0)
2 (6.7)
Bachelor’s degree

Health insurance

24 (80)
28 (93.3)
Medical assistance

6 (20)
2 (6.7)
None

10 (33.3)
6 (20)
Employed

14 (46.7)
21 (70)
Home phone owner

25 (83.3)
25 (83.3)
Cell phone owner

Smoking frequency

12 (40)
17 (56.7)
Every day

6 (20)
5 (16.7)
Some days

12 (40)
8 (26.7)
None

JMIR Res Protoc 2014 | vol. 3 | iss. 2 | e20 | p. 5

Figure 1. Steps and results from each development phase. 1Messages may fall under multiple categories; thus, percentages do not sum to 100%. 2Eleven

messages required additional revision to fit within the 159-character limit for text messages. 3Highly rated messages received a mean rating over 4.5

(out of 5) for “Overall Helpful” and were found to be “Helpful If Stressed” by all raters. 4Messages were flagged if they received a mean rating less
than 4 (out of 5) for “Overall Helpful”; these were then identified for possible removal if two-thirds or more of raters found it “Not Helpful If Stressed,”
or designated “Problematic” in all other cases.

JMIR Res Protoc 2014 | vol. 3 | iss. 2 | e20 | p. 6

Phase 5: Text Message Scientific Advisory Panel
Review

All messages were evaluated by the advisory panel in relation
to the relevance of the messages to the population, as well as
their coverage of factors involved in the C-SHIP framework. A
final review of the advisory panel input by the research team

resulted in slight modifications to 50% of the messages and 21
additional messages being eliminated.Table 2 provides examples
of the message revision process and Table 3 provides samples
of final text messages corresponding to the 5 C-SHIP constructs.
For most messages, the basic content of the original message
was retained, but revisions improved the readability and
specificity of the message.

Table 2. Examples of message revision process.

After advisory panel
Comment revision
Participant comment
Health literacy

revision

Original message

Women who don't smoke
live about 15 years more
than women who do smoke.

Research shows that women
who smoke live about 14.5
years less than those who
don't.

“It’s confusing. . . [when] it
says this is about 14.5 years
off their lives.”

Research shows that women
who smoke lose about 14.5
years off their lives.

Research shows that female
smokers lose an average of
14.5 years off their lives be-
cause of smoking.

The American Lung Associ-
ation reports that smoking
during pregnancy is the rea-
son for 10% of all infant
deaths.

None
"Good message. Gives peo-
ple info about the risks of
smoking. It makes pregnant
moms think about their un-
born child."

The American Lung Associ-
ation reports that smoking
during pregnancy is the rea-
son for 10% of all infant
deaths.

The American Lung Associ-
ation reports that smoking
during pregnancy accounts
for 10% of all infant deaths.

By not smoking, you will
feel healthy and fresh in-
stead of tired and drained.
Stay on the right path to a
healthier you!

Would you rather feel tired
and have less energy be-
cause you smoke? Or feel
healthy and rejuvenated as
a nonsmoker? Stay on the
right path to a healthier you!

None
Think about it. Would you
rather feel tired and have
less energy, or healthy and
rejuvenated? You're on the
right path to a healthier you!

Think about it. Would you
rather feel tired and less en-
ergized, or healthy and reju-
venated? You're on the right
path to a healthier you!

Table 3. Samples of final text messages across 5 C-SHIP constructs.a

Self-regulation

/social support

Beliefs
Distress
Decisional balance
Knowledge

Put away ashtrays, matches,
and lighters. Trade them for
things that remind you not
to smoke, like a list of rea-
sons for quitting, or a family
photo.

Smoking while pregnant
puts your baby at higher risk
for ear infections and asthma
attacks. Be glad you chose
to quit!

Feeling extra stressed and
grouchy today? Try playing
soft music to help you relax.
It may help calm any sudden
urges and relax you and
your fussy baby.

Caring for a baby takes a lot
of energy! If you do not
smoke, you will feel more
active during the day to play
with your baby.

Kids whose parents smoke
get bronchitis and pneumo-
nia much more often.

Make sure your car and
home are smoke free. Do it
for yourself and others, espe-
cially for your baby.

At the end of each day, think
about how you didn't smoke
at all. Be thankful for that
moment. It will make your
thoughts of success stronger.

It is normal to feel stressed
with a new baby in the
household. Remember to
make “me” time!

If you hope to have more
children, now is the time to
quit. Smoking raises your
chance of having trouble
getting pregnant again.

With each cigarette, you
breathe in more than 4000
chemicals. Don’t be fooled,
all forms of tobacco can hurt
you and your baby.

People who lift weights have
spotters. You too should
have a spotter! Pick some-
one you trust to support you
and help you to stay smoke
free.

You quit smoking for a rea-
son. Think about this reason
often. It will never be less
true, but it could become
less important if you forget
about it.

Do not worry if you are
gaining a few pounds.
Weight gain is normal when
you stop smoking. Keep a
healthy diet and talk to your
doctor if you are concerned.

Not smoking makes you a
better role model for your
kids. A child raised by a
nonsmoker is less likely to
start smoking. Stay smoke
free for your baby.

Babies whose mothers
smoked during pregnancy
are up to three times as like-
ly to die from sudden infant
death syndrome (SIDS) as
babies of nonsmokers.

aSome messages may fall under multiple categories.

Phase 6: 1-Week Usability Testing

Ten participants were recruited from the same 3 WIC clinic
sites as in the interview phases to participate in a 1-week
usability testing session. Each participant was provided with a
mobile phone and instructions for mobile phone and message
use. Each participant received 7 system-initiated messages over
a 1-week period and was instructed to initiate 3 crave and 3
lapse message requests. Among the 10 enrolled participants, 8

successfully completed the testing and responded to the
evaluation interview. All 8 participants identified the messages
as helpful and reported being satisfied with the messages, as
well as with the crave and lapse functions. They all stated that
they would use the program and recommend it to others. They
also suggested changes, including making the system-initiated
messages more frequent (3 per day) and adding voice and video
messages to the program. Based on participants’ feedback, the
research team finalized the “Txt2commit” program, which

JMIR Res Protoc 2014 | vol. 3 | iss. 2 | e20 | p. 7

provided: (1) 1 text message per week during the prenatal period
(27 weeks gestation and on) to enhance and sustain program
engagement, (2) 3 text messages daily during the first
postpartum month, and (3) crave and lapse functions so that
participants could request additional messages when feeling the
need. The final program was tested in a larger feasibility pilot
study, results of which will be reported elsewhere for ease of
communication. Figure 1 provides an illustration of the order
and findings throughout different phases of the development,
including the changes of the numbers of messages over time.

Discussion

The development of the Txt2commit mobile text messaging
intervention relied on a combination of theory and evidence,
systematic attention to health literacy issues, and integration of
a user-centered approach throughout the developmental process.
This research adds to the emerging literature supporting the
critical role of a comprehensive strategy for the design of
mHealth interventions and highlights the value of a scientifically
based health literacy focus. This study aimed to stimulate
discussion among target users about how to use mobile text
messaging as a platform for delivering smoking cessation
interventions for underserved postpartum women, as well as
demonstrate a rigorous process of development to ensure that
the messages are potent, easily understood, and delivered in an
effective manner. Using an iterative developmental process, a
multidisciplinary team, and user input, the text messaging
intervention was progressively developed and refined based on
formative participatory evaluations to achieve a culturally—and
linguistically—appropriate psychosocial program that provides
relevant content to underserved women who quit smoking during
their pregnancies.

The needs assessment, message review, and cognitive response
interviews were all essential to identify gaps in women’s needs
in postpartum and smoking relapse trigger stressors, which
resulted in relevant and appropriate text messaging content and
format. Furthermore, the health literacy review and painstaking
editing significantly increased the readability and accessibility
of the information. The final usability testing confirmed the
preferred frequency of message delivery and the usefulness of
the crave and lapse functions, prior to the final production and
pilot study implementation. The intensity and functionalities of
our final intervention program design is comparable to most of
the studies in the text messaging smoking cessation literature,
with an average of 1-5 text messages per day and the
availabilities of crave and lapse functions [28,58,59].

As technology advances become more common as a delivery
mechanism for health behavior interventions, it is important to
recognize that the impact will depend on the interdigitation of
well-designed content, technology, and end user input.Given
advances in the field of behavior medicine, it has become
increasingly clear that knowledge alone does not change
behavior. Likewise, technology alone does not change behavior,
but the combination of theory-based best practice approaches

in content development, coupled with technology, increases
access and reach and has great promise for improving outcomes
through attention to evidence-based cessation barriers. The
strengths of the study include the use of an established C-SHIP
theoretical framework, application of health communication
and health literacy best practices to guide text messaging content
drafting and revision, extensive input from a community-based
sample at various steps in development, and the use of a
multidisciplinary expert advisory board. This approach extends
our prior research, where the C-SHIP framework was
successfully applied to smoking cessation and multimedia
intervention behavior change studies [47,50,52,60,61]. To our
knowledge, this is the first text messaging intervention guided
by the C-SHIP framework. Because research has shown that
messaging interventions designed by using behavioral theory
are more likely to be successful [29], this paper contributes to
the field by demonstrating how to apply a well-established
framework in the context of new technology delivery. We also
found that using a guiding theoretical framework, coupled with
input from a diverse group of stakeholders, was helpful during
the message revision process, particularly in terms of better
addressing the target conceptual construct contained in each
message as well as keeping the message within the limit of 160
characters.

This study provides insight into the systematic development of
text messaging interventions for use in other behavior change
contexts. The prevalence of mobile phone use and text
messaging among the present underserved sample indicates the
potential of text messaging as a delivery modality in a variety
of health settings and behaviors. Therefore, the development
concepts used in this intervention should be applicable to the
development process for other health-related mHealth
interventions, especially those targeted to diverse underserved
populations. One important lesson learned was that although
text messaging was an acceptable channel to communicate
smoking relapse messages, postpartum women indicated their
preference that these messages be written using formal language
to highlight the credibility of the information.

As the vision of eHealth/mHealth is beginning to be actualized,
development must also allow for the involvement of “consumers
with diverse perspectives, circumstances, capacities, and
experiences in the design of, evidence-based eHealth tools”
[62]. This study supports the importance of a comprehensive
developmental process as an essential foundational basis for
rigorous research in this area [47-49,63]. The goal is to ensure
that the intervention messages are appropriate, relevant, and
understandable, with a view to developing meaningful
interventions that can be evaluated for effectiveness, over the
short and long term. With the increasing prevalence of mobile
phone and text messaging use in underserved inner city
populations in the United States and in low-income countries
at the global level, harnessing this technological approach has
great potential to address health disparities and improve health
outcomes in a variety of challenging behavioral contexts.

JMIR Res Protoc 2014 | vol. 3 | iss. 2 | e20 | p. 8