Internet-based cognitive behavior therapy for eating disorders – 
Development and feasibility evaluation 

Anne-Charlotte Wiberg a,*, Ata Ghaderi b, Hanna Broberg Danielsson c, Kousha Safarzadeh d, 
Thomas Parling e, Per Carlbring f, Magdalena Jansson g, Elisabeth Welch a 

a Centre for Psychiatry Research, Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm Health Care Services, Stockholm County Council, Stockholm, 
Sweden 
b Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, Nobels v¨ag 9, 17177 Stockholm, Sweden 
c eHealth Institute, Linnaeus University, 391 82 Kalmar, Sweden 
d Student Health Center, Lund University, Sandgatan 3, 22350 Lund, Sweden 
e Centre for Psychiatry Research, Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm Health Care Services, Stockholm County Council, Stockholm, 
Sweden 
f Department of Psychology, Stockholm University, 106 91 Stockholm, Sweden 
g Stockholm Center for Eating Disorders, Stockholm County Council, Wollmar Yxkullsgatan 27B, 118 50 Stockholm, Sweden   

3. Methods 

This study was undertaken in two stages. In the first, Stage I, ICBT-E 
was developed and evaluated with a user-centered design process. 
Subsequently, in Stage II the feasibility and preliminary outcome of 
ICBT-E were evaluated. The study was approved by the Swedish Ethical 
Review Authority (2018/1221-31/5). 

3.1. Stage I: development of ICBT-E 

The design and development processes were based on a multidisci­
plinary and user-centred design approach (Graham et al., 2019). The 
international standard for usability, ISO 9241-11 (2018) and the defi­
nition of usability by Nielsen (1993) was used in this study to provide 
guidance on usability. The ISO 9241-11 describes usability as “the extent 
to which a product can be used by specified users to achieve specified 
goals with effectiveness, efficiency, and satisfaction in a specified 
context of use” (ISO, 2018). According to Nielsen, usability includes the 
five quality components: learnability, efficiency, memorability, errors 
and satisfaction (Nielsen, 1993). 

3.1.1. Participants and setting 
The project team for multidisciplinary collaboration consisted of 
researchers from three universities with different research backgrounds 
covering psychiatry, psychology, and health informatics and clinicians 
working with the treatment of EDs at the ED clinic Stockholm Center for 
Eating Disorders (SCED), Stockholm County council, in Sweden. Study 
participants were patients and individuals with current or previous 
history of ED (n = 30), who were recruited from the outpatient unit at 
SCED and from a patient organization. The inclusion criteria for 
participation were adults with current or lifetime diagnoses of EDs. In 
addition, clinicians working in the outpatient unit at SCED were 
recruited (n = 8). Informed consent was obtained from all participants 

3

before participation. 

3.1.2. Data collection 
Focus groups were conducted with clinicians, patients and in­
dividuals from the patient organization. The interview guide that was 
used was semi-structured and contained questions about usability and 
how the content was presented in the digital format (see online sup­
plement). In addition, Think Aloud observations were carried out to 
assess usability and to further understand the end-user needs. Think 
Aloud is a method in which the participants are observed while per­
forming predetermined tasks and where they concurrently express their 
thoughts and reactions. The method is commonly used in usability 
studies. It provides extensive, detailed data and only a small sample of 
five to eight users is needed to identify 80–85 % of usability issues 
(Nielsen, 1994). Focus groups were audio recorded and Think Aloud 
observations were audio and video recorded using screen-capture 
software. 
Usability was also evaluated through the System Usability Scale 
(SUS; (Brooke, 1996), which measures usability based on ISO 9241-11 
(2018). 

3.1.3. Development process 
The UCD process, was carried out in accordance with the recom­
mendations of Graham et al. (2019) and consisted of the following eight 
phases 1) Development of a prototype, 2) Evaluation, 3) Refine and 
develop, 4) Evaluation, 5) Refine and develop, implementation, 6) 
Ongoing feedback collected from users, 7) Refine and develop, and 
finally 8) Validate. The clinical content was written and structured by 
researchers and clinicians. The written content was entered into the 
platform together with pictures and graphics. To optimize interactivity, 
access and efficiency, most of the content was delivered as films and 
infographics. In addition, exercises, self-assessment and self-monitoring 
were developed, based on the CBT-E treatment model. The final version 
of ICBT-E was produced after feedback from repeated focus group in­
terviews (four in total) and 16 Think Aloud observations as well as a 
validation of the usability by 24 patients who had used the treatment for 
approximately 5 weeks. 

3.1.4. Data analysis 
Screen- and audio recordings from focus groups and Think Aloud 
observations were transcribed by two transcribers. The goal of the an­
alyses was to generate insights that would enable refinement of ICBT-E. 
Transcription was therefore not performed verbatim, which thereby 
allowed for a more rapid processing (Mann et al., 2018). 
For the thematic analysis, transcripts were reviewed and transcribed 
verbatim, including participants' nonverbal behavior. The thematic 
analysis was conducted according to Braun and Clarke's model (Braun 
and Clarke, 2006), using both an inductive and deductive approach. 
Transcripts were read multiple times by two authors (AW and MJ) to 
familiarize themselves with and to gain an overview of the entire ma­
terial. All transcripts were coded by AW and 60 % of the transcripts were 
independently double-coded by AW and MJ to ensure consistency. 
Coded data was sorted by AW and MJ into tentative themes, based on 
semantic level. The themes were reviewed, which generated modified 
and newfound themes, to enable a narrative for the findings that was 
representative of the data. The themes were given final names, consis­
tent with their content. Regular meetings with the research team (EW, 
AG, HBD, AW, MJ) were held throughout the entire process, to discuss 
and refine the analyses. NVivo 12 software package, produced by QSR 
International, was used for coding and analysis. 

3.2. Stage II: feasibility and preliminary outcome of ICBT-E 

3.2.1. Design 
A single-group open trial was conducted to examine the feasibility 
and preliminary outcome of ICBT-E. Clinical outcome data was collected 

on three occasions; at pre- treatment, at post-treatment and at 3-month 
follow-up. 

3.2.2. Participants 
All patients seeking treatment at the Stockholm Centre for eating 
disorders (SCED) meeting the criteria for full or subthreshold BN or BED 
according to DSM-5 (American Psychiatric Association, 2013) were 
offered participation in the study until a total of 50 patients were 
recruited. Patients were excluded due to pregnancy, concurrent alcohol 
or substance abuse, psychotic and/or suicidal symptoms in the absence 
of qualified care, severe problems with reading and writing and/or any 
other severe psychological and/or physical impairment that could 
hinder participation. Diagnosis were initially assessed by well-trained 
clinicians using the Mini International Neuropsychiatric Interview 
(MINI; (Sheehan et al., 1998) according to local practice at SCED, and 
then verified by the SCID-5 interview (First et al., 2016) conducted by a 
trained research nurse. Data collection was initiated on June 6th, 2019 
and terminated on June 16th 2021. The characteristics of the patients 
are presented in Table 1. 

3.2.3. Measures 

3.2.3.1. Feasibility of ICBT-E. The feasibility assessment included 
quantitative measures of rates of recruitment, treatment acceptability, 
treatment credibility and expectancy, treatment adherence and occur­
rence of negative effects due to treatment. 
Feasibility of the study procedures was determined based on 
recruitment to the study, and retention to follow-up at the endpoint (3 
months). 
Acceptability of ICBT-E was assessed at post-treatment, with a visual 
analog scale (VAS) from 0 (representing minimal acceptability) to 10 
(representing maximum acceptability). 
An adapted version of the Credibility/Expectancy Questionnaire 
(CEQ) (Devilly and Borkovec, 2000) was used to evaluate credibility and 
expectancy. The CEQ has demonstrated adequate psychometric prop­
erties with regard to internal consistency, inter-item correlations and 
test-rest reliability (Devilly and Borkovec, 2000). 
Adherence was calculated as completers, i.e., patients who 
completed 80 % or more of the chapters. The mean number of completed 
chapters was also coded. 
Occurrence of negative effects due to treatment was assessed using 
The Negative Effects Questionnaire (NEQ) - 20-item version (Rozental 
et al., 2019b). The NEQ is a self-administered measure of negative ef­
fects and differentiates between negative effects that are attributed to 

Table 1 
The characteristics of the participants.   

M(SD; range) 

Age 
34.5(10.1; 19–61) 
Gender 
N(%) 
Female 
39(95.1) 
Male 
2(4.9) 
Education level  
Nine-year compulsory school 
2(4.9) 
High school 
14(34.1) 
University and above 
25(61) 
Occupation  
Student 
10(24.4) 
Employed 
29(70.7) 
Self-employed 
1(2.4) 
Long-term sick leave 
1(2.4) 
Diagnosis  
BN 
23(56.1) 
BED 
12(29.3) 
Subthreshold BN or BED 
6(14.6) 

Notes: Values presented outside of parenthesis = number of participants, 
Values presented within parenthesis = percentage of participants, BN =
Bulimia Nervosa, BED = Binge Eating Disorder. 

4

treatment and those possibly caused by other circumstances. The items 
are distributed across five factors: symptoms, quality, dependency, 
stigma and hopelessness. 
Participants also completed a socio-demographic questionnaire de­
tailing age, computer literacy, education, employment status, income 
and residence area at baseline. 

3.2.3.2. Primary 
outcome 
measures. Primary 
outcome 
variables 
included the clinical presentation of full or subthreshold BN or BED 
according to DSM-5 assessed by The SCID-5 (First et al., 2016), and key 
behavioral features as well as core psychopathology of EDs measured by 
the Eating Disorders Examination Questionnaire (EDE-Q; (Fairburn and 
Beglin, 2008). 
The SCID-5 (First et al., 2016) is a semi-structured interview instru­
ment for assessment of current and lifetime of psychopathology ac­
cording to DSM-5. In this study, the Research Version of the SCID-5 
(module H) was used in order to assess and establish ED diagnosis. 
The EDE-Q (6.0) (Fairburn and Beglin, 2008) measures the core pa­
thology of EDs, conceptualized as the excessive importance of weight 
and shape in determining self-worth, as well as the frequency of core ED 
behaviors, including binge eating and compensatory behaviors. It pro­
vides a global score as well as four subscales: Restraint, Eating Concern, 
Shape Concern and Weight Concern. Initial and later reports indicate 
satisfactory psychometric properties such as concurrent validity, inter­
nal consistency, temporal stability and test-retest reliability (Fairburn 
and Beglin, 1994; Welch et al., 2011). 

3.2.3.3. Secondary outcome measures. The Clinical Impairment Assess­
ment (CIA) (3.0) (Bohn et al., 2008) is a self-report measure developed to 
assess the psychosocial impairment secondary to ED features. CIA has 
shown satisfactory psychometric properties in terms of internal consis­
tency, test-rest reliability, construct and discriminant validity and 
sensitivity to change (Bohn et al., 2008; Welch et al., 2011). 
The Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ-9) (Kroenke et al., 2001) is a 
brief measure used to screen for depression. The internal reliability of 
the questionnaire as well as the test-retest reliability have been found to 
be satisfactory (Kroenke et al., 2001). 

3.2.4. Procedure 
Patients who were recruited to internet-based treatment after a 
standardized basic assessment according to local practice at SCED were 
invited to participate in the study by clinicians. Participants received 
written and verbal information about the study with the opportunity to 
ask questions, and prior to inclusion they signed an informed consent. 
This was followed by the SCID diagnostic interview, conducted by a 
trained research nurse by telephone, in order to confirm the diagnosis, to 
ensure that participants met the inclusion criteria for participation and 
did not meet any exclusion criteria for participation. Subsequently, 
participants completed baseline self-report measures online. At the end 
of the treatment (after 15 weeks) and at 3 months' follow-up, the 
research nurse conducted a SCID diagnostic interview again with par­
ticipants by telephone and self-report online measures were completed. 
The patients were consecutively recruited from the outpatient unit for 
adults at the SCED, from May 2019 until October 2020. 

3.2.5. Data analysis 
All the statistical analyses were conducted in SPSS version 26. Data 
were initially screened by means of descriptive statistics. To test the 
normality of outcome variable, descriptive statistics and graphic pre­
sentations (e.g., histogram distribution and quantile-quantile (Q-Q) 
plots) were used. Treatment outcome was analyzed using generalized 
linear mixed modeling (GLMM), with a fixed effect of time and repeated 
observations nested within subjects, and random intercept, with the 
except of the EDE-Q weight concern, for which the random effect was 
excluded as the model did not converge with a random effect. 

Descriptive statistics and Q-Q plots showed reasonably normal distri­
bution of most outcome variables and normal distribution and an 
identity link were thus specified in the analysis. For binge eating epi­
sodes, a Poisson distribution with a log link was used. The GLMM can 
effectively handle non-normal outcome distributions, and mixed models 
are inherently intention-to-treat. The proportions of participants who 
completed post- and follow-up-assessment in this study were 58–78 % 
and 70–74 % respectively. Within-group effect sizes were also calculated 
using Cohen's d. 
Remission from ED at post-treatment and 3-month follow-up was 
established by the SCID-5 diagnostic interview. Full remission was 
defined as no symptoms or criteria being met for a sustained period of 
time. Partial remission was defined as only some remaining symptoms, 
compared to meeting the criteria for a full diagnosis of ED at baseline. 
Duration criterion for partial remission and full remission was three 
months. Additionally, to obtain full remission, EDE-Q global score had 
to be within one standard deviation (SD) from the general population 
mean (≤2.83) (Welch et al., 2011). 
Furthermore, in order to assess whether the observed change in EDE- 
Q Global score among the participants were of clinical significance, the 
two-step criterion for clinically significant change, proposed by Jacob­
son and Truax (1991) was used. The Reliable Change Index (RCI) was 
first calculated to ensure that the observed change was not related to 
measurement errors. A reliable change had occurred if RCI was >1.96, 
which corresponds to a 95 % confidence interval. In the next step, a cut- 
off score was determined for the clinical group and the non-clinical 
group in accordance with the commonly used criterion for clinically 
significant change, EDE-Q global score within one SD from the general 
population mean (Fairburn et al., 2015). Participants whose mean EDE- 
Q global score after treatment had crossed the clinical cut-off score of 
≤2.83 had a clinically significant change (Welch et al., 2011). Partici­
pants who passed the cut-off and reached a reliable change were 
considered to be recovered. Those who scored below the cut-off but did 
not reach reliable change were considered to be non-reliably recovered. 
Participants who reached reliable change but did not pass the cut-off 
were considered to be improved, while those who neither passed the 
cut-off nor achieved reliable change were considered to be unchanged. 
Participants who achieved reliable change in the opposite direction were 
considered to be deteriorated. 

4. Results 

4.1. Stage I: Development of ICBT-E 

4.1.1. Participant characteristics 
In total, 14 individuals participated in focus groups and Think aloud 
observations. Six participants were individuals with the experience of an 
ED and 8 were clinicians at SCED. Participants age ranged from 30 to 62 
with a mean age of 43.3 (SD = 10.1). There were 3 males and 11 females. 
One participant was a university student and 13 had completed uni­
versity education. Usability evaluation through SUS was performed by 
24 patients, ranging in age from 19 to 57 with a mean age of 35.1 (SD =
12.5). Two were males and 22 were females. One of these participants 
had completed nine-year compulsory school, 9 had completed high 
school and 14 had completed university education. 

4.1.2. Qualitative results 
The guidance of ISO 9241-11 (2018) and Nielsen's definition of us­
ability (Nielsen, 1993) during the UCD process contributed to identifi­
cation and correction of usability issues, grammatical errors and 
technical bugs, and the final version of ICBT-E was found to be usable. 
The UCD approach also enabled the content to be adapted to the users' 
needs and preferences. The thematic analysis generated six overarching 
themes: Accessibility, Navigation, Design, Transformation of Information, 
Patient-Facilitator Interaction and Elements of Interventions. 
The theme Accessibility reflected the fact that participants 

5

appreciated the opportunity to use the treatment after it had ended. 
They highlighted the need to be able to log in easily to the treatment, 
because registrations are carried out several times a day. Login with 
BankID, a national digital identification service, was experienced as 
inefficient by some participants and several expressed the idea that 
registration in an app would be preferable: 

“I think that […] I probably should have used an app myself, that I 
download from the Internet, and where you can record food and then 
fill out later. Because it's pretty complicated to log on […] with 
BankID every time. Especially when you are going to do it several 
times a day”. 

Regarding Navigation, the majority of participants found it easy to 
navigate through the program. Some had difficulty in understanding the 
structure initially, but learned it after a short time of use, during the 
Think Aloud observations: 

“Now I'm beginning to learn this, how it works here. Meal plan” 
(finds right away). “Instruction, right.” (Fills in) 

However, a usability issue that was observed was that participants 
had difficulty navigating between Modules, Chapters and Forms, which 
was addressed with a clarified structure for headings. 
Comments on the program's graphic Design were mostly positive. 
However, a usability problem in relation to interaction design of self- 
monitoring of meals emerged. The initial self-monitoring form gave a 
deficient overview of the eating and was redesigned in several rounds. 
The final version was designed with a timeline that allowed registration 
of all meals as they occurred during the day: 

“So, when we do it on paper they fill it out, then it is possible to put it 
in like, in the right place in time or what to say. Here it's like 
something else, it will be something else. Like something outside.” 

Within the theme Transformation of Information, it became clear that 
the majority of participants appreciated that the content was largely 
presented via film, although some stated that they assimilate informa­
tion better via text. This resulted in each film being provided with a PDF 
file with a summary of the film's content in text: 

“I thought it seemed maybe a little too long and too much informa­
tion, and then I thought oh, such good information! I would like to 
have this in writing, I thought.” 

The Patient-Facilitator Interaction, via email messages in the platform, 
was perceived as valuable, as was the facilitator's insight into the pa­
tient's work with the various exercises in the program. Comments on the 
communication between patient and facilitator concerned whether it 
should be related to the content of the treatment or to other areas of life. 
The majority of participants favored the communication being related to 
the content of the treatment: 

“As a patient I also think it's good because this is what you need to 
focus on. And then I think that it is easier to float off somewhere if 
this is given, that is, if you are given the opportunity to do so. I think 
it's good that it's controlled, that this is what we do.” 

Feedback within the theme Elements of Interventions included the 
opinion that the Problem-solving exercise could be difficult to under­
stand, which resulted in a new film with a patient and therapist going 
through Problem-solving together. One intervention that several par­
ticipants reported as difficult to do independently at home was weekly 
weighing, but the participants felt that the content of the film and text 
could support carrying out the exercise: 

“Yes, but ’I haven't weighed myself in such a long time, and I go a 
little crazy when I weigh myself, I haven't managed to do this', a little 
elevated anxiety. But this is a very good film, that explains it and I 

guess that you also get some kind of graph that helps you see that a 
fluctuating weight is a stable weight.” 

The most central feedback from users during Phase 6 (ongoing 
feedback collected from users), which was not included in the thematic 
analysis, concerned the self-monitoring form. Although the form was 
refined in several rounds, some users reported usability issues related to 
its presentation in mobile phones. These users perceived that the self- 
monitoring form required too much scrolling, the overview of meals 
was deficient and it was difficult to enter the information in the text 
fields. However, the functions included in the treatment software plat­
form did not enable the design of a self-monitoring form with optimal 
usability. Therefore, the form was not redesigned in phase 7. Conse­
quently, it was left open for patients to digitally self-monitor their meals 
or to use traditional pen-and-paper self-monitoring. 

4.1.3. System Usability Scale 
A total of 24 patients responded to the System usability scale, with a 
mean score of 76.46 (SD 14.20; range 47.50–100.00). Thus, the usability 
of the program was within the acceptable range for better systems 
(Bangor et al., 2008). 

4.1.4. The internet-based treatment N¨ARA 

Table 2 presents the structure and content of the ICBT-E program 
(named N¨ARA). 
The duration of the treatment is 12–15 weeks and consists of five 
modules which by large correspond to the four stages in CBT-E. Patients 
are instructed to spend at least 30 min every day working with the 
treatment content. The facilitator logs on once a week to review the 
patient's exercises, and provides feedback, with the role of supporting 
and guiding the patient to proceed with the treatment. 
The initial treatment interventions include introduction, psycho­
education, case-formulation, daily self-monitoring of food-intake, 
establishing eating plans and regular eating patterns, weekly weigh­
ing, alternative activities (i.e. meaningful behaviors that are incompat­
ible with disordered eating behaviors), and problem solving. These 
interventions are followed up by an in depth evaluation of the patient's 
progress (i.e., the second phase of CBT-E). Issues considered together 
with the patient include the patients' engagement in ICBT-E, commit­
ment to the treatment plan, external circumstances that may hinder or 
enhance progress and so forth. At this point, termination of ICBT-E, or 
transfer to other treatment options might be considered in light of 
inadequate progress. In the latter part of the ICBT-E, effort is devoted to 
the topics of self-esteem, addressing all forms of dieting, and shape and 
weight concerns. The patient is encouraged to engage in activities that 
are completely independent of food-intake, shape or weight, and 
incompatible with disordered eating behavior. Dietary rules and rigid 
eating habits are identified and revisited, and finally, issues concerning 
shape and weight are addressed by identifying and modifying unhelpful 
behaviors and thoughts. The treatment is terminated with the enactment 
of a maintenance plan detailing progress, maintenance of gains and 
future hurdles. 
After completion of treatment, the patient has access to the treatment 
content for six months, without support or facilitation by a facilitator. 
Three months after the end of treatment, a follow-up session is con­
ducted via video. 

4.2. Stage II: Feasibility and preliminary outcome of ICBT-E 

4.2.1. Study flow and sample characteristics 

Fig. 1 shows the study flow. During this period, a total of 202 patients 
with full or subthreshold BN or BED according to the DSM-5 started the 
ICBT-E. Of those 202 patients, 50 (25 %) agreed to participate in the 
study, 5 (10 %) were excluded due to missing data at baseline, 4 (8 %) 
withdrew from the study and 35–37 (70–74 %) completed all or portions 
of the follow-up assessments at the endpoint. The patients were 

6

recruited from 05/2019 until 10/2020. The target sample size (n = 50) 
was recruited with a mean rate of 3.1 participants per month for the 16- 
month recruitment period. The characteristics of the patients are pre­
sented in Table 1. 

4.2.2. Feasibility 
The mean score based on the visual analog scale (0−10) for the 
acceptability of ICBT-E was 7.76 (SD = 1.86). Credibility and expectancy 
ratings on the two rating scales, ranging from 1 to 9 and from 0 to 100 %, 
showed moderate to high overall rating. In terms of how credible the 
treatment was perceived, the mean ratings were 7.02 (SD = 1.77) (how 
logical does the intervention offered to you seem?), 6.27 (SD = 1.60) 
(how successfully do you think this intervention will be in reducing your 
eating disorder symptoms?) and 6.41 (SD = 1.86) (how confident would 
you be in recommending this intervention to a friend who experiences 
similar problems?). The mean ratings of expectancy were 66.34 (SD =
20.71) (by the end of the treatment, how much improvement in your 
symptoms do you think will occur?), 6.07 (SD = 1.89) (how much do 
you really feel that the intervention will help you reduce your eating 
disorder symptoms?) and 62.44 (SD = 22.89) (by the end of the treat­
ment, how much improvement in your symptoms do you really feel will 
occur?). 
Of the 41 participants, 30 (73.2 %) completed the treatment (defined 
as completion of at least 80 % of the chapters). The mean number of 
completed chapters was 8.68 (SD = 2.06) out of 10 chapters. The reasons 
for dropping out among the 11 participants who did not complete the 
treatment were the need for higher level of care (n = 5), personal or 
familial circumstances (n = 4), low motivation to change (n = 1), or 
unknown reason (n = 1). 
Negative effects due to treatment were noted as measured by the 
NEQ, with a frequency of negative effects from treatment ranging from 
0 to 13, with a mean of 3.62 (SD = 2.98) (score range: 0–20). Most 
adverse effects included an increase in symptoms due to treatment, 
which 24 (70.6 %) participants experienced. The most frequently re­
ported question was “I experienced more anxiety”, reported by 15 (44.1 
%) participants. The total negative impact of treatment (i.e., how im­
pactful each patient viewed any experienced negative effects) varied 
greatly, ranging from 0 to 33 with a mean of 7.12 (SD = 7.41) (score 
range: 0–80). 

4.2.3. Treatment outcome 
Significant reductions in core ED symptomology, functional 
impairment as well as depressive symptoms were noted from baseline to 
end of the treatment. The results were maintained at follow-up. Fig. 2 
depict overviews of the clinical outcome data. GLMM-estimated means 
and standard errors of the outcome variables and time points are pre­
sented in Table 3. 
Results from the GLMM-analysis showed significant time effects for 
EDE-Q global score and its subscales: EDE-Q global score (F(2, 109) =
56.23, p < .001), Restraint (F(2, 109) = 39.08, p < .001), Eating concern 
(F(2, 109) = 34.91, p < .001), Shape concern (F(2, 109) = 32.34, p <
.001) and Weight concern (F(2, 109) = 28.99, p < .001). Significant time 
effects for objective binge eating episodes reported in EDE-Q was also 
found (F(2, 109) = 34.16, p < .001). The main effect of time was 
accounted by changes from pre- to post-treatment, reflected in non- 
overlap of the 95 % confidence interval of the mean for pre- versus 
post-treatment, while the 95 % confidence interval for the treatment 
assessment at post-treatment and 3-month follow up were basically 
identical. At post-treatment, abstinence rates from binge eating episodes 
assessed by EDE-Q for the last 28 days, was 28.6 % (n = 10). Among the 
participants, 46.3 % (n = 19) reported self-induced vomiting at baseline 
and abstinence rate post-treatment was 74.3 % (n = 26). At the 3-month 
follow-up, the abstinence rates from binge eating increased to 44.4 % (n 
= 16). Abstinence rates from self-induced vomiting increased to 80.6 % 
(n = 29). 
In terms of remission from ED diagnosis, 48.7 % (n = 19) of the 

Table 2 
Overview of the treatment.  

Week 
Module 
Chapter 
Content 

1 
1 
1: Preparing for 
treatment 
- Education about the treatment 
and EDs. 
- Interventions to help patients 
decide to change. 
2 
2 
2: Starting well and 
achieving early change 
- Education about ED maintenance. 
- Creating a personalised case 
formulation. 
- Establishing real-time self- 
monitoring of food intake. 
- Education about body weight, 
weight change and support to 
begin to perform weekly weighing 
at home. 
3,4  
3: Regular eating 
- Education about regular eating. 
- Interventions to establishing a 
pattern of regular eating and meal 
plan. 
5  
4: Problem behaviors 
and alternative activities 
- Interventions to identify problem 
behaviors. 
- Introducing alternative activities 
(i.e. helpful substitute behaviors in 
replacement for problem 
behaviors). 
6  
5: Problem solving 
- Education about the proactive 
problem-solving technique. 
- Practice of proactive problem- 
solving skills. 
7 
3 
6: Taking stock and 
planning for the rest of 
the treatment 

- Review of progress and 
engagement within the treatment. 
- Identifying barriers to change 
- Review and revision of case 
formulation 
- Identifying problems to be 
addressed in module 4. 
8 
4 
7: Self-evaluation 
- Education about self-evaluation. 
- Creating the self-evaluation, 
represented by the pie chart. 
- Identifying new personal domains 
of self-evaluation. 
- Interventions to identify activities 
or areas of life that the patient 
wants to engage in. 
9  
8: Dietary restraint & 
rules, and control over 
eating 

- Education about dietary restraint, 
dietary rules and control over 
eating. 
- Identifying and breaking 
remaining dietary rules. 
- Identifying and reintroducing 
avoided food. 
- Engaging in new activities or 
areas of life. 
10,11  
9: Problems with body 
image 
- Education about over-evaluation 
of shape and weight and its 
consequences. 
- Monitoring body-checking 
behaviors, body avoidance and 
feeling fat. 
- Interventions to reduce body- 
checking behaviors, body 
avoidance and feeling fat. 
- Engaging in new activities or 
areas of life. 
12 
5 
10. Ending well 
- Education about realistic 
expectation about time after 
treatment, and prevention and 
handling relapse. 
- Review of progress 
- Review and revision of case 
formulation 
- Identify remaining ED features 
and plan for how these will be 
addressed 
- Formulation of a maintenance- 
and relapse prevention plan.  

7

Fig. 1. Study flow.  

Fig. 2. Outcome on the EDE-Q global score and the CIA at pre- post-, and at three months follow up.  

8

participants reached partial remission at post treatment and 7.7 % (n =
3) reached full remission. At 3-month follow up, 38.9 % (n = 14) were in 
partial remission whereas 19.4 % (n = 7) were in full remission. 

Fig. 3 presents the proportion of participants who were recovered, 
non-reliably recovered, improved or unchanged at post-treatment and at 
3-month follow-up. At post-treatment, 60 % (n = 21) of participants 
were recovered, 5.7 % (n = 2) were non-reliably recovered and 5.7 % (n 
= 2) were improved. The proportion of participants who were un­
changed was 28.6 % (n = 10). At 3-month follow up, 55.6 % (n = 20) 
were recovered, 8.3 % (n = 3) were non-reliably recovered, 8.3 % (n =
3) were improved and 27.8 % (n = 10) were unchanged. No participant 
deteriorated between baseline and follow-up. 
The GLMM-analyses also showed a significant decrease in psycho­
social impairment due to ED across time, measured by CIA: (F(2,110) =

38.21, p < .001) and a significant decrease in depression measured with 
the PHQ-9: (F(2,102) = 7.85, p = .001), with the main effect of time 
observed from pre- to post treatment. 

5. Discussion 

This study describes the multidisciplinary, user-centered design 
process of guided ICBT-E for patients with full or subthreshold BN or 
BED. The study also presents findings from the evaluation of the feasi­
bility and preliminary outcome of the treatment in a clinical setting. 

5.1. Development of ICBT-E 

The UCD process of ICBT-E included a total of eight phases with 
development, evaluation, ongoing feedback after implementation, 
refinement and validation (Graham et al., 2019), and contributed to 
improvements and adaptions of the program, according to the needs and 
perceptions of end-users. User feedback and improvements were 
described within the six overarching theme, Accessibility, Navigation, 
Design, Transformation of information, Patient-Facilitator Interaction 
and Elements of interventions. 
Based on Nielsens five quality components, learnability, efficiency, 
memorability, errors and satisfaction (Nielsen, 1993) the final version of 
ICBT-E was considered to be usable. The users could easily familiarize 
themselves with the program during the Think aloud observations. They 
could also easily navigate to and accomplish the planned tasks. No se­
vere errors were detected and evaluation by focus groups and Think 
aloud showed that the participants were satisfied using the program. 
When the usability of the program was validated through the System 
Usability Scale (SUS), the usability was found to be within the accept­
able range for good systems (Bangor et al., 2008). The multidisciplinary, 
user-centered design process resulted in a 12–15 week guided internet- 
based treatment, based on evidence-based treatment for EDs, CBT-E. 
Contrary to many other ICBT for ED, the ICBT-E content in this study 
was delivered through various multimedia channels, with the majority 
of the content delivered via video and infographics, according to what 
individuals with EDs prefer (Linardon et al., 2021). Underutilization of 
interactive features in digital interventions and reliance on programs 
that are largely based on text, has in previous studies been suggested to 
affect the outcome of treatment (Nordgreen et al., 2019). Patients have 
also expressed that they dislike reading long texts in digital in­
terventions and often skip over the content. (Nitsch et al., 2019). In 
addition, internet-delivered treatments are often developed and 
disseminated without evaluating usability, and it is currently 

Table 3 
Estimated means (standard errors) and Cohen's d of the outcome variables 
(negative effect sizes indicate deterioration).  

Measure 
Estimated means (standard 
errors) 
Effect size (Cohen's d) 

Pretest 
M(SE) 
Posttest 
M(SE) 
3-month 
follow 
up 
M(SE) 

Pre 
to 
post 

Post to 
3-month 
follow 
up 

Pre to 
3-month 
follow 
up 

EDE-Q 
Global 
score 
3.97 
(0.20) 
2.42 
(0.21) 
2.52 
(0.21) 
1.25 
−0.08 
1.17 

Restraint 
3.39 
(0.25) 
1.55 
(0.26) 
1.73 
(0.26) 
1.20 
- 0.12 
1.08 

Eating 
concern 
3.41 
(0.23) 
1.76 
(0.24) 
1.68 
(0.24) 
1.16 
0.06 
1.21 

Shape 
concern 
4.91 
(0.23) 
3.42 
(0.24) 
3.55 
(0.24) 
0.48 
−0.10 
0.39 

Weight 
concern 
4.22 
(0.21) 
2.95 
(0.21) 
3.15 
(0.22) 
0.99 
−0.16 
0.83 

OBE 
11.26 
(1.38) 
3.57 
(0.68) 
3.27 
(0.63) 
1.11 
0.08 
1.17 

CIA 
30.54 
(1.78) 
17.14 
(1.87) 
17.18 
(1.84) 
1.21 
0.00 
1.20 

PHQ-9 
12.51 
(1.00) 
8.95 
(1.11) 
9.40 
(1.05) 
0.58 
−0.07 
0.50 

Note: EDE-Q global score = global score for The Eating Disorders Examination 
Questionnaire, EDE-Q restraint = restraint subscale, EDE-Q eating concern =
eating concern subscale, EDE-Q shape concern = shape concern subscale, EDE-Q 
weight concern = weight concern subscale, EDE-Q OBE = frequency of objective 
binge eating episodes, CIA = Clinical Impairment Assessment, PHQ-9 = Patient 
Health Questionnaire. 

Fig. 3. Jacobson-Truax plot of clinically significant change at post-treatment and at 3-month follow-up. 
Note. Post-treatment: n = 35, 3-month follow up: n = 36. 

9

recommended that aspects of usability are taken into account early on in 
the development of these treatments (Yogarajah et al., 2020). The pre­
sent findings suggest that the multidisciplinary, user-centered design 
approach is a useful method for the development of digital in­
terventions. Consequently, the prerequisites for use, engagement and 
clinical outcome are optimized so that the potential offered by digital 
interventions can be fully utilized (Barakat et al., 2019; Kushniruk and 
Nohr, 2016). 
After implementation in the clinical setting, most feedback from end- 
users concerned the self-monitoring form of meals, which some patients 
chose not to use due to usability issues. This highlights the need for 
usability and user-centered design principles to be incorporated into the 
development of digital interventions intended for use in healthcare. To 
date, the technical functionality of the platform for ICBT-E does not 
allow the development of a smartphone application as an alternative to 
the self-monitoring of meals, as some participants requested, but various 
alternatives for improving the self-monitoring are being explored. 
However, since usability evaluated by SUS showed that the overall us­
ability of ICBT-E was perceived to be good, and since the program has 
otherwise been adapted to the needs and preferences of end-users, the 
fact that some users perceived a lack of usability in the self-monitoring 
form of meals is not considered to be a barrier to the user engagement 
and adherence to ICBT-E. 

5.2. Feasibility and preliminary outcome of ICBT-E 

In summary, the results of this study indicate that ICBT-E is a feasible 
treatment of BN and BED as specified above. Participation in ICBT-E was 
associated with significant symptom reductions in core ED sympto­
mology, functional impairment as well as depressive symptoms and the 
results were maintained at the 3-month follow-up. 
The study mean recruitment rate of 3.1 participants per month was 
lower than anticipated. The clinic had long waiting times for treatment 
during the study period and the clinicians were therefore under pres­
sure, which may have hampered recruitment of available patients. In 
addition, there was limited availability of facilitators and ICBT-E was a 
recently implemented method that facilitators were unfamiliar to use, 
which may also have contributed to a lower recruitment rate. With 
better conditions in terms of access to treatment for patients, access to 
facilitators and familiarity with the method, a future large-scale effec­
tiveness trial of ICBT-E may be likely feasible. 
ICBT-E was considered highly acceptable, with the mean score for 
acceptability on the VAS of 77.6 %. The treatment rational was rated as 
credible by the majority of the patients and they also expected the 
treatment to yield reasonable to substantial symptom reductions. These 
findings are encouraging, not only because it is adding to the overall 
feasibility of ICBT-E, but also because previous research identified low 
credibility and expectancy as predictors of failure to engage in ICBT for 
BN (Watson et al., 2017). In addition, perceiving ICBT as credible and 
expecting it to be effective has been associated with better adherence, 
treatment response and outcome (El Alaoui et al., 2015; El Alaoui et al., 
2016). Treatment adherence was also satisfactory (73.2 %) compared to 
other internet-based interventions targeting EDs (57.6 %) (Schlegl et al., 
2015), which is especially encouraging since treatment completion is 
lower in “real-world” trials (Byrne et al., 2016). 
Some negative effects of treatment could be noted as measured by 
NEQ, with most negative effects reported in the domain of symptoms. 
Increased stress and anxiety in ICBT-E is expected as exposure to feared 
foods and body image exposure, is included in the treatment. Such 
increased stress and anxiety could be indicative of engagement in 
treatment, and can contribute to greater symptom reductions in the long 
run. In addition, reported frequency of negative effects, such as items 
that investigate increased symptoms due to the intervention, had in 
general none to negligible impact as rated by the patients themselves. 
Most importantly, participation in ICBT-E was associated with sig­
nificant and substantial reductions in core ED symptomology as 

measured by the EDE-Q with significant difference in means scores from 
pre-treatment to 3-months follow up. These findings were mirrored by 
the shift in representation of clinical diagnoses with notable decreases in 
representation of ED diagnosis and increases in remission and recovery 
from baseline to follow up. Of the participants, 58.3 % were in partial or 
full remission according to the SCID-diagnostic interview at 3-month 
follow-up. Based on the criterion by Jacobson and Truax (1991), 55.6 
% of the participants, were recovered and additionally 8.3 % benefited 
from the treatment in terms of improvements. The results are encour­
aging and favorable compared to previous findings of internet-based 
intervention for ED showing clinically significant improvement related 
to EDE-Q of 39 % (Ruwaard et al., 2013) and of 45.7 % in BN symptoms 
(Carrard et al., 2011b). Direct comparisons are however complicated 
due to differences regarding study characteristics. At 3-month follow-up 
abstinence rates from binge eating and self-induced vomiting was 44.4 
% and 80.6 % respectively. This is in line with other guided self-help 
studies for BED showing abstinence rates from binge eating of 40.4 % 
(Linardon, 2018), and favorable compared to guided self-help studies for 
BN showing abstinence rates from binge eating and purging of 31.6 % 
for treatment completers (Linardon and Wade, 2018). In a recent review 
by Pittock et al. (2018), abstinence rates from binge eating ± other 
behaviors were found to be 22.1 to 46.5 %. 
Results were also significant with regard to the other outcome var­
iables indicating sustainable reduction in functional impairment due to 
ED (CIA) and a decrease in depressive symptoms (PHQ-9), similar to 
other studies of internet-based interventions where impairment and 
depression decreased after ED-specific treatment (D¨olemeyer et al., 
2013; Wagner et al., 2016). 
This study showcased the promising potential of ICBT-E, which 
marks a step forward in the endeavor to make evidence-based in­
terventions for ED more widely available and accessible. Previous 
research has shown that a significant proportion of patients with EDs 
intend to use digital interventions for their ED symptoms, especially 
those with BN, and that a significant proportion even prefer digital in­
terventions over face-to-face interventions (Linardon et al., 2020b). 
ICBT-E can bridge reported barriers to treatment such as experiences of 
shame and fear of stigma, geographic and financial barriers, limited 
access to specialized care and long waiting times for treatment (Ali et al., 
2017; Kazdin et al., 2017), and provide treatment at an early stage. The 
benefits of early treatment are substantial for afflicted individuals, 
because early detection and treatment are among the most important 
factors for a good prognosis (Treasure et al., 2015). ICBT-E can also 
reduce costs for mental healthcare, as the digital format requires less 
resources, which enables the allocation of more resources to address 
complex cases. 

5.3. Limitations and future studies 

There are several limitations and areas that should be addressed in 
future research. One limitation of the study in Stage I was the homo­
geneity of the sample considering gender and education level. The ma­
jority of the participants had a high level of education and few men 
participated. Previous studies suggest that men benefit less from ICTB 
(Rozental et al., 2019a) and that less education predicts dropout from 
treatment (Watson et al., 2017). Inclusion of participants with lower 
education level and more men in the study could have shed light towards 
possible strategies that may have enhanced their adherence, engage­
ment and outcome in treatment. 
Furthermore, conclusions regarding the effects of ICBT-E warrants 
careful interpretation of the results, given the study design without 
control condition. Future randomized control trials (RCT) are needed in 
the effort to establish ICBT-E as an effective treatment that enjoys 
equivalent levels of evidence and legitimacy of its face-to-face coun­
terpart CBT-E. Moreover, the vast majority of the sample consisted of 
well-educated females recruited from vicinity of Stockholm. This is not 
representative of the Swedish population that suffer from ED, let alone 

10

the wider global population of patients with ED, which most probably 
differ from this sample with regard to literacy, ethnicity, gender, culture, 
computer and internet proficiency. Although this is an initial feasibility 
study with no claims in generalizability, future research and replication 
studies are warranted in the pursuit to make ICBT-E more accessible to a 
wider audience. 
Moreover, even though the majority of the participants benefited 
from ICBT-E, some of them remained unimproved during the treatment 
and follow-up. Given this, it is critical to inform healthcare providers 
about which patients that should be offered ICBT-E and which should be 
offered other treatment, by examining predictors and moderators of 
outcomes. In addition, testing a stepped care approach would be valu­
able since that could be a useful and cost-effective model for increasing 
patients' access to evidence-based psychological treatments (Nordgreen 
et al., 2016). 
Patients with the diagnosis of AN were excluded which casts shade 
on a treatment that theoretically and at heart is a transdiagnostic 
approach to the treatment of ED. Future investigations into the effec­
tiveness of ICBT-E in treating AN would be an appreciated contribution, 
since AN among adults admittedly is a condition that is particularly 
difficult to treat with an approximate recovery rate of only 25 % in 
clinical outcome studies (Treasure et al., 2020) and high attrition rates 
(Frostad et al., 2018). 
Lastly, some limitations are related to conducting the study in a real- 
world clinical setting and its prevailing conditions, such as high volume 
of referrals to the clinic, long waiting times for assessment and delayed 
treatment which made randomization of patients infeasible. Neverthe­
less, conducting the study in a real-world clinical setting brought about 
the benefits that such entails, such as varying degrees of comorbidity 
and severity of EDs due to the study's few exclusion criteria, and 
different degrees of education and level of clinical experience of the 
therapists, which makes the results of the study representative of an 
unselected real-world population. 
In summary, ICBT-E was developed with end-users' preferences in 
mind, in accordance with the identified recommendations, and the 
program is perceived as usable by end-users. The study provides pre­
liminary evidence that ICBT-E, delivered in a clinical setting, is a feasible 
treatment with potential for promising outcomes for patients with BN, 
BED and subthreshold BN and BED.