Original Paper

The Development of an mHealth Tool for Children With Long-term
Illness to Enable Person-Centered Communication:User-Centered
Design Approach

Angelica Wiljén1,2,3, MSc; John Eric Chaplin4, PhD; Vanessa Crine2, MSc; William Jobe5, PhD; Ensa Johnson6,7,
PhD; Katarina Karlsson8, PhD; Tomas Lindroth9, PhD; Anneli Schwarz10, PhD; Margaretha Stenmarker4,11,12, PhD;
Gunilla Thunberg2,13,14, PhD; Joakim Öhlén1,2,15, PhD; Stefan Nilsson1,2, PhD

1Institute of Health and Care Sciences, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden
2University of Gothenburg Centre for Person-Centred Care, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden
3Department of Paediatrics, Region Västra Götaland, Södra Älvsborg Hospital, Borås, Sweden
4Department of Paediatrics, Institute for Clinical Sciences, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden
5Department of Informatics, School of Business, Economics and IT, University West, Trollhättan, Sweden
6Centre for Augmentative and Alternative Communication, University of Pretoria, Pretoria, South Africa
7Department of Inclusive Education, University of South Africa, Pretoria, South Africa
8Department of Health Sciences, Faculty of Caring Science, Work Life and Social Welfare, University of Borås, Borås, Sweden
9Department of Applied Information Technology, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden
10Department of Research, Education and Innovation, Region Västra Götaland, Södra Älvsborg Hospital, Borås, Sweden
11Department of Paediatrics, Region Jönköping County, Jönköping, Sweden
12Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden
13Dart Centre for Augmentative and Alternative Communication and Assistive Technology, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden
14Speech and Language Pathology Unit, Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg,
Sweden
15Palliative Centre, Sahlgrenska University Hospital Region Västra Götaland, Gothenburg, Sweden

Stefan Nilsson, PhD
Institute of Health and Care Sciences
Sahlgrenska Academy
University of Gothenburg
Box 457
Gothenburg, 405 30
Sweden
Phone: 46 738538951

Methods

The Adapted UCD Process

UCD is an iterative process that focuses on an understanding
of the users and their context in all stages of design and

development. In UCD, the design project is based on an explicit
understanding of the users, tasks, and environments. Therefore,
the team involved in the design process should include a range
of professionals across multiple disciplines, as well as domain
experts, stakeholders, and the users themselves [41,42]. This is
a way of increasing the impact of mHealth tool usability for
children and adolescents [27,28]. During the development
process of PicPecc, a set of key principles were in focus:
dynamism, iteration, creativity, openness to change, and a look
forward toward future evaluation and implementation [43].

From a user-centered perspective, it is central to not only involve
the user but also to have a point of departure in the existing
practice where the artifact is intended to be used [44]. Thus,
being user-centered means having a focus on multiple users and
on the context in which the use takes place. Thus, in a care
situation involving children, it is central to weave in the
experiences of children, their parents, and health care
professionals [41]. In addition to users, UCD stresses the
importance of having different types of experts in the design
process. We are not referring primarily to information
technology experts but to experts in the areas that the design
process may affect.

From a UCD perspective, design is not just the activities
conducted together with a user or activities for which the digital
artifact is developed. A central part of the process is to set the
framework for the project and define its starting point. It is said
that design is vision driven and intentional, meaning it is
consciously aimed toward change [45]. Thus, the design process
starts as soon as the principles for the project are defined and
data are collected and lasts beyond the implementation of the
artifact in the practice it was designed for.

In this study, the starting point was a design approach that
departs from 3 child-centered standpoints. The first is to design
a solution that solves the problem of children’s symptoms being
underreported and not identified [8,9], treated, or relieved [10],
causing children to experience unnecessary distress. The second
is symptom assessment being key to symptom relief, whereby
children should have the opportunity to self-assess and report
their symptoms. Thus, this study centers on children’s ability
to self-report their symptoms. The third standpoint was to follow
the principles of UD to identify the expectations and
requirements of the health care professionals who would analyze
the data and the parents’ attitude toward using the app and,
finally, to use a mock-up of the app to evaluate how children
from different backgrounds, speaking different languages, and
with different long-term illnesses benefit from the app.

Inspired by previous research, the UCD process included
feedback, suggestions, and observations from a multidisciplinary
research team, children, parents, and health care professionals
in 2 phases [46]. Figure 1 shows a visual presentation of the 2
phases.

Children with cancer could not participate in all stages of UCD
for medical and ethical reasons. An adapted version of UCD
was used where the children’s, parents’, and health care
professionals’ voices were represented in stages 2 and 3 via
interview data. Subsequently, the adapted UCD was followed
in the development of the PicPecc mHealth tool, comprising 2
sequential phases.

Phase 1 involved 3 stages. For example, in stage 1 of phase 1,
interviews with children with long-term illnesses and their
parents were conducted, with participants sharing their lived
experiences to guide the development of the PicPecc app. Health
care professionals who worked within the system also provided
input on their needs and the perceived needs of the children
when caring for them. The children’s needs and wishes were
the departure points for all the following design activities,
followed by the results from the parents and health care
professionals.

Stage 2 of phase 1 involved a workshop where researchers with
theoretical and clinical intervention knowledge presented
information on person-centered care, UD, and evidence-based
practices on the use of mHealth tools in various settings, such
as high-, low-, and middle-income countries, to inform the
development needs of the specific intervention (PicPecc).

In stage 3 of phase 1, a workshop was held with the design team
(information technology personnel). These designers provided
valuable input in terms of which electronic platforms might best

suit the needs of the specific tool (PicPecc). In addition, this
stage involved using the analyzed data from the first 2 stages
as guidance for the development of PicPecc. The task of the
experts and developers was to highlight existing evidence and
indicate what technical possibilities were available to meet the
children’s requirements. The design of the app was decided
along with experts in UD [47] to facilitate accessibility for all
users, regardless of their ability and needs.

In phase 2, we followed principles from previous research and
included a pilot test with children, parents, and health care
professionals who tested our ideas for the first time with a
mock-up (prototype) of the developed PicPecc [48]. Stage 1
(forming part of phase 2) involved interviews with children,
parents, and health care professionals to evaluate the PicPecc
app (Figure 1). The participants tested the ideas and reflected
on the flow of the PicPecc app, commenting on whether the app
was easy or fun to use. The participants also described whether
the app was adaptable to their individual needs.

The Shier [49] Pathway to Participation model (2001) is often
used to assess commitment to youth participation. The model
contains 5 levels of participation, where level 5 means that
children share power and responsibility in the development of
an intervention. The present adapted UCD reaches level 3 on
the Shier [49] model; that is, children’s voices are taken into
account in the process of developing the intervention.

Ethical Approval

After ethical approval was obtained from the Swedish Ethical
Review Authority (reference 2019-02392; 2020-02601;
2020-06226), children and parents were contacted and informed
about the study through assigned persons working in the
pediatric wards where the children were treated. Each assigned
person was informed about the study by the researchers.

Phase 1

Stage 1 Semistructured Interviews and a Focus Group

Research Question
How do children with long-term illnesses, their parents, and
health care professionals prefer to communicate about symptoms
and symptom relief, and what symptoms are important to talk
about?

Participants
Participants were recruited from 5 different hospitals in Sweden.
Purposive sampling of children, parents, and health care
professionals was used according to the following eligibility
criteria: (1) an understanding of Swedish or English, (2) an age
of 5 to 17 years, (3) a cancer or congenital heart defects
diagnosis, and (4) an experience of illness. We chose to include
children with an expected experience of a range of symptoms.
Children in need of end-of-life care were excluded. Parents of
children diagnosed with cancer or congenital heart defects, as
well as health care professionals working with children with
these diagnoses, were also involved in this study. Health care
professionals with <6 months of work experience in pediatrics
were excluded. Participants in this first stage of phase 1 included
7 children with cancer, 8 parents, and 19 health care
professionals (Table 1).

Procedure
The health care professionals were contacted by the last author
(SN) and invited to participate. Interviews were conducted with
children and parents at the hospital where the child had a
scheduled appointment for treatment. Written consent was
obtained from health care professionals and parents, and assent
was obtained from each child. The interviews were conducted
by the first (AW) and last authors (SN) and were audio recorded
or video recorded (Textbox 1). The young children were given
the option to be interviewed together with their parents or to be
interviewed alone. To hear the child’s own voice, the child was
asked to answer the question first, after which the parent could

answer the question to add depth to what the child said and to
add the parents’view. Some health care professionals also chose
to do their interviews in dyads, as they often worked together.
Upon receiving consent, a suitable time and a meeting place
were decided. The health care professionals’ interviews were
conducted at their workplace. A focus group with 4 health care
professionals was also conducted, where the first author (AW)
was the moderator and the last author (SN) was an observer. At
the end of each interview, all participants were asked to
prioritize the different symptoms according to their importance
on a 5-point Likert scale (Table 2). The symptoms were
identified as important, in accordance with previous literature
[50].

Textbox 1. Topics and questions of the semistructured interviews.

Data collection

•
Stage 1 (phase 1)

Topics

•
Existing support, existing scales, and experiences of symptoms and conditions

•
A communicative support tool as support when dealing with multiple symptoms and conditions

Questions

•
Tell me about a good and a bad care situation?

•
What symptoms have you experienced (children), and which symptoms do you see (adults)?

•
How do you measure what the child feels (adults)?

•
What kind of support is there when dealing with multiple symptoms and conditions?

Table 2. Prioritization of symptoms that need to be assessed in a new way (N=27).

Values, mean
(SD)
Strongly agree (5),
n (%)
Agree (4), n (%)
Neutral (3), n (%)
Disagree (2), n (%)
Strongly disagree (1),
n (%)
Symptoms

4.56 (0.57)
16 (59)
10 (37)
1 (4)
0 (0)
0 (0)
Anxiety

3.67 (0.90)
5 (19)
11 (41)
8 (30)
3 (11)
0 (0)
Fatigue

4.41 (0.56)
12 (44)
14 (52)
1 (4)
0 (0)
0 (0)
Fear

3.70 (1.24)
10 (37)
6 (22)
5 (19)
5 (19)
1 (4)
Nausea

3.41 (1.23)
6 (22)
8 (30)
6 (22)
5 (19)
2 (7)
Pain

4 (0.72)
6 (22)
16 (59)
4 (15)
1 (4)
0 (0)
Well-being

Multi-perspective data with children, parents, and health care
professionals 
were 
collected 
through 
semistructured
interviews—one-on-one children–parent, parent-parent, and
health care professional dyads and in a focus group. Multiple
data collection approaches were a viable option to ensure
different perspectives [51]. Multi-perspective data also enabled
us to compare different participants’ perspectives and feelings
regarding symptom relief and explore the possible underlying
reasons for differences.

The individual interviews with the children (4/7, 57%) lasted
between 17 and 44 minutes (mean 35, SD 10.56 minutes) and
interviews with the parents (5/8, 63%) lasted between 26 and
37 minutes (mean 30.40, SD 5.39 minutes), one of the interviews
were a dyad interview with a mom and a dad. The dyad
interviews with the child and parent (3/12, 25%) lasted between

29 and 60 minutes (mean 45.33, SD 12.71 minutes). The
individual interviews with health care professionals (11/19,
58%) varied in length from 28 to 53 minutes (mean 38.36, SD
8.16 minutes). The health care professionals’ dyad interviews
were 53 minutes and 58 minutes long (mean 55.50, SD 2.5
minutes), respectively. A focus group was conducted with 21%
(4/19) of the health care professionals to generate more variation
and multiple perspectives in the collected data. The length of
the focus group interview was 66 minutes.

Data Analysis: Qualitative Data
All audio data were transcribed verbatim and complemented
with video recorded information. The qualitative analysis
software NVivo 12 Pro (QSR International) was used to arrange
and rearrange the codes into patterns and relationships.

The analysis process started with the transcribed interviews
being read intensely by the first (AW) and third (VC) authors
to obtain a sense of the whole, in accordance with interpretive
description [51]. During the preliminary reading, words and
sentences that corresponded to the aim of the analysis were
underlined according to a broad inductive coding. The different
groups of participants were first coded sequentially, starting
with the children’s interviews, followed by the parents, and
finally, the health care professionals. The initial coding was
used as a basis for subsequent coding; however, new codes were
added for parents’and health care professionals’interview data.
Tentative patterns and relationships were identified. A broader
analysis was subsequently made where questions such as, “What
does it mean?” and “What are they talking about?” were asked.
Continued synthesis of the tentative patterns facilitated the
understanding of various interpretations of the topic. The data
reflected not only common patterns but also ideas and beliefs.
The final step of the analysis was the definition of themes [52].

During the analytical process, the researchers were mindful that
their preunderstanding could affect the data and, therefore,
returned to the data repeatedly for confirmation of the emerging
patterns and relationships. These patterns and relationships were
discussed within the research team to reach a consensus about
relevant findings and to ask, “What are we not seeing?” The
analytical process from the first phase gave us an understanding
of the unmet needs and wishes mentioned by participants when
dealing with multiple symptoms.

Member checking was conducted with the participants as an
important step to improve qualitative validity [51].

Interpretive description supports a credible and transparent
process in qualitative research [52,53]. The researchers need to
make their preconceptions regarding the research topic
transparent; that is, recognize that these preconceptions can
influence data collection or data analysis. This was performed
in an interdisciplinary research group with members who had
several years of experience in interaction design, information
systems, nursing sciences, pediatric oncology care, psychology,
communication, and UD. We strove to be as open as possible
to the participants’ perspectives and experiences.

Data Analysis: Quantitative Data
All assessments from the participants were described using
descriptive statistics; that is, with numbers, percentages, and
means.

Stage 2 Workshop

The project team arranged a workshop to ensure theoretical
relevance 
and 
anchoring 
regarding 
relevant 
clinical,
person-centered, and design-related perspectives.

Research Question
Which theoretical knowledge and findings from the research
are relevant to consider in the development and research of the
app?

The workshop was designed explicitly to prevent such
shortcomings from occurring in this project. To ensure that our
app of UD principles was acceptable in a different societal
context, a collaboration was established with university partners

in South Africa. We wanted to investigate whether our app
based on the principles of UD was acceptable in a completely
different context. This context also includes a multilingual and
multicultural environment that poses additional challenges.

Participants
The workshop was attended by 19 researchers, 12 health care
professionals, and 8 postgraduate students from Sweden and
South Africa in areas related to the project.

Procedures
Topics 
of 
discussion 
involved 
person-centered 
care,
communication of children in health care settings, principles of
UD and communication support, and the design and
development of mHealth tools.

The workshop was video recorded, and notes were taken;
mapping of relevant theoretical perspectives and patterns were
conducted.

Data Analysis
The data collected from the workshop were analyzed using
manifest analysis [54]. In the analysis process, important areas
were selected to be used in stage 3. This workshop provided
knowledge of the conditions for using an app in low- and
middle-income countries. The workshop also mapped existing
apps and in-depth knowledge of person-centered care and UD.

Stage 3 Workshop

We determined the possible user journey for the PicPecc app
by means of a user experience (UX) workshop.

Research Question
What is a possible user journey for the PicPecc app?

Participants
Throughout the project, the children were included in the
research and design whenever possible. However, these children
had decreased immune function and experienced fatigue. This
made it difficult to include them in design events such as
workshops. However, other users of the mHealth tool (eg,
nurses) participated in the design workshop. Web-based
participation was considered and can be of value [55,56].
However, some activities were not suited for web-based settings,
and web-based participatory design settings have proved to be
challenging [57].

A total of 3 UX specialists, 2 speech and language therapists (a
PhD and an associate professor), 3 pediatric nurses (a PhD
student, a PhD, and an associate professor), 2 researchers in
information systems (both PhDs), and a health psychologist
specialist (an associate professor) participated in stage 3.

Procedures
A full day, face-to-face interprofessional workshop was held in
Gothenburg, Sweden, to collate the assumptions of the different
researchers into a design report. The workshop had a structured
agenda comprising 3 distinct parts. The first part comprised a
value proposition canvas with the purpose of pinpointing the
value offering [58]. The second part focused on impact mapping
with the purpose of tracing how and who created the impact [59]. Finally, a user journey was undertaken to create a

visualization of a user’s possible interaction with the app over
time [60].

Data Analysis
This workshop provided knowledge for the developers and gave
them a basis for developing a mock-up.

Phase 2—Stage 1 Semistructured Interviews and Focus
Groups

Phase 2 involved only 1 stage where children with cancer or
congenital heart defects, their parents, and health care
professionals provided input on the mock-up version of the
PicPecc app.

Research Question

How can the PicPecc app provide children, parents, and health
care professionals support when communicating about
symptoms and symptom relief?

Participants

Participants were recruited from 5 different hospitals in Sweden.
The recruitment process was similar to stage 1 of phase 1. These
participants were also invited to participate in phase 2, resulting
in 6 children, 5 parents, and 11 health care professionals (Table
1) taking part in both phases. Additional recruitment of
participants was conducted. Finally, the sample comprised 10
children with cancer or congenital heart defects, 9 parents, and
21 health care professionals (Table 1).

Procedure

The procedure was similar to stage 1 (phase 1), apart from using
the mock-up as stimuli material (Textbox 2).

Textbox 2. Topics and questions of the semistructured interviews.

Data collection

•
Stage 1 (phase 2)

Topics

•
Process of engaging with the communicative support tool

•
Existing websites for support and tips when dealing with symptoms and conditions

Questions

•
What do you want to know from the support tool?

•
What do you want help with?

•
What motivations do you and the children need to use it?

•
When can it be useful?

•
Did you understand everything?

The individual interviews with the children (7/10, 70%) varied
from 18 to 57 minutes (mean 37.29, SD 11.80 minutes), the
individual interviews with the parents (6/9, 67%) varied from
19 to 62 minutes (mean 37.67, SD 13.77 minutes), and the dyad
interviews with a child and a parent (3/16, 19%) were between
23 and 41 minutes (mean 32.33, SD 7.36 minutes). The
individual interviews with the health care professionals (11/21,
52%) varied from 26 to 71 minutes (mean 44.82, SD 10.60
minutes) and the 2 focus group interviews with health care
professionals (10/21, 48%) lasted between 37 and 75 minutes
(mean 56, SD 19 minutes). In the 2 focus groups, 30% (3/10)
of participants took part in the first focus group, and 70% (7/10)
of participants took part in the second focus group.

Data Analysis: Qualitative Data

In stage 1 of phase 2, all participants were presented with the
prototype of the mHealth tool that was developed according to
the key findings of the first phase.

We followed the same data analysis procedures as in stage 1 of
phase 1.

Results

Phase 1

Stage 1—Qualitative Findings

The results are presented with quotations, which are presented
with a unique code and general information about the speaker.

Significant Standpoints to Address
Children and parents emphasized a need to address both the
positive and negative sides of daily life. Health care
professionals focused to a higher degree on symptoms in need
of treatment and requested valid instruments. Participants
stressed highlighting symptoms beyond pain; for example,
anxiety or fear.

All participants talked about the ways in which symptoms
interrupt the child’s life. Self-care strategies are needed to help
children cope:

Not meeting friends and not even doing...video games
make them feel sick. That’s it. And some of them feel

ill as long as the therapy lasts. [310; female
pediatrician]

Different Perspectives on Provided and Perceived Support
Children expressed a wish to receive support for self-care;
however, there seems to be a disparity between what children
want and what health care professionals provide. Parents
experienced a lack of support from health care professionals
who worked closely with the child. Health care professionals
focused more on physiological symptoms, whereas children
and parents indicated that they also needed psychosocial support.
Children and parents also appreciated when the nurses provided
emotional support and took time and stayed a little longer to
talk about entertaining topics such as movies or books:

For me it was most useful and valuable when the
nurses stayed for a bit and just talked. I saw that some
of the nurses had an easy way of talking with my
daughter about movies and...they were more open for
conversations. [202; mother of a 14-year-old girl]

Need for an Easy Tool to Assess Symptoms and Facilitate
Communication
Children, parents, and health care professionals expressed a
need for an easy way of assessing the child’s symptoms in a
reliable manner based on multimodal strategies. For example,
health care professionals were satisfied with existing pain scales
but at the same time stated that these scales were not used as
often as they could be. Health care professionals needed an easy
way of assessing pain or other symptoms, as they sometimes
doubted the assessment given by the child, based on the signs
and behavior they could observe. Parents wished that they could
facilitate the children’s expression of how tired or how much
pain they experienced in different ways, such as via visual
support. The children wanted to use an easy tool that helped
them explain how they felt, sometimes even without having to
talk because of feeling tired or experiencing pain:

It would be easier, instead of talking all the time, you
could just show them. [104; boy, 16 years]
If you have a bad day, then you may not want someone
to ask how you feel. Then you can write it in the app.
That would be a smart thing. [102; girl, 14 years]

Creating Safety and Reaching the Child’s Voice
All participants stressed the importance of safety in the situation.
From the child’s perspective, this was expressed as a need to
feel that they have control over the situation. Parents and health
care professionals described wanting to access the child’s needs
and wishes; that is, get to the primary source. Children wanted
to feel safe and have a sense of control over the situation. When
they knew what to expect, children could handle their
treatment-related procedures better. Health care professionals
felt they were able to listen to the child’s needs and wishes and,
thereby, provide appropriate help:

I believe in the visual for a child...That the child has
a way to show and express, so that you don’t lean too
much on the parent’s interpretation. [309; female
pediatrician]

Mapping the Journey to Facilitate Recall
The ability to visualize and thereby easily remember the child’s
journey was emphasized. Children, parents, and health care
professionals wanted to measure the aspects of well-being and
not only the negative experiences, as described by the following
adolescent:

It would have been good to have a positive thing, so
that you can see that sometimes you feel well, so you
can see which days during the week are the better
ones. [104; boy, 16 years]
Another perspective mentioned by health care professionals
was the need to retrieve information with the purpose of
providing appropriate symptom relief to the individual child.

Parents stressed the need to strengthen their child’s self-efficacy
using an mHealth tool to prompt and support the child in
symptom relief.

Quantitative Results
All symptoms were found to be important, as shown in Table
2.

Stage 2

The presentations and the following discussion created a
common ground regarding four areas. (1) The discussion
resulted in a mutual understanding of the most relevant
symptoms (anxiety, fatigue, fear, nausea, and pain), the
assessment of symptoms (Visual Analog Scale, Numerical
Rating Scale, Faces Pain Scale–revised, and Wong–Baker Faces
Pain Rating Scale), and management of symptoms. Regarding
the assessment of symptoms, for instance, the project identified
a need for digital assessment of pain that aligned with the current
assessment method at different hospitals. (2) There was also a
focus on children’s rights, person-centered care, and UD from
an augmentative and alternative communication perspective.
This discussion emphasized the development of an mHealth
tool with communication support and illustrations of specific
actions and text-augmented communication for children of
different ages, cultures, and cognitive capabilities. The idea of
a UD perspective focused on alternative communication became
a central thesis for this project. (3) Another outcome was a
deeper understanding of UCD, where the focus is on the use
situation and how the mHealth tool also must fit into a larger
context of information systems to stay relevant beyond the study
phase. (4) Finally, there was a slightly different discussion on
how to measure the effect of the intervention from a
neurochemistry perspective; that is, the possibility to measure
the effects of the intervention in blood samples.

A meta outcome of the second phase acknowledged the
complexity of the intervention at hand. Designing a
research-anchored mHealth tool from a UD perspective is a
great challenge in itself. Designing something that fits into the
existing care practices and information systems at different
locations increased the complexity even further.

Stage 3

Although the children did not participate in this stage, their
perspectives were central throughout the workshop. From stage

1, the children’s needs and wishes were fundamental to each
part of this study.

The value proposition canvas summarized the different
stakeholders and their pains, gains, and actions. For instance,
from the child’s perspective, a typical symptom would be fear
in relation to the disease. A typical gain would be a visualization
of their symptom journey, and a typical action would be to
assess their well-being. This was followed by detailing the
possible impacts of the app.

The outcome from the workshop was translated into a number
of user stories (participant journeys); that is, a set of
requirements based on different actions that different users want
to perform with the system to fulfill certain goals. These user
stories were grouped into themes. These themes could be
general; for example, user management and calendar. More
specific ones were gamification, my pets, avatar system, and
an assessment system. My pets and the avatar system are related
to the personalization of the system. Gamification is related to
motivating the child to perform the assessments (Multimedia
Appendix 1).

Phase 2

Stage 1

In stage 1 (also referred to as phase 2), children, their parents,
and health care professionals provided input on the mock-up
version of the PicPecc app.

Different Perspectives on Provided and Perceived Support
Health care professionals in this phase also focused more on
physiological symptoms, whereas children and parents indicated
that they also needed psychosocial support (Multimedia
Appendix 2). The children talked about how the PicPecc app
could be a way of communicating without having to speak to
either their parents or health care professionals. Children also
said that this could help them express how they feel and help
them manage their symptoms:

It helps you to say how you feel, and the tips on what
you can do to lessen the pain or lessen the nausea;
it’s good to get help with that because sometimes it
feels like nothing works. But if you have tips, maybe
you will find one that works for you. [101; girl, 14
years]
Health care professionals also emphasized the child’s self-care
and further wanted the PicPecc app to provide professional
support, such as the next dose of medication, preparations for
procedures, and information about possible side effects.

The health care professionals thought they could see the PicPecc
app being useful during medical rounds to follow up on
symptoms to guide treatment and prepare the child for treatment
and procedures. This was facilitated by a function in the app;
that is, diagrams.

Need for an Easy Tool to Assess Symptoms and Facilitate
Communication
Children thought that gamification (eg, in PicPecc, the use of
the app enabled collection of pets) could motivate the use of
the app. Health care professionals were also of the opinion that

a reward system was a positive motivator for children to use
the app. Older children stated that the app was an easy way of
informing health care professionals and parents about how they
felt. The children also felt that their parents might ask fewer
questions if they (the parents) could have access to the
information on how their child assessed his or her symptoms
in PicPecc:

This app could make mum and dad stop asking how
I feel all the time; instead I can go in here and press
from time to time how I feel, so they can see. [101;
girl, 14 years]
Health care professionals and older children thought the calendar
or schedule was also a motivator as it would help the children
during hospital visits. This was also verified by a parent:

I’ve been giving my child medicine now at two o’clock
and the next one comes at eight o’clock. And she
wanted to know that because then she knew she’ll feel
better then. [201; mother of a 14-year-old girl]
The health care professionals mentioned that PicPecc might
clarify their communication with the children and especially
envisioned using it with children who found expressing their
opinions challenging. The PicPecc app can also facilitate
understanding of the child:

It will probably be easier to ask the child than...Now
you ask the parents, even if the child can talk. So, you
don’t reach the child, it’s the parents. Here I think I
can reach them. [316; focus group, nurse in pediatric
cardiology]
The colors and faces added to the thermometer in PicPecc helped
with the understanding of the thermometer scale. Most
symptoms were easy to assess, ranging from feeling good (green
and smiley face) to worse (red, sad, and crying face), except for
the symbol appetite, where the participants found this kind of
scale difficult to use.

The health care professionals liked that the mock-up included
a page called my page, where the child could write their requests
and wishes for their care. However, some parents doubted that
their child would use that function. Nevertheless, the health
care professionals saw it as a means of helping the child to
become more involved in their own care.

Parents appreciated the diagram function and the possibility for
the child to assess symptoms using the body figure. The
feedback provided by PicPecc could help the child to realize
that they need help with symptom management. The feedback
option may also offer a way for the parent to help explain
feelings that the child might find difficult to express clearly.

The word anxiety was not problematic for the children.
However, health care professionals and parents were unsure if
the word anxiety was the correct term to use, although they
highlighted the children’s need for psychosocial support in the
first phase. The adults were of the opinion that the word anxiety
may be too strong a term to use when talking to young children
and that they might find it challenging to understand the
meaning of anxiety:

No, I don’t know. But anxiety is one of those adult
words. “Oh, I have anxiety”. But it’s almost like
a...anxiety, it should be classified as anxiety, but
worry is something...I think children will recognize.
[209; mother of a 12-year-old boy]

Mapping the Journey to Facilitate Recall
The children liked features such as the schedule and the calendar
that could help them remember what was planned, how the
treatment worked, and how they felt each day. The schedule
was regarded as a way of offering the children and parents a
simple overview of the week:

You can see what’s going on and that the doctor can
put in, yes, but around this time I’ll come in and talk
to you, and around this time you’ll change the infusion
(drip) or something. [101; girl, 14 years]
The health care professionals were positive about the additional
notes feature, as it was a way of getting to know the child and
allowed them to tell their narrative. Meanwhile, parents saw it
as a personal space for their child to make short notes that he
or she could remember and write questions. They also saw the
notes feature as a possibility for the child to document their
treatment journey and write down things they were looking
forward to.

The children proposed features that, in their opinion, were
lacking in the design, such as being able to check off parts that
had been completed on the schedule. The children also suggested
the inclusion of information about their disease, common
symptoms, and a treatment plan, so that they could understand
themselves how their bodies are going to change and easily
explain this to their friends:

Friends ask day in, day out, day in, day out. And it’s
really hard because it’s so hard to explain. [110; girl,
7 years]

Design of the Mock-up

The health care professionals and the parents wondered if the
PicPecc app needed to be age adjusted; for example, if the pets
and pictures were too childish for older children. Some parents
thought it was too childish for adolescents, whereas others
thought it looked good. The children themselves thought the
design was simple and easy to understand but not childish:

I think it’s very nicely laid out and looks good etc.
It’s not too difficult for five-year-olds and not too
childish then for those who are older. [102; girl, 14
years]
The health care professionals and parents felt that the design of
the PicPecc app facilitated user-friendliness and appreciated the
read-aloud feature.

The children wanted different ways of personalizing their avatars
and pets, with both real and fantasy animals in the pet section.
They also talked about being able to name and change different
features of their pets.

All groups commented on the chosen symbols, as they found
them difficult to interpret and thought that if pictures and picture
schedules were used, they needed to be accurate. The children

needed to see what was going to happen to feel safe. They also
had difficulty in understanding some of the words used in the
mock-up version of PicPecc; for example, care plan and
estimates.

A part of the mock-up included creating a care plan. Children
and parents found it difficult to understand the usefulness of
this part. Children struggled with the word estimates and
suggested that estimates be rewritten as how do you feel?

The PicPecc App

The mobile PicPecc app comprises a number of pages where
children can describe how they are feeling using icons and a
faces thermometer scale. On the home page, there are three
options—record symptoms, access the gaming function
(collecting animal icons that can be included in the child’s
profile), and access an area where the data are displayed in the
form of customizable statistics. A setting function also allows
for customization of the sounds, spoken text, or notifications.
The child is represented in the app by an avatar of their choice.
Symptom location can be described on a body outline. There
is a support and help page where the child can obtain
information about their condition and tips and ideas about how
to feel better. This can be linked to an external webpage.

Discussion

Principal Findings

There were 2 phases in this study. In the first phase, information
from participants in stage 1 and experts from stage 2 formed a
PicPecc mock-up in collaboration with UX specialists in stage
3. Both participants from stage 1 (phase 1) and new participants
tested the mock-up in phase 2. The participants in phase 2 stated
that the mock-up was accessible, affordable (in this case, the
value of spending personal resources and time with the app),
and acceptable. The results generally emphasized that the
potential to support symptom management was a beneficial
aspect of PicPecc and that children can find symptom relief
within the app. Symptom relief is an important aspect of
pediatric care and an essential part of the care process [61].

In stage 1, the children with long-term illness wanted to describe
symptoms beyond pain, and parents and health care
professionals confirmed the relevance of including anxiety,
fatigue, fear, and nausea. This is consistent with previous work
examining symptom distress in children with cancer [8]. The
most frequently prioritized symptom assessed by the participants
was anxiety, followed by fear. Similar findings have been
highlighted in previous research [8,62]. PicPecc aims to support
the child and the parents in discussing distressing issues and
support the health care professionals in raising issues other than
pain and nausea. PicPecc strives to facilitate communication
and has the potential to be a tool that helps health care
professionals listen to the child.

In stages 2 and 3 of phase 1, researchers cooperated with the
participants to innovatively translate their needs into the PicPecc
mock-up. Adaptations were made based on UD and
person-centered care. The participants suggested that
digitalization may facilitate the assessment of symptoms using
a faces thermometer scale, which the participants described as

useful in assessment, ranging from feeling good (green and
smiley face) to worse (red, sad, and crying face). This type of
traffic light system has previously been described to manage
symptoms such as pain on a scale of 0 to 10 but is sometimes
not enough to reflect the intensity level [63].

In stage 1 (phase 2), the children commented that the PicPecc
mock-up was not too childish. This is in line with previous
research identifying determinants that might have an impact on
access to health care [64]. The design of the mock-up was
accessible and acceptable to all children; it was simple and easy
to use. UD might improve accessibility by adding sound,
easy-to-read texts, and pictures that could facilitate
communication across languages, cognitive developmental
stages, or disabilities. This corresponds well with a study by
Rodgers et al [22], stating that the method of assessing
symptoms needs to be on a level that equals the child’s cognitive
and developmental level. However, some of the parents and
health care professionals in our study were concerned that the
design was too childish. UD is a design that should not present
an obstacle but rather use symbols and pictures to make the
content more accessible for all people. Adults may see symbols
and pictures as something for young children; however, as the
results show, children of various ages can see the benefits of
visualization.

In this study, a person-centered approach was adapted to
pediatric care, which emphasizes the purpose of accessing the
child’s stories [34]. The goal of such an approach is to empower
the child to become more independent in their own care. Lin et
al [1] stated a need for tools to enhance communication with
health care professionals as children value empathic and
respectful communication. Feelings of powerlessness and
anxiety may arise when communication is perceived to be
parent-centered or paternalistic [1]. PicPecc may have the
potential to bridge the gap and open a dialog between the child
and health care professionals. This dialog might help the child
feel more independent, relieving the parents of the responsibility
of being that bridge. Information and communication
technologies can be a bridge between users who do not know
the culture or language and the health care professionals [65].
The children in our study generally expressed a wish for
autonomy and a possibility for communicating directly with the
health care professionals about symptoms through mHealth
tools.

In PicPecc, the story is told through the child’s own estimations
and the note function, which can hopefully help the health care
professionals recognize the child’s symptoms and focus on
them. PicPecc intends to facilitate a supportive approach, which
may enable more person-centered care. In addition, PicPecc is

an attempt to create a digital tool that supports the child in
expressing what they are feeling and provides information that
may help them manage some of their symptoms. Symptom relief
is a prerequisite for reducing long-term problems. For example,
chronic pain in adulthood can progress from acute pain in
childhood [26]. Thus, there is a need for a tool that helps
children with symptom relief early and that is immediately
available when a symptom occurs.

Limitations

Six main limitations can be identified in this study. First, there
is a risk of population selection bias, as the children and parents
were recruited by the health care professionals who were treating
them. Second, no child with congenital heart defects participated
in phase 1 (stage 1). Third, the parents could have influenced
the children’s answers, and fourth, it would have been valuable
to have had a wider range of ages, as most of the participants
were adolescents. Fifth, it is a limitation that the end users (ie,
children, parents, and health care professionals) did not
themselves participate in stages 2 and 3. Finally, the sixth
limitation is that this is a description and mock-up of an app,
and we have not yet been able to test the final version of
PicPecc.

Conclusions

The results from our study reveal a need for a tool that facilitates
communication between children and health care professionals.
Both parents and children stressed the importance of
communication about feelings beyond symptoms of pain. With
the potential to facilitate person-centered communication
through UD, PicPecc is an advanced first attempt on how to
provide support when dealing with multiple symptoms and
conditions. PicPecc has the potential to open a dialog between
the child and the health care professionals and addresses
symptoms that may otherwise be overlooked. Over the past
decade, the use of digitalization has expanded within health
care. This study demonstrated the potential for using PicPecc
as a digital support in clinical practice. Future phases should
include usability testing and evaluation of the effects in hospitals
and in home care settings.

The effectiveness of PicPecc to communicate symptoms and
lead to symptom alleviation, thereby improving well-being and
HrQoL, will be assessed in the next phase of the project.
Representative populations of children in Sweden and South
Africa will be identified through a randomization method and
invited to participate in an evaluation study. In addition to
PicPecc, standardized instruments for measuring symptoms and
well-being will be administered to a group using PicPecc and
a control group.