Original Paper

Negotiating Tensions Between Theory and Design in the
Development of Mailings for People Recovering From Acute
Coronary Syndrome

Holly O Witteman1,2,3, PhD; Justin Presseau4,5, PhD; Emily Nicholas Angl6,7, BSc; Iffat Jokhio7, BDes; JD Schwalm8,9,
MSc, FRCP(C), MD; Jeremy M Grimshaw4,10, MBChB, PhD; Beth Bosiak11, BComm, BA, MSc; Madhu K Natarajan8,9,
MSc, MD; Noah M Ivers11,12,13,14, MD, PhD

Methods

Design of First Prototype

We gathered an interdisciplinary research team with experience
in health behavior change, knowledge translation, cardiology,
primary care, and the design and evaluation of evaluation of
health communication materials. Based on our prior mixed
methods work exploring psychological determinants of
adherence among patients who have had a heart attack [18] and
informed by studies testing similar interventions in the past
[17,25], we identified a list of theory-based constructs that
should be targeted by the intervention materials and behavior
change techniques designed to develop motivation and to
support translating motivation into action.

We used the Health Action Process Approach and Theoretical
Domains Framework as a basis for identifying behavior change
techniques linked to key determinants and the behavior change
techniques taxonomy version 1 [26] to describe behavior change
techniques in a consistent manner (see Table 1). Wherever
possible, behavior change techniques were selected based on
whether existing evidence demonstrated their effectiveness for
changing health behavior. Further details of all behavior change
techniques mapped to all intervention materials are available
upon request.

Table 1. Behavior change techniques used.

Behavior change techniques
Theoretical construct or domain

Information about health consequences
Risk perception

Information about health consequences
Outcome expectancy

Information about social and environmental consequences

Credible source

Comparative imagining of future outcomes

Verbal persuasion about capability
Self-efficacy

Vicarious consequences

Instruction on how to perform the behavior

Social support (practical)
Social support

Social support (unspecified)

Goal setting (outcome)
Intention

Prompts or cues
Memory, attention, and decision processes

Action planning
Action planning

Problem solving
Coping planning

Self-monitoring of behavior (optional)
Behavioral regulation

Adding objects to the environment (optional)

Nonspecific reward (optional)
 

Researcher team members partnered with a design firm to
engage in an iterative design process. The design firm’s team
included a person with significant lived experience as a patient
who had served as a patient advisor to multiple organizations.

Designers worked with the research team to develop theme
boards to guide the visual design of materials. The design firm
also led additional user research, that is, research to better
understand the needs, contexts, and goals of people who would
use the materials. This user research informed the development
of personas to guide the design of the content of materials to
deliver intended behavior change techniques. Personas are
archetypes—not stereotypes—of potential users [27]. Using
personas may help to center design work around the people who
will use the developed materials and have been used in other
health communication contexts [28]. Working closely with the
project’s principal investigator (NMI) and consulting with other
team members with expertise in user-centered design, health
behavior change, and clinical support of patients in their
recovery after a heart attack, the designers produced the content
and first prototypes of study materials: mailings designed to be
sent to patients 1, 2, 5, 8, and 11 months following a heart attack.

Recruitment

Cardiology team members (JDS, MN) identified potential
participants from their cardiology practice roster in Southern
Ontario that matched, to the extent possible, the various personas
and recruited them to the study. A patient partner with design
expertise (ENA) met with consenting study participants at
Hamilton General Hospital. Patients were offered a Can $20
gift card to a common coffee shop chain in appreciation of their
time and effort. This study was approved by the Hamilton
Integrated Research Ethics Board (02-245).

User Testing

We used a think-aloud approach in which users were asked to
articulate their thoughts as they used or reviewed materials
[29,30]. Although think-aloud can demonstrably capture
cognitive processes [31,32] and has been used with other static
health communication materials [33,34], previous work using
think-aloud to assess a booklet about a health topic (colorectal
cancer screening) also reported some difficulties with the
method, particularly among people with lower health literacy,
who found the interview “intimidating and stressful” (p.9) [33].
Methods such as think-aloud that rely on verbal articulation
may overlook important issues and may also privilege the views
of people who are better able to find words to describe their
reactions. Therefore, in addition to think-aloud, we also
discussed the materials more broadly and asked clarifying
questions of study participants to better understand their
reactions to the materials. The interview guide for such
discussions is shown in Multimedia Appendix 1.

Analysis and Subsequent Design Changes

We transcribed interviews verbatim, and the study team
reviewed transcripts for key themes that could inform design
changes using data from both think-aloud and interviews to
develop interpretations based on users’ verbal reactions to
materials, researchers’ observations of participants’ nonverbal
reactions, and participants’ responses to questions about both
their cognitive and emotional responses. Following each set of
user testing sessions, the design team prepared a presentation
for the larger research team. The whole team met to discuss

usability or other problems identified during user testing
sessions, assessing the severity of problems and the feasibility
of different ways of addressing such problems and grounding
these discussions in the context of other available evidence and
the overall study goals.

Results

Recruitment

Out of the 15 eligible patients we attempted to recruit, 10 agreed
to participate. The spouse of one of the patients also participated.
Participants were thus 10 people who had had a heart attack
within the past year (5 men, 5 women) and 1 spouse (a woman)
of one of the patients. Patients’ mean age was 57 years
(range 31-70 years).

Key Tensions and Resulting Changes to Design

The user testing revealed key tensions to be negotiated during
the design process. First, in a number of instances, users
expressed a desire to remove operationalizations of behavior
change techniques that have previous evidence of their efficacy.
Second, the ethical imperative of supporting evidence-informed
decisions aligned with the preferences and goals of each patient
was sometimes at odds with the overall goal of encouraging
particular behaviors. Third, logistical constraints made it
infeasible to enact some of the changes requested by users. The
full, final set of developed mailings is available in Multimedia
Appendix 2.

Effectiveness Versus User Experience

One significant source of tension occurred when potential users’
responses conflicted with evidence about what works to support
behavior change. For example, we observed this tension around
patients’ responses to embedded problem-solving (coping
planning) exercises within the mailings. This behavior change
technique was operationalized to be consistent with the evidence
supporting the use of volitional help sheets, which present
prepopulated lists of barriers to action and solution to these
barriers. Completion of a volitional help sheet involved users
completing tasks such as drawing lines between a prespecified
barrier (eg, “If I can’t get to my pharmacy when it’s open...”)
and solution that best applies to them (eg, “... then I will call
about delivery options.”). Problem solving and volitional help
sheets have strong theoretical grounding and empirical evidence
supporting their use [25,35-38]. However, a number of patients
responded poorly to these; they found them silly and stated they
would not do such an exercise, commenting, for example, “It
seems useless...To me it’s common sense...if you don’t know
this you have other problems.” [Participant 2].

To address this tension, we analyzed and discussed user
comments during testing and interviews to identify a potential
root cause of the tension—users lacked a motivating reason to
complete the exercise. We therefore highlighted the evidence
supporting such exercises with brief explanations, “Research
shows...” that connected the exercises to staying on track and
thus avoiding dying due to a second heart attack (see Figures 1
and 2).

Informative Versus Persuasive Communication

Our initial designs were closer to the informative end of the
informative-persuasive spectrum. As our design evolved and
as the research team considered users’ reactions to prototype
materials, designs ultimately moved more toward persuasive
communication. For example, we initially presented the choice
to take medications or not to take them as somewhat visually
equivalent by presenting 2 possible paths to follow (Figure 3).
In contrast, our final design privileges the path of “new normal”
by using a solid line, checking it off as the presumed default,

and presenting returning to the old path as a dotted line deviation
from the default (Figure 4).

The design team also initially attempted to convey statistics
about mortality in the year following an acute coronary
syndrome event using an abstract icon array with random
dispersion of events (Figure 5). Users found this representation
confusing and scientific team members confirmed that such a
display was unlikely to be understandable [41]. By taking a
more persuasive approach in the final design and focusing on
the number of people whose premature death could be avoided,
our final design allowed us to collapse a conditional probability
into a single statistic that users reported as being both more
compelling and also more understandable (Figure 6). Both initial
and revised figures were deemed potentially frightening by
some users, a worrisome finding, as it may not be effective to
attempt to frighten people into healthy habits. However, our
research team agreed that there was an ethical imperative to
communicate this evidence to people whose lives could be
affected by it.

Feasibility of Meeting Users’ Expectations

The nature of the planned intervention (standardized printed
materials) and the context in which it was to be implemented
generated some important tensions. Some expectations and

needs related to imagery and content were able to be addressed
or partially addressed, but others about the timing of the
materials were not.

Designing static, paper booklets that could suit all potential
users was a challenge when it came to imagery and other design

decisions. Many emerging methods that have been shown to
optimally support comprehension of health information,
informed choice, and behavior change involve digital tools
[47-50] and translating such methods into static booklets is not
always feasible. It was out of project scope to tailor images to
match gender, age, race, ethnicity, and other characteristics. We
therefore attempted to present images that were more abstract
and less specifically representative of a single, identifiable
person. Our initial images were intended to evoke ideas of life
goals and plans (Figure 7) and moving on with one’s life (Figure
8). However, users found the first of these confusing,
questioning whether Figure 7 indicated that people are travelling
somewhere in the rain and noting that it looked unpleasant:
“Well, that’s depressing.” [Participant 1]; “Are they going back
to hospital?” [Caregiver of participant 1]; and “Why are they
walking in the rain? Who wants to walk in the rain?” [Participant
3].

Users also found Figure 8 not relatable due to a lack of match
in perceived age. For example, participant 3 noted:

I think it should be more of a variety of people...you
look at them and you know they’re older
people...maybe...it should be parent child and
grandparent...so that it shows you that it’s possible
for anybody (to have a heart attack).
While constrained by the inability to tailor images to individual
users, we addressed the perceived discordance between
intervention imagery and participants’ self-image by changing
the abstract human figures. In subsequent testing, revised figures
were deemed more relatable and revised content more
understandable (Figures 9-11).

User testing revealed an important missing element regarding
the source of the mailings. Participants articulated their thoughts:

I’m wondering, who is this content from? One of the
vital pieces of information for me, and I think
probably other people, is more about who is sending
me this? What’s the organization/association/
hospital/cardiologistis it the Ministry of Health?
[Participant 5]

It could be the Heart and Stroke Foundation
sweepstake thing [Participant 7]
Participants revealed that when they receive mail with the logo
of the hospital, they may assume it is a fundraising campaign
and may not even open the envelope. We therefore added
specific imagery (Figure 12) and a reference to a charitable
foundation who partnered with us on the project (see
Acknowledgments).

The early prototype for an introductory page (Figure 7) was
also overwhelming to users, possibly due to inadequate
introduction to a great deal of complex content. We therefore
revised the introduction and added signposts to orient users as
to where they were in a given booklet (Figure 9) and also in the
series of mailings (Figure 13).

In contrast, some user needs and expectations could
unfortunately not be addressed due to contextual factors
including logistical constraints. For instance, many patients
suggested that the first booklet should arrive at the time of
hospital discharge, stating:

You need to hit the knowledge gap. This needs to come
right after or in hospital.All of this would have been
maybe useful right at the beginning [Participant 5]
This comes too late (...) I got my pills the first day.
You have to have that sorted [Participant 3]
However, such timing was not technically feasible to implement
at scale.

Furthermore, iteratively developing an intervention to the extent
we believed would be ideal—including conducting multiple
iterative cycles with users beyond a single site—would have
left insufficient time to run the cluster randomized controlled
trial within the 3 years allocated to the project. We partially
addressed this by planning and undertaking rapid iteration and
applying design findings from 1 set of evaluations across
multiple mailings, increasing efficiency. For example, following
potential users’ responses to imagery in the first mailing, we
adapted the images in all subsequent mailings as well.

Discussion

Principal Findings

Relatively few quality improvement initiatives tested in trials
are both theory-informed and formally user-tested [51]. In this

design and development study, we collected and used patient
input to refine our theory-informed intervention. Specifically,
we encountered and addressed tensions within 3 themes that
we believe may be relevant for others embarking upon similar
projects.

First, we noted tension between users’assessments and evidence
of effectiveness. This finding emphasizes that what people like
and what works may not always be the same. The role of
designers is not to automatically add every feature that users
request, nor to automatically remove any feature that users
dislike. Rather, design methods require carefully observing how
people respond to a prototype—verbally, nonverbally,
behaviorally, emotionally, and otherwise—analyzing those
observations and making adjustments to the materials
accordingly.

Second, tensions between informative communication and
persuasive communication need to be addressed when designing
any health communication materials, but particularly in cases
in which a medically preferable option exists. This element of
tension occurred even within our research team, as some team
members are more oriented toward informative communication
and others toward persuasive communication. Related to this,
we recognized an ethical tension in using design approaches to
address an external goal. Treatment adherence as a measure of
quality of care is a metric that matters to health care systems,
researchers, and health care professionals; it may or may not
matter to the individuals who are assigned the task of adhering
to the plan. Design methods are well-suited to optimize users’
experiences according to their own individual goals, which may
not be the same as goals externally imposed by a health care
system. People may discontinue medications or not participate
in cardiac rehabilitation for valid reasons. However, the
demonstrated benefits of taking recommended medications and
attending rehabilitation often align well with what matters to
most people, namely, living longer with a higher quality of life.
Therefore, we determined it was reasonable to suggest that if
people are making a choice not to follow recommended
practices, this choice ought to be fully informed by the available
evidence, including evidence about ways that people can best
implement behavioral changes in their lives.

Third, the tension between our initial imagery and patients’
reactions to it highlight that people’s acceptance of an
intervention may depend on how well their self-perception is
represented within it. For health communication materials
incorporating visual depictions of potential users, user research
should include issues of self-image, which may or may not be
possible to address within the constraints of a research study.
It remains a challenge to fit design approaches and methods
within the bounds of feasibility of health care systems and health
research projects. The lack of ability to deliver these materials
when patients feel they would be most useful is a challenge to
their ultimate effectiveness. Additionally, because design
processes are not always predictable, fitting one within a tightly
constrained timeline of a research project can present difficulties.

Although this work occurred in the context of paper-based
mailings, the tensions presented here apply to design processes
more broadly, including the design of Web-based applications.
The challenge of finding the balance in responding to feature
requests without falling into feature creep occurs regardless of
format, as do the tensions of informative versus persuasive
communication and adherence versus user experience. Although
tailoring imagery to users is more technically feasible in a
Web-based format, it requires, at minimum, a database of

appropriate images, knowledge of each user’s characteristics,
and a matching algorithm. Such requirements can be technically
or logistically difficult to fulfill.

We note that mailings, like Web-based applications, have
advantages and disadvantages for users, health systems, and
also for the design and development process. In this project, the
advantages of mailings included their feasibility and relatively
low cost within a large health care system that does not yet have
widespread Web-based options for patients. Many patients
within this system, particularly those who are older or who live
in rural or remote areas, may lack reliable Internet access or be
uncomfortable using computers or mobile devices. The
disadvantages of mailings in this project included lack of tailored
content and lack of accessibility for users who have literacy or
vision barriers. Using paper as a medium is practical on many
levels but also makes approaches such as universal design more
difficult. Our trial in progress will help determine whether
automated phone calls can help those users who receive mailings
but who face barriers to using them effectively. Finally, although
the delay in receipt of the first mailing is primarily a function
of the transfer of administrative data—a barrier that would exist
within this system regardless of format—the delay is arguably
longer for a first mailing due to the time required for mail
delivery.

Limitations

Our study has several limitations. First, all of our user testing
took place at a single site, all in English, and with a small
number of participants recruited by a study team member.
Findings may or may not apply in other contexts or with
participants who have no connection to the research team.
Second, our randomized controlled trial evaluating these
materials is currently underway and thus we do not yet know
whether our approaches to the design tensions we identified
resulted in materials that have desired effects. Third, the
thematic groupings described here represent the authors’
judgment and the ability to confirm saturation of key themes
was constrained by project timelines.

Conclusions

Health care systems may not be optimally designed to support
patients along their path to recovery after a heart attack. Our

study explored whether health systems may be able to better
support people in their recovery with a feasible, scalable
approach: providing carefully designed educational booklets at
specific time points. In designing such booklets by
collaboratively working with patients as an interdisciplinary
group of researchers and designers, our project revealed design
tensions and possible ways to address those tensions. Teams
developing similar materials may wish to use similar methods
and may anticipate similar tensions requiring resolution.
Particularly for teams developing interventions to encourage
adherence, it is important to recognize that while the term
adherence has largely replaced the previous term compliance,
if the functional meaning of the word remains, “doing what
others decide is best for you,” nothing has truly changed. Teams
must identify and address root causes of tensions and focus on
ensuring and highlighting alignment between individual and
health care system goals.