Original Paper

Using Human-Centered Design and Cocreation to Create the Live
5-2-1-0 Mobile App to Promote Healthy Behaviors in Children:
App Design and Development

Kiana W Yau1,2, MSc; Tricia S Tang1,2, PhD; Matthias Görges2,3, PhD; Susan Pinkney2,4, MA; Shazhan Amed2,4, MD

1Department of Medicine, The University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada
2Research Institute, BC Children's Hospital, Vancouver, BC, Canada
3Department of Anesthesiology, Pharmacology and Therapeutics, The University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada
4Department of Pediatrics, The University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada

Shazhan Amed, MD
Research Institute
BC Children's Hospital
A4-196
950 W 28th Ave
Vancouver, BC, V5Z 4H4
Canada
Phone: 1 6048753113

Methods

Ethics Approval

This study was approved by the University of BC and Children’s
and Women’s Health Centre of BC Research Ethics Board
(H18-00700; SA; August 16, 2018).

Study Design

This study was conducted and reported using the COREQ
(Consolidated Criteria for Reporting Qualitative Research)
guidelines [22]. Using a mixed methods embedded research
design, 3 sets of focus groups (FGs) were conducted between
October 2018 and January 2019 to obtain the perspectives of
children, parents, and HCPs. Each FG was approximately 2
hours long and was held in person at BCCH (our study was
performed before the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic) by
facilitators from an external technology consulting firm (Striven)
or our app developer partner (Tactica). FG guides (Multimedia
Appendix 1) consisted of open-ended questions that reflected
the Fogg Behavior Model, which posits that motivation, ability,
and triggers must all be present to influence an individual to
perform a target behavior [23]; in the case of health
interventions, this is to influence a patient to adopt healthy
behavior change. Human-centered design (HCD) is a
participatory method that engages stakeholders throughout the
development process to generate solutions that reflect the needs
of end users [24]. It consists of three phases: (1) inspiration
(immersing the researcher in the lives of participants to
understand their needs), (2) ideation (knowledge from
inspiration is used to brainstorm ideas and create a prototype),
and (3) implementation (the solution is brought to life and
evaluated).

The child and parent participants received a CAD $50 (US
$37.35) gift card for their time and to offset the costs of
participating; HCPs received a CAD $5 (US $3.73) Starbucks
gift card.

Participants

Children aged 8 to 12 years and their parents were recruited via
posters at BCCH, advertisements in a patient newsletter (Sunny
Hill Connect), and announcements posted on BCCH and Live
5-2-1-0 social media channels (Facebook and Twitter).

Recruitment material included the names of the principal
investigators, eligibility criteria for participants, and a brief
description of the goal of the research team to develop an app
that supports healthy living habits. Interested participants
contacted a research assistant via phone or email to receive
additional study information and provide informed consent in
writing. The eligibility criteria were (1) ability to read, speak,
and understand English and (2) willingness to attend at least
one FG session. A maximum of 1 child and 1 parent per family
could participate. Participants with severe intellectual difficulties
were excluded. BMI or other weight-related characteristics of
children and parent participants were not part of the inclusion
criteria as the aim of the study was to develop an app that could
serve as a tool in primary prevention of childhood obesity and
would apply to all children regardless of BMI. HCPs within the
University of BC Department of Pediatrics at BCCH were
invited to participate via an email containing study information
and contact information for the research assistant. Given that
the Live 5-2-1-0 initiative is multisectoral and cross-disciplinary,
the representation of physicians and medical trainees, nursing
staff, and allied health professionals was sought to capture a
wide range of clinician perspectives in the app’s design.

Quantitative Data Collection

Children and parents completed a sociodemographic
questionnaire that included age, gender, and ethnic background
of both the child and parent, as well as parents’ marital status,
educational level, and annual household income. Parents
completed an adapted version of the Healthy Habits
Questionnaire (Multimedia Appendix 2), a tool that has
previously been shown to be useful and feasible in the primary
care setting, to assess the Live 5-2-1-0 behaviors, sleep habits,
and eating behaviors of their children [25]. Study data were
collected and managed using REDCap (Research Electronic
Data Capture; Vanderbilt University), a secure web-based
software platform designed to support data capture for research
studies, hosted at the BCCH Research Institute [26,27].
Participants in the user-testing FG were asked to complete
specific surveys on the usability and content of the prototype.

Qualitative Data Collection

A schematic outlining the sequence of research activities can
be found in Figure 1.

Figure 1. Schematic of research activities for Live 5-2-1-0 app development.

FG 1 (App Conceptualization)

The first FG (FG 1) aimed to inform the app’s conceptualization
and consisted of separate child and adult (parents and HCPs)
sessions. In total, 8 parents and 3 HCPs (2 dieticians and 1
physician) participated in the adult session, and 9 children
participated in the child session. In the adult session (FG 1A),
participants discussed the challenges in ensuring the adoption
of healthy habits by their children, followed by an app feature
prioritization activity. The children’s session (FG 1B) began
with a discussion on their digital device and app use, followed
by a drawing activity on how mobile devices played a role in
their typical day. Facilitators then led a discussion where
children reflected on what being healthy meant for them and
their motivators for adopting healthy behaviors.

Ideation Session

In total, 8 members of the research team, 1 health technology
consultant, and 3 members of the app development team
participated in an ideation session to generate insights from the
qualitative data obtained from FG 1 and identify design
opportunities. Participants were guided through three HCD
inspiration rounds for themes uncovered in FG 1: (1) family
habit tracking and accountability; (2) behavior change
techniques; and (3) family, child, and HCP collaboration. Each
round began with “How Might We” questions, an HCD
technique where challenges are framed as questions to prompt
innovative solutions [24], followed by a brief brainstorming
session and rating activity of proposed ideas.

FG 2 (Cocreation)

Key themes that emerged from FG 1 and the ideation session
were presented in the second set of FGs (FG 2). Separate
sessions were held for families and HCPs 1 week after the
ideation session. In total, 7 parents and 6 children participated
in the family cocreation session (FG 2A), of whom 71% (5/7)
of the parents and 67% (4/6) of the children had previously
participated in FG 1. Parents and children were presented with
wireframes (design layouts of requested features) and asked to
rank features and daily challenge completion reward ideas by
applying stickers that represented different ratings on printed
wireframes. The HCP session (FG 2B) was attended by 15 HCPs
from BCCH and facilitated by the health technology consultant.
It aimed to gather feedback on questions that would help HCPs
understand the baseline health behaviors of their patients, the
design of the HCP dashboard wireframe, and the structure of
the in-app daily challenges.

Agile Development

Agile development refers to the process of developing software
that addresses stakeholders’desires through short iterative cycles
[28]. We used a subset of agile development known as “Scrum”
that is characterized by high productivity and responsiveness
to changing requests [28]. This process began by creating user
stories, or short phrases that represented a desired functionality,
and categorizing them under app features using Trello (Atlassian
Corporation Plc), a Kanban-style web-based project management
tool centered on list making. Next, the research team prioritized
user stories based on available resources and complexity to
provide guidance to the app developers on what features to

develop next. A key feature of the Scrum framework is the use
of development cycles known as sprints [28]. A total of 3 sprints
were performed. For each sprint, the app developers were given
1 week to develop app features based on the research team’s
prioritization. A demonstration of new or revised features
developed during the week was sent to the research team
approximately 48 hours before a 30-minute weekly sprint
meeting, where the research team provided feedback. Shorter
sprints that lasted 3 to 4 days were performed near the end of
app development to address technical issues that arose during
the previous iterations. The output of the agile development
phase was an app prototype.

FG 3 (User Testing)

FG 3 was cofacilitated by the app development and research
teams. A total of 11 parents and 14 children participated in FG
3. In total, 82% (9/11) of the parents and 77% (10/13) of the
children had participated in at least one of the previous FGs.
Each parent and child pair, or child only when a parent was not
present, was given an iPad preloaded with the app prototype
and asked to provide feedback on the prototype’s usability and
content by completing and rating the difficulty of 5 tasks on a
scale of 1 (very difficult) to 7 (very easy). FG facilitators
minimized the guidance they provided on how to use the app
to allow participants to independently explore the prototype.
Next, participants were asked to brainstorm reward ideas as part
of the app’s gamification feature and rate a list of predefined
rewards generated by the research team. The FG ended with a
brainstorming session of daily challenges and the categorization
of these challenges into different levels of difficulty.

Data Analysis

Descriptive statistics (means and SDs for continuous variables,
counts and percentages for categorical variables, and medians
and IQRs for ordinal variables) were generated to describe the
sociodemographic characteristics of the participants, ease in
completing tasks using the prototype, and ratings of rewards
and daily challenges. Quantitative data were analyzed using
SPSS (version 25.0; IBM Corp).

FG sessions were audio recorded and transcribed verbatim by
KWY and reviewed by SK to ensure transcription accuracy.
Transcripts were not returned to participants for comments or
corrections given that our sessions were group sessions and not
individual interviews. KWY and SP independently conducted
a thematic analysis of all transcripts using NVivo (QSR
International). 
Following 
the 
immersion-crystallization
framework [29], qualitative data generated from the FGs were
organized into coding categories that were continuously revised
throughout the transcript reviewing process, followed by a
discussion between the 2 authors to review the preliminary
coding categories and reduce the data further using thematic
coding and content analysis. Any discrepancies were discussed
between the 2 authors until a consensus was reached.

Results

Demographics

Most children (n=14; mean age 10.2, SD 1.3 years; 5/14, 36%
male; 5/14, 36% White participants) and parents (n=12; 9/12,

75% aged 40-49 years; 2/12, 17% male; 7/12, 58% White)
participated in at least 1 of 3 FGs. The Live 5-2-1-0 behaviors
of the FG child participants are summarized in Table 1. Most
of the parent participants (9/12, 75%) were aged between 40
and 49 years, and 92% (11/12) were married. Most parents
(8/12, 67%) had at least a bachelor’s degree, with the remainder
having a trade certificate, diploma, or university certificate.

Moreover, 70% (7/10) had an annual household income of
>CAD $80,000 (US $59,756.30). HCPs (n=18) participated in
at least 1 of 3 FGs and included physicians (5/18, 28%), nurses
(3/18, 17%), nurse practitioners (2/18, 11%), dieticians (5/18,
28%), pharmacists (2/18, 11%), and physiotherapists (1/18,
6%).

Table 1. Live 5-2-1-0 behaviors of focus group child participants (n=14).

Values, median (IQR)
Live 5-2-1-0 behaviors

3.5 (2-6)
Servings of fruits and vegetables per daya

1 (1-2)
Hours of screen time per day (excluding time for schoolwork)

5 (3-6)
Days per week physically active for at least 1 hour (n=13)

0.5 (0-1)
Cups of sugary drinks per day

a1 serving=half a cup.

FG 1—App Conceptualization

Coding categories and themes that emerged from FG 1 are
illustrated in Figure 2.

Figure 2. Concept map outlining themes that emerged from focus group 1 (app conceptualization). HCP: health care provider.

Empowerment and Intrinsic Rewards Lead to
Development of Healthy Behaviors

Parents described their children’s tendency to gravitate toward
choices that were meaningful to them and that the empowerment
of the child would lead to the establishment of long-term habits.
Children’s self-discovery of health knowledge was thought to
result in better adherence rather than a top-down approach in
which parents instructed their children on what to do:

When kids feel empowered that they are making the
decision...instead of being directive as parents, we
would be non-directive and...coach them. [Parent]
Both parents and HCPs agreed that an app that facilitates shared
decision-making between children and parents would empower
children to become actively involved in making healthy behavior
changes. The importance of personal awareness was reflected
in the child session, during which guilt was often discussed in
association with knowledge of the optimal amount of screen
time. Children expressed that guilt from excessive amounts of
screen time discouraged them from playing with their electronic
devices even when they had not exceeded their daily screen
time limit. Education and awareness of the consequences of
their actions played a role in their decision-making related to
healthy behaviors:

I saw [a] fact on my agenda. It said if you play [on
your device] four hours a day, it’s good to get out
sometimes, so limit your time [to] two hours. [Child]

Social Connectivity as a Key Motivator for Children and
Families

According to HCPs, and confirmed by children, children are
more willing to engage with an app if it requires them to
complete tasks cooperatively with or competing against their
peers. Parents commented that children tended to gain awareness
of healthy behaviors from their peers, which was far more
effective than parental directives or encouragement. HCPs
commented that, once children take ownership of their own
health, they tend to develop a sense of responsibility for their
family, and it may encourage them to adopt healthy behavior
changes together. The sense of accountability and responsibility
can also transform into a source of motivation:

Making it as a family activity that’s like “you need
the physical activity but your parents also need it,”
so going together and then doing some physical
activity...making them (children) responsible for
[their] parents’health. [HCP]
Parents believed that a blog or group chat for sharing healthy
behavior tips would encourage children to mutually support
each other as they make healthy behavior changes. However,
both parents and HCPs agreed that any communication tool
should be regulated by a moderator to ensure the accuracy and
appropriateness of the information presented. Children identified
connectivity with peers (ie, using digital messaging applications
and social media platforms to communicate with their peers
about play and engage in competition) and customizability
(progressing through increasing levels of difficulty and selecting
different modes of play) as key features they desired for the
Live-5-2-1-0 app.

Behavior Tracking Changes Child Behavior and
Supports HCPs

Parents and HCPs were supportive of the idea of the app tracking
children’s daily Live 5-2-1-0 behaviors as the data collected
could be summarized in a visual interface for the user to view
their progress, which in turn could be a source of motivation.
It could also be used by HCPs during clinical encounters to
become aware of their patients’ progress since their last visit:

A graph when they come to see us...a snapshot
picture...my physical activity is going up...going down.
It...motivates them, they’re on the right track. [HCP]
HCPs also explained how the availability of tracking data would
serve as a conversation starter and enable them to further
investigate the facilitators and barriers faced by the child. This
would allow HCPs to build stronger relationships with children,
who identified HCPs as individuals of authority and would be
more likely to comply with their recommendations to improve
their health behaviors.

Ideation Session

Visual Summary as a Tool for Collaborative
Decision-making

A key discussion point during the ideation session was to
identify ways for the app to facilitate collaborative
decision-making, goal setting, and Live 5-2-1-0 behavior
tracking among children, parents, and HCPs. A summary visual
of the user’s progress was proposed to motivate users and guide
HCPs in behavioral counseling. However, it was noted that the
user may view the visual summary as discouraging if it reflects
minimal progress. To address this, the idea of allowing for
progressive changes in goal setting was proposed. For goal
setting and progress data to be meaningful and comprehensible,
it was agreed that the visual interface and user experience design
had to be tailored to each stakeholder (child, parent, and HCP)
while ensuring that the metrics were identical between different
stakeholders.

Need for Adaptive and Customizable Goals

Adaptive goals that were customizable based on the user’s
preference and reflected progress in the behavior change journey
were identified as essential. A suggestion was to include a
baseline health assessment that would allow children, parents,
and HCPs to set goals collaboratively based on current behavior
and readiness to change via the app. Even though users may
not choose to act on these behaviors immediately, it is still
valuable for them to become aware of what behaviors can be
improved upon. However, users should be able to choose which
behavior to focus on regardless of the recommendations that
arise from the baseline assessment. Finally, the choice to select
“small steps” (daily challenges) toward achieving the Live
5-2-1-0 goals was proposed, addressing children’s desire for an
app that allows for progression and choice of difficulty level.

Design Elements for Gamification

Children suggested a progress bar for visualizing their healthy
behavior change journey and progression through increasing
levels of difficulty for their small steps to be completed toward
achieving a health behavior goal. To do this, the decision was

that users initially had to complete easier small steps before
being allowed to attempt more difficult small steps toward their
goal. In addition, given parents’belief that intrinsic rewards are
more likely to lead to sustained healthy behavior change, the
inclusion of a mix of intrinsic and extrinsic rewards within the
app was discussed. Intrinsic rewards may include creating an
avatar of the user and their home and earning badges that
recognize progress. Ideas proposed for external rewards included
those that further encourage healthy behaviors; could easily be
provided by parents; and promote family engagement, such as
going to the local swimming pool, visiting a new playground,

or going to a local park. To address parents’ desire for
customizable external rewards, the option to manually enter a
reward of their choice was suggested.

Pilot Journey Map and Screen Wireframes

Information gathered in the app conceptualization FGs and the
ideation session was used to create a pilot journey map (Figure
3) to reflect a user’s experience with accompanying wireframes
demonstrating initial designs of various screens (Multimedia
Appendix 3). It is this journey map that was presented to the
child, parent, and HCP participants in the cocreation FGs (FGs
2A and 2B).

Figure 3. Journey map presented to participants in focus group 2A (cocreation—family session). HCP: health care provider.

FG 2A—Cocreation (Parents and Children)

Coding categories and themes that emerged from FG 2 are
illustrated in Figure 4.

Figure 4. Concept map outlining themes that emerged from focus group 2 (cocreation).

Parental Involvement via Family Challenges

Completing challenges as a family on a weekly basis appealed
to children and parents, with children indicating parental
involvement as a key motivator for app use. Participants were
enthusiastic about the idea of keeping participating family
members accountable by having everyone set their own goals
via individual user accounts but being able to achieve the family
challenge only if everyone completed their respective individual
goals:

Let’s say you all have the app...one of you would do
five fruits, one does two hours of TV, one does one
hour activity, and another does no sugary drinks...if
one doesn’t do it...they all do not get a reward...all
eyes are on each other. [Child]
Parents suggested that family challenges could be designated
as rewards for children upon goal completion, such as a family
bicycle ride or going on a camping trip.

Novelty and Progression Promote User Retention

Parents and children both pointed to the importance of novelty
in promoting user retention and were supportive of a notification
system that would remind users to record their daily challenge
progress in the app. Suggestions for triggers included varied
durations for goal completion and surprise rewards rather than
user-selected rewards. Finally, an app that is regularly updated
with new content and features was a suggested strategy to
decrease attrition rates. Parents suggested the option for users
to begin with an easier level to identify which of the 4 healthy
behaviors to address before launching the rest of the app.
Children added that rewards should be unlocked progressively

such that users who achieve more difficult challenges would be
awarded greater rewards.

Customization and In-App Rewards Enhance User
Experience

Participants stated that the ability to personalize app content
and customize settings within app features would enhance their
experience. Parents stressed the importance of commitment to
follow through with rewards and stressed that the option for
parents to input their own reward ideas was essential:

Maybe going to a local lake...if there’s a movie your
family really wants to see...you can customize to
what’s happening to your life at that time. [Parent]
The ability to customize the time and frequency of notification
reminders for completing daily challenges was identified as a
desired feature. Participants believed that reminders that could
be customized to be sent at an ideal time and frequency would
increase the chance that users would complete daily challenges
and log their progress in the app. Discussion regarding rewards
included in-app features that could themselves serve as rewards.
Suggestions included badges and celebratory animations that
are shown in the app when users accomplish a goal:

It (the badge) could have a picture of what you did
and then it could have like rainbows and sparks
coming out of it. [Child]

FG 2B—Cocreation (HCPs)

Supporting Patient-Centered Care and Shared
Decision-making

HCPs were enthusiastic about the app’s potential to support
patient-centered care and shared decision-making with families.
HCPs shared that, although collecting metrics and following
the medical model of care are important, patient communication
about their health priorities is also crucial to ensure patient- and
family-centered care where HCPs are meeting the patient where
they are at:

I’ve got my checklist of stuff that I want to get from
my patient...the flipside of it is to help patients
communicate what they want [us] to help them with,
so that we can actually address their goals, not so
much our goals. [Physician]
HCPs believed that a visual summary of the user’s progress
would allow them to easily pinpoint areas of opportunity and
concern to address during clinical encounters. An app feature
that provides users with the opportunity to input reasons for not
completing a daily challenge was deemed to be useful for HCPs
to identify barriers to successful goal completion. Given that
users may not have the opportunity to visit an HCP frequently,
participants agreed that the app should have educational content
that parents can review with their children for extra support.
The inclusion of a flagging system that would directly alert
HCPs if users faced challenges with completing their goals was
suggested.

Readiness to Change Promotes Healthy Behavior
Adoption

HCPs stressed the importance for the app to be able to capture
the child’s readiness to make changes in addition to their healthy
behavior status. Specifically, HCPs called for capturing the
child’s emotional feelings toward each healthy behavior and
believed that children would be more likely to make changes
if they felt positive toward the behavior and were motivated
internally. Suggestions for facilitating this included allowing
users to indicate how they feel (using child-friendly graphics
such as emojis) related to the progress of their chosen goal and
choose their own avatars with the option to customize their
facial expressions to reflect their feelings on their goal progress.

FG 3—User Testing

On the basis of the feedback collected in the FGs and after
rounds of iterative development, a prototype of the Live 5-2-1-0
app was created, which included seven main features: (1) a
Healthy Habits Questionnaire to support a baseline assessment
at the time of onboarding, (2) goal setting, (3) tiny steps (daily
challenges), (4) rewards, (5) gamification, (6) daily notifications,
and (7) a progress dashboard. During the FG, parent-child dyads
were asked to complete five assigned tasks using the prototype,
which included (1) completing the baseline assessment; (2)
selecting a behavior to work on, a reward, and a tiny step; (3)
responding to a daily notification for their current tiny step and
reporting progress; (4) completing a further tiny step and
receiving a reward for completing their goal; and (5) reviewing
goal progress and changing their behavior goal. Families
reported ease in completing the 5 assigned tasks, with a median
score of 7 (IQR 6-7; range 2-7) on a 7-point Likert scale, where
a score of 1 represented “very difficult” and 7 represented “very
easy” (Table 2).

Table 2. Median scores for prototype testing during focus group 3 (user testing) on a 7-point rating scale (1=very difficult; 7=very easy).

Values, median (IQR)
Task

7 (6-7)
Complete baseline assessment

6 (6-7)
Select a behavior to work on, a reward, and a tiny step

6 (5-7)
Respond to a daily notification for your current tiny step

7 (6-7)
Complete a tiny step and receive a reward for completing your goal

6 (6-7)
Review goal progress and change your behavior goal

Following prototype testing, families shared that they were
pleased with the graphics and found the app easy to use overall.
Most identified the rewards screen as their favorite but also
found it the most challenging to navigate because of difficulty
in scrolling through a long list of reward options. Parents also
suggested a feature in which custom rewards entered by the
user could be saved for future selection. Children desired more
animation and sound effects as a reward for completing daily
challenges and goals. A total of 64% (7/11) of the regular reward
ideas and 81% (21/26) of the family challenge rewards proposed

by the research team were “liked” by >50% (8/13, 62%) of the
children who completed the scoring task.

Final Product of the App Development Process

After 8 months of app development, the Live 5-2-1-0 app was
launched on both the Apple App Store and Google Play Store.
The main app features, including the Healthy Habits
Questionnaire, goal setting, reward selection, tiny step selection,
goal wheel, goal completion, and assessment dashboard, are
shown in Figure 5.

JMIR Pediatr Parent 2023 | vol. 6 | e44792 | p. 9

Figure 5. Screenshots of various app features. (A) Upon launching the app, users initially complete a Healthy Habits Questionnaire consisting of 8
questions about the user’s current practices for the Live 5-2-1-0 behaviors and readiness to make changes for each. (B) On the basis of the user’s response
to the Healthy Habits Questionnaire, the app labels each behavior goal with either a green, yellow, or red tab representing meeting, almost meeting, and
not meeting each behavior goal, respectively. The app also highlights a suggested goal for the user. (C) Users select a reward from a drop-down menu
or input their own reward. (D) Users select a daily challenge (tiny step) related to their chosen behavior goal. Challenges are categorized into 3 levels
of difficulty (easy, medium, and hard). (E) Visualization of the user’s progress toward achieving a goal. Completion of a tiny step earns users points
that are used to fill the goal wheel. (F) Users are notified that they have earned their reward after the goal wheel is filled. (G) A visual summary of the
user’s assessment response and goal completion progress.

Discussion

Principal Findings

Overview

Guided by cocreation and participatory design research
principles, we developed a mobile app with features and content
that are meaningful and relevant to the behaviors and lifestyles
of children. Although other health behavior promotion apps for
children have also used iterative design processes [30] and
user-centered design approaches [31] and involved end users
in the app development process [30], our app is unique as
families (end users), researchers, and app developers were
actively engaged as collaborators throughout the entire app
development process.

Several key themes emerged from the qualitative data gathered
across the 3 sets of FGs. Children, parents, and HCPs desired
an app that facilitated shared decision-making and empowerment

of children to become active agents in behavior change. Desired
app features that emerged included gamification, goal setting,
daily challenges, family-based challenges, and an interface that
illustrates behavior change progress. Previous studies describing
the development of healthy behavior apps for children have also
reported similar features, such as gamification [30] and graphical
visualization of behavior change progress [31], as being desired
by stakeholders. After testing a prototype that was created based
on the ideas proposed by stakeholders, families reported that
the app prototype was easy to use, and children “liked” the
rewards and daily challenges included.

Shared Decision-making Supports Healthy Behavior
Changes in Children

A dominant theme that emerged from our research was the need
for the app to support shared decision-making when making
healthy behavior changes. By combining HCPs’ medical
expertise with the children’s goals and preferences, shared
decision-making facilitates patient-centered care [32] and

JMIR Pediatr Parent 2023 | vol. 6 | e44792 | p. 10

increases the children’s chances of achieving their desired health
outcomes [33]. In a controlled intervention for children with a
family history of cardiovascular disease that was based on shared
decision-making principles, intervention participants showed a
significant reduction in fat (P<.001) and salt (P=.01) intake, as
well as a significant increase in exercise, compared with controls
[34]. Seventh-graders who took part in a school-based
intervention comprising health coaching and health promotion
sessions stated that taking part in shared decision-making with
researchers in the context of choosing topics for the health
promotion sessions encouraged them to take responsibility and
be more motivated to engage in the sessions [35]. In our app,
the assessment dashboard is intended to facilitate shared
decision-making among children, parents, and HCPs by
providing a visual summary of the child’s progress in making
healthy behavior changes and serving as a conversation starter
during healthy behavior counseling.

Family and HCP Connectivity Encourages the Adoption
of Healthy Behaviors

Parents and children identified family connectedness as a key
motivator, and children were enthusiastic about the idea of
making healthy behavior changes through family challenges.
However, results from studies that investigated the effectiveness
of childhood obesity prevention and treatment interventions
with parental involvement have been mixed [36]. A family-based
obesity prevention and treatment intervention reported positive
intervention effects on children’s weight loss when both children
and parents were educated in healthy behavior changes together
[36]. However, a 3-month multidisciplinary program aimed at
managing childhood obesity reported that parental involvement
in weekly sessions did not result in significant reduction in
weight among children who were overweight [37]. More
research in this area is needed. Children identified peer
connectivity (ie, peer-to-peer digital texting within the app) as
a desirable feature but recognized potential challenges, such as
the need for a moderator. A review of peer support–based mobile
apps pointed to ethical and privacy considerations as substantial
limitations (eg, bullying, spam, and limiting disclosure of
personal information) and suggested that closed access to apps
and monitoring of peer interactions are needed to address any
misuse by users [38].

Child-HCP connectivity, where the assessment dashboard allows
users to keep track of their progress and facilitates better
communication with their HCPs at clinical visits, was also
identified as important and achievable. In an intervention that
addressed childhood overweight via the 5-2-1-0 goals and
included the use of paper-based goal trackers for children to
record their behaviors, youth and parents reported increased
self-perceived quality of care and counseling from their HCP,
whereas HCPs felt better supported in providing medical
evaluations and counseling on healthy behaviors [39].
Connections between HCPs and patients outside of clinic visits
have been shown to be effective in chronic disease management
(eg, in an app aimed at supporting asthma self-management
among adolescents and the inclusion of a pharmacist chat
function increased medication adherence [40]). Our stakeholder
engagement revealed that connection with HCPs via the app
outside of clinic visits is a potential strategy to enhance the

adoption of healthy behaviors. Future app development should
explore how HCPs can be engaged in children’s progress in
adopting healthy behaviors between clinical visits.

Intrinsic Goals as Motivators for Progressive Behavior
Change

Adults and HCPs explained that children would be more likely
to adopt healthy behavior changes if the app meaningfully
educated them about healthy behaviors. This contradicts
evidence from the existing literature claiming that solely
providing health knowledge is unlikely to lead to behavior
change [41]. Interestingly, children participating in our FGs
reported feeling guilty about their behaviors when they were
knowledgeable of recommendations (ie, <2 hours of recreational
screen time). However, previous literature has pointed to the
role of education in developing self-efficacy [42]. Increased
self-efficacy is often linked to decreased stress levels, which
can encourage children to become active agents in making
healthy behavior changes. Whether an individual will initiate
and sustain behavior change depends on their expectations of
the outcomes and their perceived ability to do so [43]. This
concept is reflected in the Fogg Behavior Model, which posits
that individuals are more likely to perceive themselves as having
a high ability to achieve a task that is simple [23]. When the
app educates children about healthy behaviors, the knowledge
gained may decrease the cognitive effort required to achieve
healthy behavior changes.

To allow children to act as active agents of their own behavior
change, the app was designed such that users could select goals
and rewards based on their perceived ability. The flexibility
that the app provides through progressive levels of difficulty in
tiny steps makes the behavior change journey more accessible
to all users regardless of their current healthy behavior practices
and motivation level. By providing an opportunity for children
to master easier challenges first before advancing to more
difficult ones, the app has the potential to provoke a feeling of
satisfaction, which can become a source of motivation. In a
study examining exercise goal setting and its relationship with
cognitive, affective, and behavioral outcomes, setting intrinsic
goals was found to be positively associated with self-reported
exercise behavior and psychological well-being and negatively
associated with exercise anxiety [44]. A systematic review that
aimed to assess the effectiveness of family-based interventions
on obesity-related behavior change in children reported intrinsic
motivation as a key facilitator in encouraging behavior change
in children regardless of the behavior change strategies and
techniques used [45].

Clinical and Research Implications

A unique element of our study was the inclusion of stakeholders
(children, parents, and HCPs) as research partners throughout
the entire app development process. Researchers were able to
seek input directly from stakeholders, analyze the ideas through
a methodological lens, and relay the information to app
developers such that the abstract ideas of stakeholders could be
transformed into app design requirements that were then
integrated into tangible features in the app.

JMIR Pediatr Parent 2023 | vol. 6 | e44792 | p. 11

This reflects the strengths of participatory research, including
the focus on the everyday lives of stakeholders and the ability
to address pressing issues via action and research [46]. App
development that does not incorporate cocreation and
participatory approaches often leaves researchers disappointed
when app features that they believed would be appealing are
not well received by users. For example, in a pilot study
investigating the effectiveness of a mobile app on weight loss,
a peer support buddy chat and in-app bulletin board were
expected to encourage user engagement. However, these features
were undesirable to users because of the discomfort they
experienced in exchanging sensitive information such as body
weight [47]. Had end users participated in the development
process, their perspectives regarding peer support could have been captured earlier in the design process and resources could
have been put toward app features that aligned with their needs
and values.

Strengths and Limitations

The Live 5-2-1-0 app is one of the few mobile health apps aimed
at promoting healthy behavior changes among children that
used HCD and engaged stakeholders as collaborators throughout
its development. The engagement of HCPs was particularly
important to provide insight into how the app could best be
incorporated into their clinical workflow to enhance patient
care. Our approach, which included FGs and agile app
development methodologies, can potentially be applied by others
interested in developing a mobile app to support health
interventions.

Despite these strengths, our development process also had
several limitations, among them the inability to include all
features discussed during the FGs owing to limited resources,
such as 2-way communication between users and HCPs and
remote monitoring of progress by HCPs. To create an app that
closely resembled the overall vision of the participants, the
research team, with guidance from the app development team,
prioritized features that emerged from the FGs before the agile
development phase. Although the app’s current version supports
neither parental profiles nor multiple accounts, the app
encourages parents to participate by including reward options
and daily challenges that involve performing an activity with
the family. Involving stakeholders in the feature prioritization
activity and sprints during agile development would allow for
their direct input on decisions regarding feature prioritization
and resource allocation. Most participants in FG 3 (user testing;
19/24, 79%) also participated in at least 1 of the 2 previous FGs,
which may have led to bias as the features tested were those
that participants had suggested previously.

Selection bias from voluntary response sampling could have
led to an overrepresentation of participants who were interested
in mobile health and highly motivated to respond positively to
the app, as well as those with higher socioeconomic status who
had the ability to travel and the time to attend the FGs. To
address this, we provided reimbursement for transportation and
parking to families as well as scheduling FGs in the evenings
to minimize conflict with work schedules. Finally, given that
our study was conducted before the COVID-19 pandemic and
the increasing use of telephone-based and internet-based care

and digital health services since then, the perspectives we
gathered may not truly reflect current stakeholder needs and
desires.

A potential limitation of the app’s feasibility is its low
compliance with health behavior tracking. However, previous
studies that have investigated the feasibility of mobile health
apps for children that were based on self-monitoring have shown
promise. For example, a study investigating the feasibility of a
handheld computer program with self-monitoring of fruit and
vegetable intake and reminder systems to track behaviors among
children reported high completion rates for fruit and vegetable
goal reminders [48]. With family involvement (eg, family
challenges and daily challenges that involve parental support)
being an integral part of our app, there is the potential for
children to track their health behaviors together with their
parents, especially those who do not have their own mobile
device, which may promote increased adherence.

In a broader context, the success of childhood obesity prevention
initiatives can also be influenced by socioecological factors
surrounding those populations that an initiative aims to have an
impact on [49,50]. The app on its own cannot address social
determinants of health that may pose barriers to behavior
change, such as economic inability to purchase healthy foods;
however, the app is a component of the larger system-level Live
5-2-1-0 initiative that engages multiple sectors across
communities to work at local policy and environmental levels
to address systemic barriers.

Future Directions

We had initiated a pilot feasibility study in the General
Pediatrics Clinic at BCCH intending to collect data to improve
the app further, but it was later halted because of the COVID-19
pandemic. Despite this, we still gathered data from our partners
at Shapedown BC, a weight management program at BCCH,
and based on these data, a second iteration of the app was
created. This new iteration includes some of the outstanding
features not included in the app’s initial version, including the
ability to build 1 weekly goal, input customized goals outside
of the 5-2-1-0 habits (eg, mindfulness and sleep), and set the
frequency of reminders. Using this new app iteration, another
1-group pretest-posttest quasi-experimental pilot feasibility
study will be conducted in Shapedown BC to assess the app’s
effectiveness. The results will inform the feasibility of using
the app as a tool in behavioral weight management programs
and primary care clinics and provide a basis for designing
full-scale studies in the future. Concurrently, the app will also
remain available to other HCPs at BCCH as an element of the
Live 5-2-1-0 HCP Toolkit, with ad hoc feedback also helping
inform future iterations.

Conclusions

We described the design and development process of the Live
5-2-1-0 app aimed at promoting healthy behavior change among
children. This study demonstrated the feasibility of cocreating
a mobile health app prototype with children, parents, and HCPs
through participatory action research. Although further work is
needed to investigate the effectiveness of the app in promoting
health behavior change, our findings may serve as a reference

JMIR Pediatr Parent 2023 | vol. 6 | e44792 | p. 12

for those who are interested in developing mobile apps that
address behavior change in collaboration with stakeholders.