Original Paper

Remote Cognitive Screening Of Healthy Older Adults for Primary
Care With the MyCog Mobile App: Iterative Design and Usability
Evaluation

Stephanie Ruth Young1, PhD; Emily Gardiner Lattie1, PhD; Andrew B L Berry1, PhD; Lynn Bui2, MFA; Greg Joseph
Byrne1, MA; Julia Noelani Yoshino Benavente3, MPH; Michael Bass1, MS; Richard C Gershon1, PhD; Michael S
Wolf3, MA, MPH, PhD; Cindy J Nowinski1, MD, PhD

1Department of Medical Social Sciences, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, United States
2Do Dac Studio, Seattle, WA, United States
3Center for Applied Health Research on Aging, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University,, Chicago, IL, United States

Stephanie Ruth Young, PhD
Department of Medical Social Sciences
Feinberg School of Medicine
Northwestern University
633 N St Clair St
Chicago, IL, 60611
United States
Phone: 1 (312) 503 1725

Methods

Ethics Approval

The research procedures were reviewed and approved by the
Northwestern 
University 
institutional 
review 
board
(STU00214921). Clinic administrators and older adults who
participated in individual interviews provided informed consent
verbally and via an electronic REDCap (Research Electronic
Data Capture; Vanderbilt University) survey [53,54] and were
offered a US $50 Visa gift card as an incentive to participate.
Clinician interviews were considered foundational, informal
consultations with colleagues and, thus, clinicians were not
formally consented or compensated. The community stakeholder
panel was facilitated by a Northwestern University center
dedicated to community research that was external to the core
research team. Thus, panel participants were consented and
compensated (with a US $100 Visa gift card) through the
external center. We used institutional review board–approved
and 
Health 
Insurance 
Portability 
and 
Accountability
Act–compliant measures to maintain participant confidentiality,
privacy, and data security. All data were deidentified, stored on
secure servers, and accessed on password-protected devices by
trained research team members only.

Clinician Interviews

We conducted informal, unstructured, 30-minute interviews
with 5 clinicians before making any design-related decisions.
We recruited clinicians through the authors’ professional
networks, and the selection criteria included clinical expertise
in geriatrics, cognitive decline, and primary care of older adults.
Each clinician was a practicing physician working in different
primary care or specialty geriatric settings across the country.
The goal of these foundational interviews was to conduct a
preliminary evaluation of the feasibility, acceptability, and

potential barriers to the adoption of a remote cognitive screener.
The discussions focused on themes including current cognitive
screening 
practices 
and 
workflows, 
ideal 
workflows
incorporating a remote cognitive screener, potential benefits
and challenges of remote screeners, and technology issues in
older patient populations.

Clinic Administrator Interviews

Next, we conducted semistructured 30-minute interviews with
3 clinic administrative staff members to better understand the
practical details of clinical and administrative workflows in
primary care settings. These interviews were informed by
findings from the informal interviews conducted with clinicians.
Clinic administrators were recruited through Northwestern
Medicine clinics, and the selection criteria included primary
care experience with a large geriatric population and with
cognitive screening processes. In total, 67% (2/3) of the
participants were practice managers, one in general internal
medicine and geriatrics and one in a primary care network with
a large geriatric population. The third was a clinical operations
manager in the same primary care network as one of the practice
managers.

On the basis of administrators’ feedback, we created user
journey maps of their current workflow and a proposed
workflow including MyCog Mobile. User journey maps are
visual models of complex processes and interactions that can
be used to represent health care services from the perspective
of different stakeholders [55]. We focused on the broad tasks
and interactions necessary for multiple users (patients, support
staff, and clinicians) to complete a cognitive screening in a
primary care setting. Visual models of the user journey maps
(Figures 2 and 3) were shared with the administrators following
the interviews for further feedback, refinement, and confirmation
of the final models.

Older Adult Interviews

Older adults were recruited from the research participant
recruiting platform User Interviews (User Interviews Inc).
Eligibility criteria were age of ≥65 years, ownership of an iOS
smartphone, and access to the videoconferencing app FaceTime
(Apple Inc; see Table 2
for participant demographic

information). The requirement for iOS smartphone ownership
was based on a grant constraint that the original version of
MyCog Mobile be built for iOS mobile phones if a native app
solution was pursued. Participants were not asked to report their
cognitive health status, although all participants were cognitively
able to complete the session tasks.

Semistructured interviews were conducted over FaceTime and
recorded with the participants’ consent. The first part of the
interview consisted of discussions of the participants’
experiences, attitudes, preferences, and beliefs about cognitive
screening and the possibility of completing a screener at home
on their smartphone. In the second part of the interview,
participants interacted with and provided feedback on the
prototype at various stages of design (as described in the
Prototype Testing section).

The interviews were transcribed using the automated
transcription software Otter.ai [56] and anonymized. The first
author (SRY) conducted an inductive, reflexive thematic
analysis of the transcripts, including familiarization with the
data, generating codes relevant to study aims, and then grouping
codes and developing broader themes [57]. We used functions
in Otter.ai [56] and Trello (Atlassian) [58] software for coding
and thematic grouping.

Stakeholder-Academic Resource Panel

Stakeholder-Academic Resource Panels (ShARPs) are custom
panels run by a university-affiliated organization that bring
together community stakeholders with personal experience
related to research projects. These community members offer
feedback on adaptations that can improve research relevance,
feasibility, and dissemination opportunities. The goal is to
engage communities in research and foster inclusive design of
research studies and innovations. ShARPs consist of 90-minute
sessions conducted over Zoom by a professional moderator
external to the core research team.

The ShARP included 10 adults aged >65 years and 1 caregiver,
all of whom resided in the Chicago metropolitan area where
MyCog Mobile will be piloted. The moderator recruited panel
members through fliers that provided a brief description of the
research project as well as direct outreach to an established
network of community members. In total, 2 members of the
core research team (SRY and CN) were present to explain the
study background and observe the discussion. The moderator
facilitated a discussion of the benefits and challenges of
cognitive screening on a smartphone for older adults.
Participants also watched short videos of examples of
downloading a native app or accessing a screener via a website,

as well as a video of the last version of the MyCog Mobile
prototype (version 4). Participants were able to use a polling
tool during the session to provide feedback on their preferences
regarding how to access the screener (ie, native app, website,
or no preference). The moderator recorded the session and
provided the research team with structured notes. Although one
of the goals of the ShARP program is to recruit diverse groups
of participants that are representative of the larger community,
they did not disclose specific demographic information about
the participants beyond the general age range (≥65 years).

Prototype Testing

We used an iterative prototyping process to test and refine the
designs based on user feedback. The Picture Sequence Memory
and Dimensional Change Card Sorting tests from the National
Institutes of Health Toolbox Cognition Battery [34] were used
as the “version 0” prototype as these tests would serve as the
foundation for the MyCog Mobile screener. As such, version 0
prototype testing was conducted using the live Mobile Toolbox
app. All other versions were clickable prototype mock-ups made
using Figma design software (Figma, Inc) [59]. All usability
testing was conducted on participants’ personal iOS devices.

During individual interviews with older adults, the researcher
sent participants a link to the prototype via SMS text message
and posed a realistic scenario in which the participants’primary
care clinic asked them to complete the screener before an
appointment. The participants either downloaded the live Mobile
Toolbox app (version 0) or followed the link to the Figma design
prototype (versions 1-4). They then shared their screen via
FaceTime so the researcher could observe their interactions and
solicit feedback. Following the interview, participants completed
usability measures via REDCap [53,54], including the Simplified
System Usability Scale (S-SUS) [60] and After-Scenario
Questionnaire (ASQ) [61].

The S-SUS is a modified version of the original System
Usability Scale designed for adults aged >65 years with or
without cognitive impairments [60]. Participants rate their level
of agreement with statements about their experience using a
given system (in this case, a prototype of MyCog Mobile) on a
5-point Likert scale. Several independent studies on the original
System Usability Scale have demonstrated evidence of its

internal consistency, sensitivity to change, and concurrent
validity with other usability measures [62]. A total score of ≥80
(out of 100 possible points) is considered above-average
usability [62].

The ASQ is a 3-item questionnaire that prompts participants to
rate their satisfaction on a 7-point Likert scale after using a
system in a hypothetical scenario that asks them to complete
realistic tasks [61]. In the case of MyCog Mobile, patient
participants were prompted with the following scenario before
using the prototype: “Imagine that you have an upcoming
appointment with your doctor for an annual checkup. The clinic
has asked you to complete some cognitive screening activities
on your smartphone before your appointment and sends you
this link.” The ASQ has demonstrated evidence of internal
consistency; concurrent validity; and sensitivity to different
systems, user groups, and scenarios [61]. Total scores range
from 1 to 7, with higher scores indicating higher levels of
satisfaction.

Results

Clinician Interviews

The clinicians we spoke with were motivated to introduce a
new cognitive screening paradigm if the process could save
them time while maintaining diagnostic accuracy. These
discussions revealed several important preferences and
constraints that informed the MyCog Mobile design process
and proposed implementation, including the following: (1)
clinicians felt strongly that proctored remote screening would
be impractical in existing clinical workflows given the
constraints on time and resources within primary care settings;
(2) clinicians require a screening test with strong evidence of
validity in remote self-administration contexts; (3) clinicians
want to see results that automatically populate the electronic
health record (EHR) as opposed to manual score entry that
would require additional staff or clinician effort; (4) clinicians
want to see simplified, easily interpretable score reports tied to
clinical recommendations; and (5) clinicians had concerns about
their older patients’ ability to navigate a smartphone-enabled
cognitive screener on their own.

Clinic Administrator Interviews

Similar to clinicians, clinic administrators were interested in a
remote cognitive screener that could help save them time and
reduce their workload. They noted that staff are already
responsible for conducting cognitive screenings and would
welcome changes in cognitive screening processes that promote
greater efficiency. Importantly, 67% (2/3) of the administrators
noted that their current screening process only takes
approximately 5 to 10 minutes to complete. Thus, a new
screening process must involve very little time and effort on
the part of the staff to be compelling.

We used the existing workflows described by administrators to
model a user journey map (Figure 2). Although administrators
worked in different roles and settings, their cognitive screening
workflows shared features that are captured in the user journey
maps. In these settings, support staff typically conduct cognitive
screeners using paper-and-pencil measures (ie, Mini-Cog [63]

or Montreal Cognitive Assessment [MoCA] [64]). Staff then
hand score these protocols and manually enter scores into the
EHR for the PCC to review. Administrators noted that, in their
current workflows, previsit tasks are typically sent electronically
to patients before their appointment, such as an e–check-in,
Medicare wellness questionnaire, or consent forms. They also
noted that some patients do not complete the tasks before the
visit and may complete these tasks after the physical check-in
at the clinic.

Older Adult Interviews

We constructed six themes based on the feedback from
individual interviews with older adults: (1) annual cognitive
screening provides reassurance, (2) older adults expect
additional benefits to using a smartphone-based screener before
a visit, (3) older adults want to be informed by their clinic about
the purpose and process of cognitive screening, (4) older adults
prioritize security and simplicity in mHealth apps, (5) older
adults have concerns about using smartphones for screening
because of the screen size, and (6) older adults tend to defer to
their PCCs’ requests.

Theme 1: Annual Cognitive Screening Provides
Reassurance

Although only 20% (1/5) of the participants had been offered
the opportunity to complete a cognitive screening in the past,
80% (4/5) of the older adult participants were familiar with the
concept of cognitive screening. All participants reported that
they would complete a cognitive screener at home on a
smartphone if their PCC asked them to. Participants were
motivated to complete cognitive screeners (both in person and
remotely) to learn about their cognitive health status. For
example, when asked why he would participate in a cognitive
screening, participant 3 responded, “I’d like to know, you know,
if I’m losing my marbles.” Participants felt that cognitive
screeners could provide reassurance that they were cognitively
healthy even when they were not concerned about their cognitive
functioning. Participant 1 said that she would complete a
screener “because I want to make sure that my brain was
functioning properly even though in my mind, I know it is. But
don’t we all think that even when it’s not?” Participants also
recognized some benefits of early detection if a screening result
was positive; for example, participant 5 said that “I would do
[a cognitive screener] so I can get some kind of assistance if
needed or intervention.”

Theme 2: Older Adults Expect Additional Benefits to
Using a Smartphone-Based Screener Before a Visit

Beyond the benefits of cognitive screening generally,
participants reported that at-home screeners specifically could
help save them time during their in-person visit and feel more
private. Participant 1 said that “I’d like to do [a cognitive
screener] at my own convenience and in a comfortable place.”
Participant 5 said that she would like the opportunity to think
about the idea of completing a cognitive screener at home rather
than being surprised by it during her clinic visit. She said that
“It would be nice to have a heads up before you meet with the
doctor, so you can kind of wrap your head and mind around it.”

Some participants expected to see their results within the app
immediately after completing the screener and disliked the idea
of waiting until their appointment to learn their results.
Participant 3 said the following:

I think I’d probably like to know sooner [than my
appointment] because then you’re worrying. Not
worrying, but you know, you’re curious and you may
not see the doc for a couple of weeks.
Participant 5 felt that the effort required to complete the screener
before the visit warranted instant feedback, saying that “if I take
the time to do it, I want immediate results. I don’t want to have
to wait.” However, all of these participants said that they would
still complete the screener if they knew they had to wait for
results and understood why waiting might be necessary.
Participant 1 said the following:

It wouldn’t make sense if someone was struggling
with [the screener] to give them very bad results
without someone there to say, “Let’s talk about this.”

Theme 3: Older Adults Want to Be Informed by Their
Clinic About the Purpose and Process of Cognitive
Screening

Some participants reported that they would be concerned if a
clinician asked them to complete a cognitive screener before a
visit; they worried that the request may indicate that the PCC
suspected they already had a cognitive problem. Speaking of
the importance of providing the rationale for screening, these
participants reported that they would feel better if they knew
that the test was routinely administered to all patients aged >65
years, including healthy people. For example, participant 2 said
the following:

Yeah, if it was part of your annual exam, then I would
[complete the screener], but it would kind of make
me nervous, knowing that [my doctor] wanted me to
do it without knowing why.

Theme 4: Older Adults Prioritize Security and Simplicity
in mHealth Apps

Participants in our sample were familiar with using mobile apps
and websites through their smartphones. They were also familiar
with communicating with their clinics (via a patient portal or
email) and completing previsit tasks electronically. Participants
expected that an at-home screener would be completed
electronically and their clinic would send them a secure link to
access the screener via email or their patient portal. They
indicated that they would want to be sure that the link was sent
by their clinic before accessing the screener. Participant 1 said
that “I would probably trust [a link to an app] if it just came
from my physician.” In total, 40% (2/5) of the participants noted
that it would be easiest for them to receive the link to the
screener through their patient portal apps as they already
frequently used these apps to manage appointments and
communicate with their physicians.

Participants in our sample preferred a remote cognitive screener
that required only a few steps to access and use. For example,
participant 4 said that she would want to access the app in as
few clicks as possible, stating that “You could produce the link

to download, you know, press the button, download it. Boom!
There it is.” Difficulty with passwords was also noted to be a
potential source of complexity and frustration. Participant 1
said the following:

You want it to work, and you want it to be simple, and
not something that frustrates you because it throws
you out or because it didn’t like the way you logged
in.
She explained that she felt frustrated when she had to create
complicated passwords with many requirements (eg,
combinations of capital and lowercase letters, numbers, and
symbols).

Participants did not have a strong preference between
downloading a native app to their phone or accessing the
screener through a web application and were familiar with both
processes. Some participants felt that downloading native apps
cluttered their phones but also expected to delete the app from
their device immediately after completing the screener.
Participants reported that an ideal app would need to be
functional and free of bugs. Participant 2 said that she would
look at reviews of a native app before downloading it to learn
“what people thought about it, you know, like if it is actually
bogged down, if it was slow, if it actually worked.” Of note,
participant 1 pointed out that the device type played an important
role in her comfort with downloading a native app, saying that
“I’m not real hesitant to download apps on an Apple device
because to me, they seem very, very safe as far as viruses and
all that go. If I had a galaxy, I might think twice about it.”

Theme 5: Older Adults Have Concerns About Using
Smartphones for Screening Because of the Screen Size

Most participants had concerns about being able to navigate
text and images on a small smartphone screen and suggested
that a tablet or computer would be preferred. Participants were
willing to accept a smartphone app if these concerns were
addressed in the user interface design. For example, participant
1 said the following:

I would want it on an app with reasonably sized text
and easy-to-push buttons. If it’s easy to click buttons,
that’s fine, it doesn’t matter [if the screener is on a
smartphone]
When asked what would make completing the screener on a
smartphone easiest, participant 5 responded, “I guess typically,
it would be as little keyboarding as possible.” She explained
that she did not mind typing on a computer keyboard, but typing
on a smartphone keyboard was more tedious.

Theme 6: Older Adults Tend to Defer to Their PCCs’
Requests

Despite the aforementioned concerns, participants in our sample
were willing to complete nonpreferred aspects of the screening
process to comply with their PCCs’requests. Participants trusted
that their PCCs ordered the screener with optimal patient care
in mind. For example, when asked if she would complete the
screener before a visit despite her concerns about why her PCC
had ordered it, participant 2 responded, “Probably, I mean, if
my doctor asked me to do it, then yes.” She explained that she

would feel more confident about completing the screener
knowing it was a routine best practice and she could discuss
the feedback with her physician. Participant 5 said that she
would prefer to see immediate results within the app but would
still complete the screener if she had to wait. She explained that
she would complete it anyway “because I think it’s an
assessment that is necessary as we age, you know, like other
health things.”

ShARP Interviews

The ShARP session moderator posed a set of questions to the
group to guide discussion on cognitive screenings and the
proposed MyCog Mobile project. Much of the feedback
provided by the panel participants was consistent with that
provided by the individual interview participants. When asked
about their familiarity with cognitive screenings, many panel
participants were unfamiliar with the practice of routine
screenings in primary care. Patients were unsure whether their
PCCs were conducting cognitive screenings, and some expressed
concerns that their PCCs had not mentioned routine screenings
during their annual visits.

When asked about the potential benefits of completing a
screening on a smartphone at home, a participant shared that
they would feel more comfortable completing the screening in
the privacy of their own home compared with in a clinic.
Another participant felt that completing the screening at home
would free up time to discuss other health issues with their
physician during their visit. Finally, participants agreed that
completing a cognitive screening in general provided
reassurance that they were cognitively healthy.

Participants also identified potential disadvantages of completing
a remote cognitive screening on a smartphone. All participants
(11/11, 100%) reported that they owned and were comfortable
using smartphones and apps but knew others their age for whom
that was not the case and, thus, who would not be able to
participate in the remote screening process. Participants
expressed concerns about the security of their health information
being transmitted over a smartphone and were wary of scams
aimed at older populations. A participant said that she believed
that some older adults may avoid taking a screening test for fear
of learning that they may have a cognitive problem and risk
losing their independence.

Participants offered ideas on how to make a smartphone
screening process easy. Similar to the individual interview
participants, panel participants also noted that they often forgot
passwords and simplifying the password process would be
helpful. They suggested that it would be helpful to allow

caregivers to help patients access the screener, such as helping
with downloading an app or resetting a password. A participant
indicated that she would prefer to complete the screener on a
laptop instead of a phone as a bigger screen is easier to navigate.
Participants noted that it would also be helpful if their clinic
offered some sort of orientation or training on how to complete
the screener.

Participants in our community research panel sample were
familiar with the process of downloading an app. Participants
were polled about whether they would rather access the screener
by downloading a native app to their smartphone or visiting a
website (web application) in their browser. In total, 73% (8/11)
of the participants voted that they would prefer to download a
native app, whereas 18% (2/11) voted for a website, and 9%
(1/11) had no preference. Most participants felt that an app
would be the most secure way to complete the screener, and a
participant noted that the iOS App Store offers assurance that
the available apps are safe.

Participants agreed that the most important access issue for
them was knowing that the screening was sent from a trusted
source (their PCC). A participant shared positive experiences
in using their PCC’s patient portal app because of its perceived
security and trustworthiness. Participants also indicated that
factors such as access to wireless internet and available storage
space on their smartphones would influence their preferences
for a website or native app.

Prototype Testing

A total of 4 versions of the MyCog Mobile prototype were
created and tested, with most improvements made in the
transition from version 0 (the Mobile Toolbox versions of the
tests) to version 1 (the first Figma prototype of MyCog Mobile).
The usability issues noted by participants were addressed in
each subsequent version of the prototype (Table 3). We defined
usability issues as any difficulty that a participant encountered
in the prototype that would negatively affect their ability to
complete MyCog Mobile in a real-world context or their
satisfaction with the user experience [65]. When applicable we
also considered the overlapping and diverging needs of
clinicians, clinic administrators, and older adults when
incorporating usability feedback (Figure 4). The mean score on
the S-SUS was 91 (SD 5.18; range 85-97.5), indicating
above-average usability for each version of the prototype.
Similarly, the ASQ average score was 6.13 (SD 8.40; range
5.33-7.0), which indicates an above-average level of satisfaction
with using the prototypes in the imagined scenario. Screen
recordings of the introduction and practice items for the tests
are included in Multimedia Appendices 1 to 4.

Discussion

Principal Findings and Design Implications

Overview

Through an iterative, human-centered design process, we
developed a viable remote cognitive screening app and proposed
an implementation strategy for primary care settings that was
optimized for multiple stakeholders. On the basis of individual
interviews and collaborative user journey mapping, we found
that clinicians and clinic administrators were motivated to use
a remote cognitive screener if it could save them time.
Minimizing staff involvement and maximizing EHR integration
were key implementation factors to ensure that MyCog Mobile
will fit in well with existing primary care workflows. Through

individual interviews and a community stakeholder panel, we
found that older adults were motivated to complete a remote
cognitive screener to ensure that they were cognitively healthy
or receive intervention if needed. They perceived additional
benefits to at-home smartphone-based screening but also
reported some concerns that required mitigation in the app
design. We iteratively designed and tested high-fidelity
prototypes that incorporated a series of usability improvements
to optimize older adults’ user experience, primarily aimed at
simplicity of instructions and app workflow and transparency
regarding expectations of the screening process.

Clinician and Clinic Administrator Perspectives

Clinicians and clinic administrators perceived that the primary
benefit of MyCog Mobile was reducing in-clinic time and effort

spent on screening healthy older adults, who comprise most of
their patients. They reported that a portion of their patients can
use smartphones and complete previsit tasks electronically
through patient portals, which was consistent with the experience
of older adult smartphone users in our sample. Although current
screening processes are relatively brief, they require substantial
staff involvement and several steps that introduce opportunities
for error (eg, manual scoring and data entry). Beyond time saved
directly by removing the need for in-person staff administration,
automation of the MyCog Mobile scoring and reporting
processes can save additional time when implemented on a large
scale.

Despite the overall efficiency improvements, clinicians and
administrators also recognized that patients at the highest risk
of dementia (eg, older age [66] and less education [67]) may
have the most difficulty using MyCog Mobile, which is an
important limitation of a remote screening paradigm. Regardless
of screening results, older adults with cognitive impairments
will need, at a minimum, a follow-up in-person evaluation to
confirm a diagnosis and receive referrals and appropriate care.
As such, the efficiency gains related to remote screening
practices are most relevant to patients who are healthy. Starting
a routine remote screening process while patients are still healthy
allows clinicians to see not only changes in scores over time
but also changes in a patient’s ability to complete the screener
at home.

It is also likely that some older adult patients will not complete
a screener for reasons unrelated to cognitive impairment.
Administrators in our sample reported that a portion of patients
who are healthy do not complete previsit tasks at home currently.
Understanding why a patient did not complete the screener
remotely may be a source of clinical information. For example,
did the patient struggle with the smartphone screener because
of a lack of technological experience or because of a cognitive
problem? For patients who do not complete MyCog Mobile at
home, clinics will need to return to their existing in-person
screening process, as shown in Figure 3. Although MyCog
Mobile can be used alongside any in-person screener, clinics
that adopt MyCog Mobile may also consider using the MyCog
tablet app for in-person screenings to maintain relative
consistency in test selection across patients.

Interviews with clinical stakeholders helped us identify crucial
constraints and features necessary for MyCog Mobile to improve
workflow efficiency. Critically, we learned that clinicians
viewed proctoring a remote screening as prohibitively
time-consuming in the context of their current workflows even
if conducted by a medical assistant or other support staff. On
the basis of this finding, our team chose not to pursue the design
and development of costly remote proctoring features such as
bidirectional video communication, which would not be viable
in practice.

Both clinicians and administrators stressed the importance of
integrating every aspect of the cognitive screener into the EHR
to improve efficiency. On the basis of administrator feedback,
we created a proposed MyCog Mobile user journey map (Figure
3) intended to leverage existing clinic-patient interactions and
minimize additional tasks for both patients and staff. Ideally, a

link to the screener would be sent to a patient automatically
along with the other previsit tasks they are already asked to
complete electronically (eg, e–check-in, insurance verification,
and consent). Patients would then accept the MyCog Mobile
screener as part of the tasks they need to complete before their
appointment. At the time of the visit, the support staff would
only need to check whether the screener was completed and
would no longer need to be involved in the screening process.
A completed screener upon arrival not only frees time for busy
staff but also minimizes the possibility for errors in manual
scoring or data entry when scores are automatically calculated
and transferred to the EHR [23,24].

Integration with an EHR addresses clinician-specific needs as
well. First, automatically populating scores into the EHR
eliminates the need for clinicians to find and review a separate
score report (eg, a paper protocol or separate software
application), which would add additional steps and time to their
workflows. Configuring automated best-practice alerts within
the EHR may help reduce the cognitive load of clinical
decision-making for PCCs following a positive result [5].
Clinicians also noted that it would be helpful to review screener
results in the EHR well before a patient arrives so that they have
additional time to plan for the visit, especially if impairment or
decline is suspected.

Older Adult Perspectives

Individual interviews and the community research panel session
revealed that older adults are motivated to complete cognitive
screeners to ensure that they are cognitively healthy or receive
early care if they need it. Participants perceived additional
benefits of screening at home, including saving time during
their in-person visits and privacy. At the same time, some
participants worried about why their PCCs would ask them to
complete a screener or what poor performance might indicate.
To feel comfortable completing MyCog Mobile, participants
first wanted to understand why their PCC had requested them
to do so and when they could expect feedback. They also wanted
to be sure that the request was sent from their primary care
provider and not from an unsafe source. They worried that
completing a screener would be difficult on a small smartphone
screen and suggested some related design improvements.
Despite some concerns, the older adults we spoke with were
willing to comply with nonpreferred aspects of the remote
smartphone screening process as they trusted that their PCCs
ordered it with their best intentions in mind.

The ways in which patient needs and goals for a cognitive
screening process in primary care overlap with and diverge from
those of clinicians and administrators are important to consider
(Figure 4). Patients, clinicians, and administrators share a
common goal of efficiency in in-person primary care visits but
may be motivated to achieve this goal for different reasons.
Both clinicians and patients want to prioritize spending visit
time on the issues that have the most impact on health and
quality of life [68] and simultaneously want to ensure that they
are not missing a nonobvious health problem that could be
caught by a routine screening [69-71]. However, clinicians’
need for efficiency is also driven by the need to accommodate
large daily patient loads, which can limit the time spent on

individual patients [72]. Similarly, clinic administrators have
many tasks to complete related to each patient visit and need
to ensure that visits are completed in an efficient and timely
manner [73]. As such, clinicians’ and clinic administrators’
goals for efficiency may not completely align with those of a
patient. For example, a patient may prefer to complete a
screening in person or not participate in a cognitive screening
at all [71].

Although we found that older adults in our sample were willing
to defer to the requests of their PCCs even if aspects of the
screening process did not align with their preferences, clinics
should be careful not to take advantage of patients’trust. There
are times when clinics must sacrifice efficiency to accommodate
patient needs and provide optimal patient-centered care.
Ultimately, individual clinics need to decide how to implement
MyCog Mobile, communicate the process to their patients, and
support app use based on the needs of their unique patient
populations. We intend to collect data on how clinics can best
implement MyCog Mobile to maximize compliance, patient
experience, and the potential benefits of MyCog Mobile during
an upcoming validation and feasibility study.

MyCog Mobile User Experience Design

Concerns expressed by older adults in the individual interviews
and ShARP directly informed our user experience design. First,
we designed introduction and exit screens to set expectations
for the remote screening process, address common concerns,
and provide clear and simple instructions (Figures 5 and 6). The
introduction screen emphasized the routine nature of the
screening and notified the user that they would learn about their
results at their upcoming visit. Instructions were written for a
middle school reading level or lower and assessed for ease of
potential translation in subsequent versions (eg, simple, direct
statements free of idiomatic or culture-specific language). Users
are instructed to complete the screener in a distraction-free
environment and given the option to delete the app upon
completion. We also increased the size of the text and images
and did not include typing to optimize the app for older adults’
preferences on a mobile screen.

To address older adults’ concerns regarding the screener being
sent from a legitimate source, we proposed that clinics send a
link to the screener to the patient via an established
communication channel. An EHR-based patient portal message
is an ideal route for many clinics if the patient has a patient
portal account (eg, Epic’s MyChart); however, a link could be
sent via a secure email or SMS text message if that is how the
clinic usually communicates with patients. Clinics will need to
carefully consider how they communicate with their patients
about the MyCog Mobile process when sending the link to the
app to ensure that patients trust the source and understand the
process.

Participants generally perceived native iOS apps as more secure
and trustworthy than web applications and were familiar and
comfortable with downloading apps. To meet the needs of both
clinical and patient stakeholders, we proposed a native app
solution that could be integrated with a patient portal. A link to
download the app could be sent via a patient portal message
similar to familiar previsit tasks such as e–check-in. The

perceived and actual security of non-iOS apps should be
considered if versions of MyCog Mobile for other devices are
pursued in the future.

Creating and remembering passwords was a source of frustration
for many patients. We proposed an open authorization process
so that patients could use their patient portal credentials to log
in to MyCog Mobile, which not only simplifies the log-in
process for the patient but also serves the clinician’s goal of
automatically transferring score data back to the EHR. It is
likely that many patients will need to find or reset their patient
portal passwords or create new accounts, which may present
barriers to using the app. However, the extra steps to find or
create new patient portal credentials are likely similar to what
would be necessary to create new MyCog Mobile credentials
but offer the benefit of broader patient portal access and use.

Findings from iterative prototype testing identified several
usability issues that led to incremental improvements in the
MyCog Mobile user experience design. Overall, high levels of
satisfaction with each version of the prototype during usability
testing and in follow-up surveys suggested good usability of
the MyCog Mobile user interface even at baseline (the Mobile
Toolbox versions of the tests). The most usability improvements
were made in the transition from the Mobile Toolbox version
(version 0) to the first version of the MyCog Mobile prototype
(version 1). Many of these changes were consistent with best
practices for mobile app design for older adults, including
increasing text size; gradually increasing difficulty level in the
practice rounds; and creating simple, interactive instructions
[46].

We also removed the activity menu in favor of a seamless flow
through the activities to encourage patients to complete both
tasks in 1 session and reduce the number of clicks necessary to
complete the screener. In later versions of the prototype, we
learned that dragging pictures to arrange them in the Picture
Sequence Memory task was difficult for some users and could
be problematic for older adults [74,75]. Thus, we changed the
touch screen interaction gesture to tapping the images instead
of dragging them to improve accessibility (Figure 6). After
completing the prototype testing, all participants reported that
they felt confident in their ability to complete the MyCog Mobile
screener on their own before a primary care visit.

Limitations

Despite its strengths, our study has important limitations,
primarily regarding the generalizability of our sample. Before
embarking on this project, we knew that the first version of
MyCog Mobile would be built for iOS smartphones based on
the stipulations of the supporting research grant. Although

smartphone ownership is becoming more ubiquitous among
older adults, many older adults still do not own smartphones or
feel confident using them. Moreover, iPhones are among the
most expensive smartphone brands, which may have biased the
sample toward higher-income participants. We also sourced
participants through User Interviews, a web-based platform that
users voluntarily seek out and sign up for, which may have
created some self-selection bias in the sample of older adults
who participated in individual interviews and prototype testing.

The constraints for the pilot version of MyCog Mobile risk
exacerbating disparities in health care access and outcomes for
older adults with lower incomes or less technical experience
[75-77]. To compensate for the potential selection bias in the
recruitment method, we incorporated the views of a diverse
panel of community members. To broaden the potential user
group of older adults, we intend to develop a MyCog Mobile
app for other smartphone operating systems in subsequent
versions if the iOS version proves successful. We also plan to
conduct additional usability interviews with a subsample of
participants from the feasibility and validation study, with
special attention to the experiences of older adults with lower
income and less experience with technology. Findings from
subsequent usability testing will inform further improvements
to the user interface before the finalized app is released.

Another important limitation of our sample is that we did not
specifically recruit older adults with cognitive impairments. As
previously described, clinicians and clinic administrators saw
value in reducing the time spent on in-person screenings for
most of their patients who are cognitively healthy. Still,
clinicians recognized that using MyCog Mobile would be
challenging for cognitively impaired older adults and that a
portion of older adults with and without cognitive impairment
would not complete the MyCog Mobile screener at home. We
intend to conduct usability interviews with participants with
cognitive impairments during a clinical validation study to
understand the accessibility of MyCog Mobile for this
population.

Finally, the workflows and designs we proposed are based on
individual stakeholders’ self-reported beliefs and behaviors in
a hypothetical situation. Usability ratings reflect only the
usability of prototype mock-ups tested in the context of a
controlled research setting. These ratings, although positive,
may not predict actual use in practice [78]. Moreover, as the
prototypes were iteratively improved, survey ratings must be
considered individually and are descriptive in nature. This study
reflects formative research in the context of an ongoing
user-centered design and implementation process for MyCog
Mobile, and additional feedback from end users is needed to
further optimize the user experience and identify additional
usability issues [79].

We 
anticipate 
unforeseen 
challenges 
related 
to 
the
implementation, compliance, and usability of MyCog Mobile
when launched in real-world primary care clinics. Once
validated and further refined, the MyCog Mobile app will be
piloted in clinics to test its feasibility and continue to optimize
the remote cognitive screening process for older adults. We will
pay special attention to the technical support needs of older

adults as well as additional support that clinics may put in place
to increase the at-home screening rate (eg, outreach to increase
awareness and caregiver involvement, including MyCog Mobile
training videos on their website).

Conclusions

Through an iterative, human-centered process, we were able to
design a viable remote cognitive screening app, MyCog Mobile,
and a proposed workflow for primary care settings that was
optimized for multiple stakeholders. Insights from clinicians
and clinic administrators helped minimize any potential
logistical friction related to the implementation of MyCog
Mobile as well as maximize its utility in clinical practice.
Feedback from older adults helped us design a streamlined user
experience that would encourage patients to complete MyCog
Mobile at home before a primary care visit. At-home,
smartphone-based cognitive screening for primary care settings
is a relatively new concept with many potential obstacles as
well as benefits. We hope that researchers and app developers
interested in cognitive screening can use our design process as

a model for future app development, particularly regarding the
involvement of multiple stakeholders early and often throughout
the iterative design process. This approach can inform not only
which features to build but also what not to build to avoid costly
mistakes.

This study reflects formative, early-stage user research in the
context of an ongoing user-centered design and implementation
process for MyCog Mobile. The next steps for MyCog Mobile
include validating the tests in clinical and healthy populations
and piloting the finalized app in a community primary care
clinic. We intend to continue to solicit feedback from
stakeholders and refine the app throughout each phase of the
project. Once released, MyCog Mobile has the potential to
improve primary care clinics’ workflow efficiency, encourage
broader routine cognitive screening, and promote serial tracking
of cognitive functioning over longer periods. We hope that the
direct benefits of MyCog Mobile will subsequently increase the
rates of early detection and management of cognitive impairment
in older adults.