Simultaneously Monitoring System Design
for Infants’ Temperature: A Human-Centred
Design (HCD) in Fashion Practice

Yushan Zou1,2(B)
and Fanke Peng2,3

1 Southwest University, No. 2 Tiansheng Road, Beibei District, Chongqing City 400715, China

2 University of Canberra, 11 Kirinari Street, Bruce, ACT 2617, Australia
3 University of South Australia, 101 Currie Street, Adelaide, SA 5001, Australia

2
Methods and Methodology

To explore the speciﬁc preconceptions or anxieties about materials that arise in spe-
ciﬁc settings, we need an interdisciplinary approach that includes scientiﬁc studies and
ethnographic methods [24]. There are various design methods available for design-
ers to consider when developing a conceptual product [13], including the user-centred
design approach, qualitative and quantitative research methods, data analysis, illustration
and model-making. The research methodology combines a practice-based, and human-
centred participatory design. Empathy is the ﬁrst step in the design process. Designers
must not only be committed to research and theoretical thinking, but also to acknowl-
edging that the ﬁeld of design as crucial to our understanding of contemporary materials
and experiences of visual worlds [22].
Designers are increasingly becoming engaged in inﬂuencing the development of
materials in the laboratory [24]. This experiment was deﬁned as a series of tests designed
to input the variables of the process so that researchers can observe the responses
outputted [15]. This research tested thermochromic materials using different designs
and applications of pigment-based thermochromic materials to attain ﬁrst-hand sources.
Colour change behaviour, the character of reversible thermochromic materials and the
character of reversible thermal yarn response were tested in the research. Through labora-
tory experiments, the core research team gained a clearer understanding of the materials
to encourage them to explore materials in different forms.
Human-Centred Design (HCD) describes the creative exploration of human needs,
knowledge and experience, which aims to extend human capabilities and improve quality
of life [7]. The HCD approach involves developing solutions to problems, advocating
a more intuitive, easier to learn environment, freer of performance errors [16]. HCD
involves techniques which include communicating, interacting with, empathising with
and stimulating the people involved, to obtain an understanding of their needs, desires
and experiences, to an extent that often transcends that which the people themselves
previously knew and realised [14]. HCD, which involves the end user throughout the
product development and testing phase, is crucial in ensuring that designs meet the
needs and capabilities of users, particularly in terms of safety and user experience [7].
It has been broadly acknowledged that HCD is required so as to develop feasible textile
solutions that address complex healthcare problems. In this research, infant babies,
parents and caregivers are the key stakeholders interacted with. Due to the difﬁculties
communicating with infants, this research mainly conducted interview with parents,
grandparents, caregivers and nurses. Moreover, the evaluation phase highlights the fact
that approaches to participatory research are changing the landscape of design practice,
creating new domains of collective creativity. It is anticipated that this evaluation will
support a future shift towards more sustainable ways of living.

2.1
Semi-structured Interviews

In the early stages of this research project, the core design team aimed to explore
and understand parents’ and carers’ experiences, needs and concerns about monitor-
ing infants’ temperature through semi-structured interviews. The difference between an
ordinary conversation and interview is that the aim of an interview is to gain further
information relating to the speciﬁc ongoing study [3]. The researcher chose the semi-
structured interview method because it can be used to narrow down certain aspects that
are closely related to the research questions. By conducting semi-structured interviews, it
is possible to discover previously unknown issues, and address complex questions using
probes and clariﬁcation, ensuring that particular points are covered by each participant.
It also allows participants and interviewers to raise additional concerns and questions,
while providing a redirection mechanism for conversations that digress too far from
the main topic [25]. Rigorous development of a qualitative semi-structured interview
guide maximises the objectivity and trustworthiness of studies and makes the results
more credible [7]. They also provide a degree of ﬂexibility to interviewers, while still
enabling broad comparisons to be made across interviews [25].
Online interviews are convenient to both parties involved and make it possible to
interview informants that would otherwise be difﬁcult to contact [12]. For this research,
20 interviews were conducted either face-to-face or virtually via the social media
(WeChat). The participants were infant sitters, nurses, parents, and grandparents of
infants to ensure access to primary carers. The majority of the interviewees were Chi-
nese. Purposive sampling was employed to select infants’ parents (n = 12), grandparents
(n = 4), clinical nurse (n = 2), and caregivers (n = 2) (see Table 1), due to their key role
in infants’ daily care. Qualiﬁed nurses were interviewed to acquire a clear perspective
on professional care and knowledge.

Table 1. The different types of interview participants.

Questions consisted of a combination of Yes/No queries and open-ended questions.
The questions included:

• Do you think monitoring infants’ temperature is important?
• Are you satisﬁed with the current temperature monitoring products for infants?
• What are the most important considerations when buying a temperature monitor for
infants, and why?
• When do you use temperature real-time monitors for your babies/infants?
• What is your attitude towards using smart textile/thermochromic textiles for infants?

By analysing the transcripts of the interviews, several insights can be derived. Fol-
lowing this approach, designers can immerse themselves in the target group and identify
challenges from stakeholders’ perspectives [9].

2.2
Laboratory Experiments

By testing the chemistry and mechanism involved, the application of textiles and evalu-
ation procedure for performance, the core design team can attain a better understanding
of materials and tailor them to meet the requirements of this project. The materials (as
shown in Table 2) presented in the experiments include: boric acid, bisphenol A, and
tetradecyl alcohol, combined with bromocresol green (C21H14Br4O5S), bromocresol
purple (C21H16Br2O5S) and bromocresol blue (C19H10Br4O5S), respectively. These
materials can be used for testing thermochromic pigment characterisation during the
discovery stage. The thermochromic materials available to the current market measure
a wide range of temperature between 10 °C and 65 °C, while the default temperature
options for the textile market are 22 °C, 31 °C and 45 °C. Considering the skin tem-
perature of infants mostly ranges from 30–35 °C [6], the activation temperature of the
thermochromic yarn used in the heat sensitive test and prototypes for this research is
approximately 31 °C. The fabric used in the test is a white knitted fabric. The reason for
selecting this cloth is because the color change effect from a white background is most
obvious, and the surface of the stitching in the stretch fabric is ﬂat. The polypropylene
ﬁber is dyed in thermochromic powder after microcapsule processing. These micro-
capsules contain leuco dyes, which change chemical structures to allow dye molecule
absorbance. The researcher designed several tests, for example, temperature sensitiv-
ity testing, color change rate-testing and real-time temperature testing using a point-
thermometer. To assist in the easy and visual determination of physical exhaustion,
thermochromic pigments were applied to spandex fabric using the pigment activation
temperature as an indication for exhaustion. Both materials were chosen to activate at a
pre-determined physiological skin temperature range of between 23 °C and 32 °C.

2.3
Experimental Prototyping

The prototyping journey is a useful resource during the innovation process, and can
convert intangible, abstract and yet to be imagined concepts into concrete and meaningful
solutions and outcomes [8]. Experimental prototyping in this project involved three types
of thermochromic sampling: printing, stitching, and knitting. The prototypes can then
be used to explore, evaluate, and communicate design ideas and concepts. The materials
for prototyping (as seen in Table 2) include thermochromic yarn and heat sensitive
thermochromic liquid red ink. The raw materials are polypropylene ﬁber.

3
Results and Discussion

3.1
The Semi-structured Interview

To investigate the users’ requirements for infants’ skin temperature monitoring, ﬁve
questions were designed to query the interviewee’s attitudes towards temperature mon-
itoring when caring for infants. 20 people including infants’ relatives, carers and nurses

Table 2. Principal materials used in laboratory experiments and prototyping

Stages
Materials
Visualisation
Laboratory experien-
tial 
Boric acid, bisphenol A, 
tetradecyl alcohol, bromo-
cresol green 
(C21H14Br4O5S), bromo-
cresol purple 
(C21H16Br2O5S) and bro-
mocresol blue 
(C19H10Br4O5S) 

Heat-sensitive test 
&
Application process-
stitching and knitting

Thermochromic yarn

(150D/2, 100g)

made with polypropylene PP 
yarn

Application process-
printing 
Heat sensitive thermo-
chromic liquid ink.

were interviewed. Based on the 20 in-depth interviews with infants’ relatives, caregivers
and nurses, the current study set out to investigate the key characteristics of temperature
indicators. Based on innate needs, the value framework provides guidance for the design
of thermochromic products. The interviews revealed the following three key ﬁndings:

The Importance of Monitoring Infants’ Temperature. There was some dispute over
the importance of monitoring an infant’s temperature. “I think monitoring temperature
is not always important, when my son looks good, or shows active performance, I would
not be concerned about his health” (P2). Another interviewee (P6) argued that “checking
the temperature of infants is important, as abnormal temperature always relates to some
disease, so I think daily checking infants’ temperature is important, I check small babies’
temperature from birth to 1 month on a daily basis. This helps me learn more about the
condition of their health. If the temperature shows an unusual ﬁgure, we should pay more
attention on their daily performance”. N2 works in a conﬁnement center, and said she
suggests that parents regularly check and record their baby’s temperature after leaving
the conﬁnement center. In addition, most of the interviewees mentioned that infants’
parents and their grandparents often falsely think that an infants’ temperature should be
the same as an adult.

Monitoring During a Fever. Almost all of the interviewees agreed that monitoring
temperature during a fever is essential. Caregivers are often mentally stressed and physi-
cally tired when they have to wake up to check an infants’ temperature repeatedly during
the night. If the infant’s fever persists for several days and caretakers are also stressed
by work during the day, they are often exhausted by anxiety. This situation needs to be
improved [10]. P1 emphasised: “I think for our daily life, the need for real-time monitor-
ing is not that important. When my daughter gets a fever, I would check her temperature
from time to time… Maybe because our environment is getting worse, nowadays infants
are more and more frequently getting colds or fevers, so I think monitoring an infant’s
temperature is very important. Besides, unlike adults, when infants get a fever, it is hard
to see the effect of their illness on performance, they are energetic and still engage in
daily activities. Therefore, monitoring temperature during a fever was considered to have
high applicability.”

Accuracy of Monitoring Products. The ratings from the interviews revealed highly
signiﬁcant agreement pertaining to the importance of accurate temperature monitoring
products. The interview data revealed high agreement that most daily measurements of
an infant’s temperature are subjective; GP 3 who takes care of her grandson on a daily
basis stated that if my grandson feels sick, I always check his temperature by touch-
ing his forehead.” “Sometimes elderly people excessively protect their grandchildren”
(P4). A father who has a 3-year-old child insist accuracy is the priority of purchasing a
temperature monitoring product: “Accuracy, if I buy something that has some function,
I hope it can be an accurate monitor of temperature. Or if it is of limited usefulness, I
won’t buy it”, P 7 said.

3.2
Laboratory Experiments

Color Change Behavior Testing for Reversible Thermochromic Materials. The
thermochromism experiments in this research are described below in Fig. 2. The raw
materials are boric acid, tetradecyl alcohol with bromocresol green, (C21H14Br4O5S)
bromocresol purple (C21H16Br2O5S), or bromocresol blue (C19H10Br4O5S) respec-
tively. The fabrication rate in this experiment is 5:40:1. Three sets of materials were
placed into three glass beakers and heated in the water tank. After heating, the com-
pound turned into a light liquid. After cooling to the indoor temperature (17 °C), it
became a dark solid. Of the three mixtures, the bromocresol green showed the most
obvious response in terms of color change.
The thermochromic organic colourant mixtures cannot be used directly for col-
oration, as they do not have any afﬁnity for textiles. Both require microencapsulation.
Microcapsules have been deﬁned as (spherical) particles, comprised of an excipient poly-
mer matrix (or wall/coating), referred to as a shell and an incipient active component,
known as a core material. The typical particle sizes of microcapsules are in the range
50 nm to approximately 2 mm [4].

Temperature Sensitivity Testing. The color reaction shows a signiﬁcant change
between 32 °C to an indoor temperature (approximately 22 °C). The ﬁber changes

Fig. 2. Color change behavior testing of thermochromic material heated and after cooling (Color
ﬁgure online)

from dark to white when the temperature changes from 22 °C, reaching approximately
32 °C. This phenomenon indicates the activation temperature for this speciﬁc type of
thermochromic ﬁber around 31 °C. Once the external heat input is cut, the color of the
ﬁber reverts to the dark color (as shown in Fig. 3) at room temperature (22 °C). While
the color changed slightly from 22 °C to 25 °C, it can be easily seen that the temperature
range for obvious color change is between 25 °C and 32 °C.
The reverse thermal response of thermochromic yarn was tested. Knowledge of
the temperature sensitivity of thermochromic materials is key to structural design and
advanced research. Temperature-sensitive testing demonstrates that the sample ther-
mochromic yarn changed colour and had a quick thermal response in this experiment.
Figure 3 (b) shows the colour change when temperature fell every six seconds in an
indoor environment. Based on this experiment, it shows great potential for application
as a real-time temperature monitor due to its quick response.

Fig. 3. (a). Real-time temperature testing by point-thermometer (b). Color-change experiment for
heat-sensitive sample test (from left to right: temperature decreasing every six seconds) (Color
ﬁgure online)

3.3
Prototyping

Prototyping enables design team members, users and clients to gain ﬁrst-hand apprecia-
tion of existing or future conditions through engaging actively with prototypes. Research
demonstrates that the value of such prototypes can be reﬂected in three critical design
activities: understanding existing experiences, exploring design ideas and communicat-
ing design concepts for commercial design projects [2]. Since inter-disciplinary study
relies heavily on approaches to co-creation, many people need to be able to take part,
evaluate, and understand the design process. To ensure freedom of inclusion and in
terms of approaches, designers need to evaluate the ramiﬁcations of the decisions they
make on projects. The techniques they decide to use and approaches to the expertise and
knowledge possessed by other stakeholders will affect the outcomes and satisfaction of
services [1].
Below there are three experimental prototypes that reveal different design concepts
and techniques: printing, stitching and knitting fabric. The proposed novel system (as
seen in Table 3) includes three interconnected parts, using thermochromic materials in
various forms and textures. From top to bottom, they are: 1. printing a fever pad with
thermochromic ink; 2. stitching thermochromic thread onto a white fabric and 3. knitting
fabric with thermochromic ﬁber. The three prototypes offer strong supporting evidence
of my approach to highlighting problems and unpacking the qualities of thermochromic
displays representing skin conductance. The existing rationale informing the designs is
that dominant color will disappear when an infant’s body temperature rises above their

normal skin temperature or color will appear when it falls below the normal level. This
color-change process is fully reversible.

Table 3. Novel solutions for thermochromic textiles

Solutions 
Sketch and Prototype
Brief description

Printing 
Left-pigment printing solution 
and application on a fever pad. 

Right-improved solutions after 
feedback. 

Stitching
Stitched thermochromic fibre on 
the edge of hat. The application 
of stitching can be used on dif-
ferent areas of clothing.

Knitting
The application of knitted ther-
mochromic fabric in garment 
pattern design and accessories 
design.

Novel Solution 1 – Printing: Thermochromic Materials Used on Fever Pad.
The ﬁrst novel solution is a fever pad with thermochromic ink on it. Table 3 - print-
ing shows the outlook and application of the design, and thermochromic ink as part of
the pattern was designed and printed on the fever pad. Printing thermochromic pigments
on the fever pad can raises an intelligent alarm, alerting carers to changes in body tem-
perature. The pigment chosen for printing is non-toxic and thermochromic. The product
might be expected to be useful for medical application and real-time monitoring. Color
change in the pigment prototype was well recognizable and reversible. However, the
overall appearance of the color on the fabric was dark to transparent. As infants’ high
temperature can last for days if they have a fever, with proper medication, all caretakers
need to do is to monitor the infants’ body temperatures and take remedial steps where
possible. When using the thermochromic fever pad, caregivers can lie beside infants to
take care of them more easily and see the temperature more clearly through the color
change.

Novel Solution 2 – Stitching Thermochromic Fibers. Thermochromic ﬁbers can be
stitched into baby accessories, such as wristbands, hats and socks. A thermochromic
stitching sample (Table 3 – stitching) can be used to demonstrate the feasibility of the
color change and temperature display. The corresponding temperature is displayed in the
stitching area. If the infant’s body temperature is normal, the textile shows a speciﬁed

color. If the infant’s body temperature is above normal, the color disappears. Inclusion
of thermochromic stitching in the band is ﬂexible, and it can be used on the wrist,
ankle, neck, etc. For example, it is suggested that almost every new-born baby should
wear a hat to protect their fontanel from catching a chill [20]. As visualized in Table 3,
stitching thermochromic ﬁbers on the edge of the hat is one way to monitor forehead
temperature. This novel concept can also be applied to the infant’s wrist and neck. One
of the advantages of this product design is that the function can be embedded into infants
clothing to monitor their temperature.

Novel Solution 3 – Textile: Garment Pattern Design and Accessories Design.
Thermochromic pigments can be applied (knitted) to cotton or spandex fabric, to create
a series of garments and accessories for infants and toddlers [28]. The third solution is
intended to use knitted fabric made of cotton, wool or polyester (Table 3 – knitting fab-
ric). Knitted textiles are designed for use on the cuff, waistband and turnup. The knitted
textile also can be designed for use in accessories like socks. The color on the cloth is
sensitive to temperature change, and it is suitable for application on infants’ clothing,
as temperature change is obvious in this case. The color of the thermochromic pigment-
based interlock fabrics changed from color to non-color in the temperature range 23 °C
to 33 °C.
The core design team attempted user testing after prototyping, mainly focusing on
feedback related to different novel solutions. After designing novel solutions, the stake-
holders were asked to select their favorite one from three design solutions and explain
their choice (Fig. 4). Most of the stakeholders believed the printing solution to be the
best of the three. “I like this solution because I think it offers a fantastic combination of
fever pad and thermochromic material, and I doubt I will need to monitor temperature all
the time” (P 5). “This design would help me a lot in the right scenario” (P 8). They also
give some suggestions on this design: “The graphic patterns on the fever pad could be
improved, it can be more interesting and fun, as this is for an infant” (P4, P8 & P12). The
feedback for the stitching varied. Some of the interviewees like the design is because
of the ﬂexible application. The thermochromic stitching could be added anywhere, like
hats, bracelets, or cloth. The embroidery pattern design can be ﬂexible as well. They
considered that this design could be applied widely but expressed concern about the
textile resistance of the stitched products. N2 argued that placing stitching on the hat
was not sensible, because if the infant overheats, it is suggested that any hat be removed
to expose the skin to the air for heat dissipation. Therefore, this design would only be
used during winter. Besides, they mentioned the third design solution is fun, and they
would like to buy it for entertainment. When they interacted with the thermochromic
socks prototype, they were surprised by the color change, and agreed that if there is a
visual reference color, then caretakers could easily check for an unusual temperature
with thermochromic textiles.
Overall, the interviewees who selected the thermochromic printing as their preferred
choice opined that the design is of great value when monitoring temperature during a
fever. The majority claim that they would buy if it were available in the market. However,
therewerealsoafewconcernsandrecommendationsexpressedregardingtheseproducts:

Fig. 4. A novel system for simultaneously monitoring the body skin temperature of infants using
a thermochromic textile and garment design. A pilot study to test the system was conducted.

1. Concerns about using chemical products on infants’ skin. Potuck [17] also indicated
that the application of thermochromic materials has health risks, which is a limitation
when employing innovative science and technology options.
2. The stakeholders were also concerned about the textile’s resistance and the accuracy
of the design. As N1 mentioned, she considers the most accurate way to check a
temperature is by using a thermometer.

4
Conclusion

This article described an interdisciplinary research project “watch the temperature”,
which proposes a novel system for simultaneously monitoring the body skin tempera-
ture of infants using a thermochromic textile and garment design, including stitching,
printing, and a garment pattern design. The core design team developed and tested the
prototype designs (low-cost printed fever pad, visual-aid stitched textiles and knitted
socks). The research project aims to establish a novel system for simultaneously moni-
toring the body skin temperature of infants using a thermochromic textile and garment
design to avoid physical exhaustion due to heat in infants under various environmental
conditions. The design, including both a cloth and reversible thermochromic pigment-
based design, can continuously take the wearers’ body temperature. As a relatively
low-tech solution, this novel system could be applied relatively universally. When the
infant’s skin temperature is lower than the default value, it shows colour, indicating that

the infant has no fever. If the infant’s skin temperature goes over 37.5 °C, the coloura-
tion of the wristband disappears. This monitoring function can help reduce caregivers’
stress over monitoring infant health. The theoretical contribution of this research is to
human-centred design in the interdisciplinary textile and fashion research. Although the
obstacles to realising the potential of “smart” clothing are complex and interrelated [5],
this project investigated the interface affecting infant health, design, and chemical engi-
neering, as it relates to newly emerging technologies and scientiﬁc platforms and their
application in the domains of health and well-being. The potential impact would be to
demonstrably contribute to advancing fashion design practices and infant wellbeing.

5
Limitations and Future Research

There is a great potential to turn this novel system into an Internet of Things (IoT)
project. The data collected could then be sent to the parents and carers’ smart phones.
Further research would include testing the application of pigment to varying ﬁbre types,
to establish how speciﬁc items of infant apparel might respond to stress on the textile, at
the surface of the textile, and in the seams. Future research is also required to improve the
construction and longevity of the thermochromic garment, as well as its maintainability,
durability, usability and functionality through abrasion resilience, colourfastness, and
colour activation veriﬁcation, using skin temperature modelling to meet the require-
ments of infants’ skin-to-skin garments. Furthermore, based on the solutions and feed-
back, many details including colour choice and graphic/pattern design should be further
explored. Thus, any future study would ideally focus on the development of these three
aspects in detail.