20 

F

ire extinguishers are widespread 
safety devices used to extinguish small 
fires. To fulfill European Union safety 
regulations, they must be installed in all pub-
lic buildings. Despite these mandates, the 
intended user (the general public) often does 
not understand how a fire extinguisher func-
tions; neither can the user differentiate 
between the different kinds, which can lead 
to mistakes in use. Compounding this prob-
lem are the costs of maintaining and refilling 
a typical fire extinguisher, which lead to dis-
couraging users from interacting with the 
device unless in a real emergency, by which 
time familiarity would be a real advantage. 
Moreover, the lack of regulations in the 
domestic context means fire extinguishers 
are overlooked as an essential utility product 
within the home.
In this article we describe the redesign of 
an emergency product and the process of 
defining the requirements of end users with 
limitations (e.g., elderly users) to increase 
the product’s usability, functionality, and 
reliability. Thus, this approach differs from 
more traditional attempts to accommodate 
the majority of users. In this case, ensuring 
product usability for user groups with the 
most limitations would virtually guarantee 
its viability for all users (e.g., “universal 
design”).
In this case study we explore how 
user-centered research can inform the 
redesign of the portable fire extinguisher. 
The project was completed by a product 
design final-year master’s of engineering 
student from the University of Nottingham 
(United Kingdom), who developed a concept 
that is intuitive, refillable, and compact. This 
article presents the variety of research 
methods used in the design process and 

concludes with a proposed concept for a 
portable fire extinguisher design.

Problems With the Existing 
Design

In the United Kingdom, there are six 
types of fire extinguisher that cater for vari-
ous types of fire, as no one fire extinguisher 
can fight all fires effectively. The internal 
substance contained within the extinguisher 
is called a suppressing agent. The four types 
of suppressing agents commonly found in 
public buildings use water, foam, dry pow-
der, and CO2; specialist fire extinguishers not 
available to the general public use wet chem-
ical and halon gas. This study will focus on 
the four suppressing agents suitable for pub-
lic use without specialist training, listed in 
Figure 1.
Dry powder represents the widest 
application; it can fight fires involving solids, 
flammable liquids, flammable gases, and 
electrical sources. However, it causes 
significant damage to property when 
discharged, in the form of settling powder, 
which can damage fabrics, electronics, and 
machinery. The current system of matching 
extinguisher type and suppressing agent to 
fire type is regulatory in nature and not 
familiar to the average consumer.
Because it is an important safety device, 
the methods used to protect fire extinguish-
ers from misuse often have the contradictory 
effect of making them hard to use. Tamper 
tags and costly fines represent the most 
common methods of discouraging inappro-
priate use. With tamper tags, the lever 
mechanism is barred by either a metal pin or 
a plastic ring. This tag is deliberately difficult 
to remove, even for the able-bodied user. 

f e a t u r e

Feature at A Glance: 
This case study documents the 
process followed to produce 
an alternative design of a fire 
extinguisher. The work focuses 
on how informative data can 
be gathered for an ethically 
challenging product scenario 
through the use of a range of 
user-centered research methods, 
including literature review, prod-
uct evaluation, shadowing study, 
empathy study, expert interview, 
focus groups, and simulation 
equipment. Design improvements 
as a consequence of this process 
include reductions in size and 
weight, refillable cartridges, 
single-handed operation, intuitive 
form, minimal cleanup post-use, 
and better portability.

Keywords:
fire extinguisher, user-centered 
design, ergonomics, industrial 
design, user testing, design 
process, human factors, usability 
universal design, emergency 
device, elderly users

707871 ERGXXX10.1177/1064804617707871ergonomics in designergonomics in design
research-article2017

User-Centered Design of a 
Portable Fire Extinguisher

By Mary Amos & Glyn Lawson

A multiphased evaluation of existing 
devices resulted in potential design 
improvements for home-use 
extinguishers to fight small fires.

July 2017 | ergonomics in design  21

Penalties for use can also discourage users, even in emergency 
situations.
Another issue with existing devices is that fire extinguish-
ers are not common domestic utility products. Although the 
Fire and Rescue Services encourage a “get out and stay out” 
policy regarding domestic fires (Fire Extinguishing Trades 
Association [FETA], 2001), statistics suggest that 78% of fires 
in the United Kingdom are extinguished without the Fire and 
Rescue Service’s intervention (Kobes, Helsloot, Vries, & Post, 
2010 ). Thus, the desire to protect family and property upon 
discovery of a fire is evidently a basis on which to explore 
domestic and portable fire extinguishers.

Design Process

It is significant that involvement or consideration of users in 
a design process can lead to a higher-quality product and bet-
ter match to user needs (Wilson & Sharples, 2015). However, 
when considering the design process for a fire extinguisher, the 
ethical tenet of safety of research participants had to be at the 
forefront of the chosen methodology. Therefore, the adopted 
research methods listed next emphasize theoretical research, 
advice from professionals, and controlled environments during 
practical research. The methods encompass the following:

•• Literature review
•• Product evaluation
•• Shadowing study
•• Fire awareness training
•• Interview with an expert
•• Focus group
•• Simulation/empathy gloves

The application of each method and its contribution to the 
design are described in the following sections.

Literature review. We reviewed current research in the field 
to inform and focus the redesign process. Articles with the 
keywords fire, fire extinguisher, human behaviour, fire safety, 
and human factors were used to identify the key issues that 
inhibit human interaction with fire safety equipment. Patterns 
emerged as to what problems the redesign needed to address. 
The results of the literature review are summarized as follows:

•• Statistics and studies confirmed that people do tackle 
small-scale fires despite the official “get out and stay out” 
policy (FETA, 2001; Kobes, 2010). Seventy-eight percent of 
domestic fire incidents in the United Kingdom are handled 
without Fire and Rescue Services’ intervention (Kobes, 2010).
•• Fire safety information needs to be conveyed frequently or 
repetitively for it to become familiar (Subramaniam, 2004).
•• It is optimistic to expect untrained people to be “competent 
at weighing their options before engaging in proper 
[firefighting] actions” (Building Research Establishment, 
1993; Fahy, Proulx, & Aiman, 2009; Huseyin, 2006).
•• Existing fire extinguishers exclude certain demographics. 
For example, “22% of the elderly [are] unable to break the 
safety tag” (Bruck & Thomas, 2010). An extinguisher 
requires two-handed operation and therefore excludes 
users who are not able-bodied.

Our findings emphasized that a redesign of current fire 
extinguishers is required to make them user-friendly in the 
domestic context. As a direct consequence of the literature 
review, we organized a focus group to explore the needs of 
elderly users in operating a domestic fire safety device.

Product evaluation. A product evaluation was conducted to 
give the designer personal experience in the use of existing 
devices. We selected a 2-kg dry powder fire extinguisher 
to test as part of the product evaluation. The dry powder 

Figure 1.  Overview of current fire extinguisher agents, use, and devices.

22 

extinguisher has the broadest application when fighting 
fires, being able to extinguish solids, flammable liquids, 
flammable gases, and electrical fires. This ability ensured the 
fire could be put out, but it also allowed the test to exhibit the 
major drawback of the dry powder design, namely, the large 
amounts of residue post-fire that can damage property.
The designer had no prior experience interacting with a fire 
extinguisher. She was therefore able to experience the product 
as a typical user. Even with no training or prior instruction (a 
situation similar to the target demographic), she was able to 
extinguish a small, controlled fire that was ignited using a 
cardboard box approximately the size of a wastepaper basket.
The activity was not intended to replicate an emergency 
situation, as the controlled situation meant the cognitive and 
emotional issues of confronting a fire in the home did not 
apply. However, it provided the designer with a firsthand 
account of the current fire extinguisher model in use.
This exercise was video recorded for further analysis and 
documentation. One finding of this test was that an able-bodied 
person found the extinguisher to be heavy. When full, it 
weighed 3.5 kg; this weight may restrict users who are unable 
to lift and operate such a load. Another observation was that 
the designer was unsure of the pressure to apply to the handle 
to discharge the extinguisher and that the power of the device 
on discharging was enough to unbalance her. It was noted 
that, as expected, large amounts of powder were released, 
which stained the designer’s clothing and settled on the 
surrounding area. The powder also negatively affected 
visibility (Figure 2).
One aim was clear: reduce the weight of the extinguisher 
during the redesign. Another was to use a suppressing agent 
that could douse a majority of domestic fires while also 
ensuring property was not damaged further by the use of a 
fire extinguisher. An alternative suppressant could also be 
selected to reduce the visibility issues associated with dry 
powder. The fire was extinguished without using the full 
capacity of the extinguisher. Therefore, a smaller capacity than 
2 kg would reduce weight while also being capable of dousing 
a small domestic fire.

Shadowing study. A fire extinguisher maintenance worker 
was shadowed so that the designer could obtain information 
about the maintenance of extinguishers in public buildings 
and the legal regulations that govern the use of such devices 
(Figure 3). Following the worker in his role, the designer 
was able to “experience the situations of his or her daily life 
or work in parallel with them, collecting insights through 
the real nuance of first-hand, real-time exposure” (Martin & 
Hanington, 2012).
The maintenance checks were thorough, and the records 
for extinguishers in public environments were extensive. No 
comparable process exists in private residential dwellings. The 
methods used to deter improper use were also clarified. For 
example, adding to safety tags and tamper tags discussed 
earlier are fire jackets and fire boxes, which are coverings that 
deter use by making the extinguisher less readily accessible. 
The ubiquity of these methods of deterrence emphasized the 
need to consider potential misuse during the redesign and to 
prevent any harm by accidental activation.
It was the opinion of the expert that extinguishers are situated 
in public places only to fulfill legal requirements. Members of 

Figure 2.  Product evaluation: The extinguisher was more powerful than expected and produced clouds of powder, obscuring the 
participant’s vision.

Figure 3.  Shadowing study: Observations of maintenance 
routines for the current design of fire extinguishers.

July 2017 | ergonomics in design  23

the public are not encouraged to use them, again highlighting 
the contradiction of official “get out and stay out” policies and the 
mandatory presence of fire extinguishers in public buildings.

Fire awareness training. To further inform the design 
process, the designer completed a one-day Fire Awareness 
Training Course run by South Yorkshire Fire and Rescue 
Service. The Realistic Fire Training Building (RFTB) 
immerses the trainee in a realistic fire simulation and was 
the most valuable experience of the course. Similar to an 
empathy study, the RFTB allowed a “deep approximation of 
environmental conditions, forging an empathic sense of real-
life user experiences” (Martin & Hanington, 2012).
The activity helped the designer identify the need for an 
intuitive design with simple instructions that would translate 
to better performance in high-stress situations. The RFTB also 
provided an appreciation of how quickly fires can escalate 
(Figure 4).
The fire awareness course also addressed the theory of fire 
behavior and combustion, user behavior (how people react in fire 
scenarios and interact with others around them), extinguisher 
coverage and timing (what size extinguisher is the most appropri-
ate for different contexts), and different types of fires (different 
extinguishing options for the size/seriousness of the fire).
The designer activated and interacted with all publicly 
available classes of fire extinguisher. Foam and dry powder 
left messy residue; water was not as messy but can be danger-
ous if used on the wrong class of fire, as it conducts electric-
ity. CO2 did not leave any residue and does not conduct 
electricity but makes a loud noise when activated. This 
exercise allowed the designer to compare firsthand the 
different suppressing agents.

Expert interview. To conclude the initial research element, an 
interview was arranged with a fire safety officer with several 
decades of experience in the fire safety industry who has 
worked as both a firefighter and a hazmat officer. An informal 
interview supported many of the findings from previous 
activities and revealed the following:

•• Those who are elderly, young, and disabled are the most at 
risk, and therefore it is important to ensure that the 
redesign encourages inclusivity.
•• Fire can spread rapidly and become very serious within a 
number of minutes.
•• Maintenance might be an issue associated with ownership 
of an extinguisher; therefore, the design would need to 
encourage regular checks or interaction to encourage 
maintenance.
•• Aesthetics would be important for fire extinguishers in a 
domestic context.
•• Portability and accessibility are of high importance and 
need to be considered in the ergonomics of the new design.

A key point made during the interview was that there can 
be no guarantee of safety with the use of an extinguisher. 
This being the case, the user gets involved at his or her own 
risk.

Initial concepts. We produced sketches and ideas in parallel 
with the research activities, and the findings from the research 
informed a wide range of possible design solutions. The initial 
concepts varied and included retrofitted stand-alone sprinkler 
systems, a self-assembled educational kit, alternative-form 
ideas, ceiling-mounted extinguisher systems, and a handheld 
extinguisher, which achieved a reduction in overall size and 
weight (Figure 5).
After conducting an internal evaluation of these concepts 
with peers, tutors, and senior researchers, we arranged a second 
visit to discuss these ideas with the fire safety officer. This 
feedback was used to decide which concepts to develop further.
We decided to move forward with the handheld extin-
guisher concept. Compared with the other concepts, the 
design of a smaller extinguisher seemed to have the potential 
to be valuable to a wider user group and presented the greatest 
opportunity for innovative design. Although effective, 
ceiling-mounted systems offered limited scope for user- 
centered design; self-assembled education systems could 
produce too many errors and encourage children to “play” 

Figure 4.  Fire awareness training: Practical training using an extinguisher and experiencing the Realistic Fire Training Building.

24 

with fire; and simply altering the form of the existing design 
would have limited applications in the domestic context.
The key areas of design development were reductions in 
size and weight and that the product be easy to activate and 
interact with. Working to these design objectives would result 
in the end concept being an inclusive fire extinguisher, able to 
be operated by the widest possible demographic.
During the concept analysis discussion with the fire safety 
officer, it was suggested to use CO2 as a suppressing agent, as 
it is suitable for electrical fires and is effective against other 
fire types. CO2 is a cleaner suppressant compared with dry 
powder or foam because it leaves no residue after use and 
therefore minimizes the risk of damage to property. CO2 has 
several drawbacks (loud noise when operated; the possibilities 
of frostbite or suffocation; limitation in use on flammable 
solids, flammable gases, or cooking-fat fires), but by limiting 
the amount of suppressing agent, we hoped that the noise 
would be reduced, as would the risk of suffocation. Ensuring 
that the extinguisher was designed to keep users’ hands out of 
the way of the suppression agent would minimize the danger 
of frostbite.
Reducing the amount of suppressing agent was discussed 
with the expert because it would restrict the product’s use  
to “small fires.” He reiterated a point made in the previous 
interview, that fires can escalate quickly, and he would encour-
age users to evacuate the house if it was any bigger than a 
wastepaper basket. Therefore, limiting the suppressing agent 
would restrict the user as to the size of fire he or she was 
tackling. Given the nature of CO2 and how the gas is designed 
to smother the fire, once the gas has floated away, the fire may 
reignite. We discussed what the main aim of the extinguisher 
was: to extinguish the fire completely or give the user extra 
time to escape the fire, which CO2 should do. The design was 
developed to incorporate smaller CO2 cartridges, which 
enabled the extinguisher to be refillable and compact.

Focus group. To investigate the best solution for making the 
concept inclusive, we arranged a focus group with a group of 
elderly residents from a local retirement village for people in 
their 60s or older. Five participants (three female, two male) 

took part in the study, and specific ages were not recorded. 
Information from the focus group was used to inform 
and support the next stage of development, as the group 
provided deep insights into the older demographic’s views 
on the product and highlighted issues that had not yet been 
identified in the design process. Details of the focus group 
activities and responses can be found in Table 1.
For example, they emphasized the importance of affor-
dances (i.e., where the nozzle should be on blank foam models; 
Figure 6) and how the product should be held. The group also 
confirmed information gathered early in the design process 
that current designs are unsuitable for elderly users. The 
participants were particularly worried about grip and hand 
strength when activating the extinguisher. Their response to 
the foam models highlighted the importance of an intuitive 
form to ensure correct interaction with the extinguisher.

Simulation gloves. After the focus group, we made further 
developments to the form and activation method to ensure 
ease of use. To understand and analyze the proposed final 
form, we used Cambridge simulation gloves (Figure 7) to 
simulate “a reduction in the functional ability of the hands” 
(Inclusive Design Toolkit, 2015). The simulation gloves use 
plastic strips to limit the dexterity of the fingers, thumb, and 
wrist of the designer, allowing empathy with elderly users. 
Using the simulation gloves accurately confirmed the comfort 
and location of the trigger in allowing high-force exertion.

Proposed Concept

The proposed concept is a compact CO2 fire extinguisher 
designed for use in the domestic context (Figure 8). The size 
reduction limits the product’s use to small fires and is an indi-
cation that if the product does not extinguish the fire, it is too 
big to tackle. We also considered assembly, cost, manufacture, 
materials, and production quantities in detail to ensure the 
new concept was realistic and achievable.
The redesigned fire extinguisher has key features that were 
motivated by the findings of the literature review and the 
user-centered activities, including the following:

Figure 5.  Interview with an expert: Some of the concepts and visual prompts used during discussions with an expert.

July 2017 | ergonomics in design  25

Table 1.  Overview of the Focus Group Activities

•• Reduced size and weight. The product is more inclusive (as 
a result of the findings from the product evaluations and 
interviews with an expert and focus group).
•• Refillable CO2 cartridges. The taboo that products can be 
used only in emergencies because of the expense of refill 
and maintenance is removed (as a result of the findings of 
the shadowing study, expert interview, and information 
gathered during the fire awareness training). It is hoped that 
by making the extinguisher refillable, users will interact 
with it more often, becoming familiar with its operation.
•• Single-handed operation. The design is more inclusive and 
simple to use, broadening the demographic of users who 
could operate it (information gained from the interview 
with an expert, focus group, Cambridge simulation gloves).
•• Intuitive form. The form indicates how the product should 
be held and is recognizable because of its similarity to other 

well-known and associated products, incorporating 
familiar affordances (a result of the focus group).
•• Minimal cleanup post-use. The choice of suppressing agent 
(CO2) means minimal cleaning is required after use. Often 
the risk of causing permanent damage to property and 
possessions makes users hesitate to use alternative fire 
extinguishers, such as dry powder extinguishers (as 
identified during the product evaluation and the interview 
with an expert).
•• Portable. The extinguisher was designed primarily with the 
domestic context in mind; however, its size does incorpo-
rate portability into the design, which could widen its 
application/context to cars, camping, caravans, and many 
more. (Targeting the domestic context was encouraged by 
the findings of the literature review, interview with an 
expert, and the shadowing study.)

26 

Future Developments

The next stage in the design process would be to produce a 
functioning prototype, which would enable further testing and 
evaluation to confirm that the design is a viable improvement. 
Rigorous testing would be required to approve the types and sizes 
of fires that could be extinguished with the limited amount of 
CO2 and confirm that it is the most suitable suppressing agent.

As the proposed design reached only the concept stage, 
weight was not calculated, but the initial product evaluation 
conducted for the redesign indicated a total weight of 2 kg 
(when full). This would be a good target weight to be tested, 
and the force required to activate the trigger should be less 
than 15 Nm (Imrhan, 1994) to satisfy the target demographics.
Experts and participants of the focus groups would be 
revisited with a physical, functioning prototype to undertake 

Figure 6.  Focus group: Participants were given the opportunity to hold and interact with sketch models. The aim of this activity is 
to identify what forms are intuitive to hold and the best methods to activate the extinguisher.

Figure 7.  Simulation gloves: The specifically designed gloves restricted movement in the hand, fingers, and wrist, allowing 
empathy with the elderly demographic.

July 2017 | ergonomics in design  27

usability tests and analyze the design for further improve-
ments. Testing would also inform the design of the labeling 
and instructions on the product and allow further research on 
producing a maintenance/refill plan.

Conclusion

In this article, we documented the process of defining 
requirements of end users to address the limitations of an 
existing product in order to improve its functionality (e.g., 
behavioral viability) and the user experience. This type of 
evaluation is important because safety and reliability represent 
compelling priorities for emergency interventions. However, 
further research is needed to provide an empirical behavioral 
profile of the redesigned product using functioning proto-
types to demonstrate its feasibility and user acceptance.
In conclusion, this project highlights the importance of a 
user-centered design process when designing equipment to be 
used in emergency situations, even though the ethics surround-
ing fire and fire studies make it difficult to do direct testing and 
research activities. In this case, a wide range of methods enabled 
a rich insight into the context and issues affecting fire extin-
guisher design. This article proposes an improved concept for 
a portable CO2 fire extinguisher and documents the activities 
that informed the design outcome.