Research and Applications

Integrating human-centered design in public health data
dashboards: lessons from the development of a data
dashboard of sexually transmitted infections in
New York State

Bahareh Ansari
1,* and Erika G. Martin
2

1Organization, Work, and Leadership Department, Queen’s Management School, Queen’s University Belfast, Belfast, UK
2Department of Public Administration and Policy, Rockefeller College of Public Affairs and Policy, University at Albany, Albany, New York,
USA

ABSTRACT

Objective: The increased availability of public data and accessible visualization technologies enhanced the popularity of public health data dash-
boards and broadened their audience from professionals to the general public. However, many dashboards have not achieved their full potential
due to design complexities that are not optimized to users’ needs.
Material and Methods: We used a 4-step human-centered design approach to develop a data dashboard of sexually transmitted infections for
the New York State Department of Health: (1) stakeholder requirements gathering, (2) an expert review of existing data dashboards, (3) a user
evaluation of existing data dashboards, and (4) an usability evaluation of the prototype dashboard with an embedded experiment about visualizing
missing race and ethnicity data.
Results: Step 1 uncovered data limitations and software requirements that informed the platform choice and measures included. Step 2 yielded
a checklist of general principles for dashboard design. Step 3 revealed user preferences that inﬂuenced the chart types and interactive features.
Step 4 uncovered usability problems resulting in features such as prompts, data notes, and displaying imputed values for missing race and eth-
nicity data.
Discussion: Our ﬁnal design was accepted by program stakeholders. Our modiﬁcations to traditional human-centered design methodologies to
minimize stakeholders’ time burden and collect data virtually enabled project success despite barriers to meeting participants in-person and lim-
ited public health agency staff capacity during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Conclusion: Our human-centered design approach and the ﬁnal data dashboard architecture could serve as a template for designing public
health data dashboards elsewhere.
Key words: human-centered design, public health informatics, data visualization, sexually transmitted infections

INTRODUCTION

Although public health data dashboards have become more
common, many have not reached their full potential due to
design complexities that are not optimized to their users’
needs.1–4 For example, a review of 2 dashboards for display-
ing influenza surveillance data shows that although these
tools provide useful information, some of their design features
(eg, use of acronyms and jargon and lack of granular data
limit the usefulness of these applications).4 Data dashboards
have become more popular due to the increased availability
of publicly available data and accessible visualization technol-
ogies such as Tableau.5 The adoption of dashboards in differ-
ent domains broadened both the form and content of the
original dashboards. Traditionally, data dashboards com-
prised single-view representations of key performance meas-
ures
for
executive
decision-makers
in
organizational
contexts.6 In contrast, new dashboards usually include

multiple data views with interactive interfaces and are used to
facilitate learning, communication, and motivation in differ-
ent areas, including public health.5 Moreover, using data
dashboards for communication and education expanded their
audiences from executives to decision-makers at all levels and
the general public.5 Public health data dashboards allow these
diverse users to interact with public health data, thereby pro-
moting
data-driven
decision-making,
encouraging
new
research, and supporting advocacy work.7,8

The human-centered design has been useful in developing
data dashboards and other information visualization tools.
Taking this approach, previous studies have included users in
the design process to ensure products’ ease of use and useful-
ness for the intended audience.9–11 It is critical that new infor-
mation visualization tools and technologies be evaluated by
users because tool development is mostly conducted by com-
puter scientists and engineers who are trained in statistical

Received: 20 December 2022. Revised: 10 May 2023. Editorial Decision: 30 May 2023. Accepted: 8 June 2023
V
C The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the American Medical Informatics Association.

Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, 2024, 31(2), 298–305
https://doi.org/10.1093/jamia/ocad102
Advance access publication 18 June 2023
Research and Applications

techniques and data analytics methods and therefore have a
different perception of visualizations than the general popula-
tion.12,13 Despite the usefulness of human-centered design, its
application in developing public health data dashboards has
been limited. One reason is the diversity of target users and
use cases14; consequently dashboards cannot meet the needs
of all users and it is critical to identify a clear focus and pur-
pose. For example, while certain graphical features might
improve quantitative reasoning, other features may more
effectively encourage behavior changes or perceptions in the
target audience such as willingness to be vaccinated or satis-
faction with healthcare decisions related to breast cancer
treatment.15 Moreover, dashboard usability might differ
among user groups with heterogeneous computer and visual-
ization literacy. For example, in a usability study of a
“Treatment as Prevention” intervention related to HIV pre-
vention in South Africa, task completion and accuracy varied
between scientific and operational staff versus community
advisory board members and nursing staff.16 Employing
human-centered design requires that dashboard designers
have explicit goals and recruit participants who are similar to
target users. Another challenge of integrating human-centered
design in public health data dashboards is that traditional
methodologies, such as observation of users’ activities, are
time-consuming
and
require
heavy
investment
from
users.10,17

We collaborated with the New York State Department of
Health AIDS Institute (hereafter, AIDS Institute) to develop a
prototype data dashboard for sexually transmitted infections
(STIs) using a human-centered design approach. New York
State was an early leader in publicizing open health data18

and integrating stakeholder feedback into dashboards such as
the New York State Prevention Agenda dashboard19 and the
Ending the (HIV) Epidemic Dashboard.20,21 The focus on
STIs was a useful case for US public health practice because of
the high morbidity (estimated STI prevalence, 67.6 million
cases in 2018), high health-related costs (estimated at $15.9
billion in 2018), and increasing rates of gonorrhea, syphilis,
and congenital syphilis.22–24 The new National STI Strategic
Plan set a goal to increase accessibility and use of STI data to
inform decisions,25 and data dashboards could provide an
opportunity for education, increasing community awareness,
monitoring trends, and evaluating programs. Moreover, the
general knowledge about STIs is low in the US population26

and there is a gap in provider communication about STIs,27

making it especially important to make reliable sources of
information available in an accessible format.

METHODS
Overview
This project comprised 4 steps, which are described in detail
in Table 1. The University at Albany Institutional Review
Board determined the study was exempt from human subjects
review.

Step 1. Stakeholder requirements gathering and establishing
the partnership
Three preliminary meetings with the data owners (AIDS Insti-
tute Office of Sexual Health and Epidemiology) and an in-
person site visit were used to establish relationships, secure
buy-in, and discuss topics such as data dashboard goals, the
intended audience, available resources, data limitations,

software requirements, and other relevant organizational con-
texts. Additionally, 2 meetings with staff from the AIDS Insti-
tute Office of Planning and Community Affairs, which is
responsible for policy development, strategic planning, budg-
etary and legislative analysis, and community were used to
expand the organization’s engagement with the project and
finalize the participant recruitment plan. A meeting series was
established to keep staff engaged throughout the project
lifecycle.

Step 2. Expert review of current US states’ STI data
dashboards to produce a usability checklist
An expert review of all US state health department STI data
dashboards (N ¼ 13, as of June 1, 2021) was used to develop
a usability checklist for data dashboard designers to conform
to usability principles.28 The selection of dashboards was lim-
ited to state (rather than local) health departments because,
although exceptions exist, local departments usually have lim-
ited resources and staff to prepare complex data dashboards,
making their websites less comparable to state departments.
The included states were Arizona, Colorado, District of
Columbia, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Iowa, Kansas, Mary-
land, New York, North Carolina, Tennessee, and Texas. Six
expert evaluators evaluated the STI data dashboards, repre-
senting domain experts and nondomain experts. Per the
requirements of expert review,30 all evaluators had knowl-
edge of usability and data visualization. The domain expert
evaluators comprised a state health department employee, a
faculty member with public health expertise, and a doctoral
student with health informatics expertise. The nondomain
expert evaluators comprised a faculty member with expertise
in digital government, a faculty member with expertise in
human–computer interaction, and a doctoral student with
expertise
in
human–computer
interaction.
The
usability
checklist was derived from a qualitative synthesis of evalua-
tors’ comments regarding major and minor usability prob-
lems. The usability evaluation was accompanied by an
analysis of the data dashboards’ characteristics such as avail-
able visualizations, interactive features, and use of filtering or
faceting to show the breakdown of the represented data.

Step 3. Pairwise user study with domain experts to
understand needs and preferences of target users
A pairwise user study was conducted with practitioners who
primarily worked in community-based organizations that
serve populations at high risk for STIs. These community
champions were ideal participants because they could repre-
sent the needs of target users (community-based organizations
and patients) and had established relationships with the AIDS
Institute, making them relatively easy to access. Participants
were paired to minimize researcher intrusion, and increase the
chance of revealing usability problems through the process of
helping each other work on the specified activity.31 During
virtual meetings, pairs of participants collaborated to com-
plete several tasks on Arizona’s STI dashboard, which was
selected from the data dashboards that were evaluated in Step
2. The Arizona STI data dashboard had different visualiza-
tions with interactive features and was scored highly in Step
2, making it an ideal choice for a user study to determine if
users and expert opinions diverged. The tasks included explo-
ration, pattern identification, association, comparison, verifi-
cation, policy development, and dissemination, and were
designed based on common tasks in visual analytics of public

299

health data.32 All meetings were held online and the partici-
pants were given 30–45 min to complete the tasks. Details of
the data collection meetings are available in Supplementary
Appendix S1. Usability problems and user preferences were
identified from the moderator’s direct observations of their
task completion, a thematic analysis of audio transcripts, and
a brief survey of their user experiences.33

Step 4. Development and usability evaluation of the
prototype data dashboard for STIs in New York State
A prototype dashboard was developed using the NYS STI
surveillance data. Multiple data preparations steps were
conducted in R software, including merging with Census

population data to produce STI rates among different
populations and redistributing missing values. The data
dashboard was created in Tableau using a dashboard lay-
out and interactive charts. All findings from the first 3
steps were integrated in the prototype data dashboard’s
design. Each of the prior 3 steps informed the design. For
example, the data limitations and the software require-
ments from Step 1 were used in choosing the platform
and selecting appropriate measures for presentation. The
user preferences from Step 3 were considered when select-
ing the chart types and adding interactive features. The
checklist produced in Step 2 was used as a general guide
for designing the layout, text, and charts.

Table 1. Steps involved in the development and evaluation of the data dashboard

Steps
Detailed procedure

Step 1. Stakeholder requirements
gathering and establishing the
partnership

• Purpose: Understand stakeholders’ goals, the organizational context, and establish the partnership.
• Three initial meetings were conducted with 2 AIDS Institute Ofﬁce of Sexual Health and Epidemiology
staff to discuss: (1) their goals for a data dashboard, (2) feedback on our proposed human-centered design
approach to developing the data dashboard, and (3) feedback on evaluation design details such as sam-
pling, recruitment, and the rubric.
• Two initial meetings were conducted with 3 staff at the AIDS Institute Ofﬁce of Planning and Community
Affairs to: (1) explain our human-centered design approach and solicit feedback on recruitment strategies
and (2) provide a ﬂyer, registration form, and slides for presentation and recruitment at one of their advi-
sory board meetings.
• A site visit was conducted at the AIDS Institute Ofﬁce of Sexual Health to learn about the data structure
and data limitations, meet staff involved in surveillance system maintenance, and understand the organiza-
tional context.
• A meeting series was established with 2 key staff at the Ofﬁce of Sexual Health to keep the AIDS Institute
closely engaged throughout the project lifecycle.
Step 2. Expert review of current US
states’ STI data dashboards to
produce a usability checklist

• Purpose: Produce a checklist to prevent common usability problems when designing dashboards.a

• Publicly available data dashboards for STIs on state health department websites were identiﬁed.
• A set of usability principles was derived from the information visualization literature.
• Six reviewers with usability knowledge and diverse domain expertise used the rubric to examine the
dashboards.b

• Experts’ usability scores and their textual comments were analyzed to produce a usability checklist.
Step 3. Pairwise user study with
domain experts to understand
needs and preferences of target
users

• Purpose: Elicit needs and preferences of target users.
• A data dashboard that received high usability scores in Step 2 was chosen for the user study with domain
experts.
• Twenty participants were recruited with the assistance of the AIDS Institute Ofﬁce of Planning and Com-
munity Affairs that had different familiarity with data dashboards and were primarily from the commun-
ity-based organizations that serve the population at high-risk for STIs.b

• A pairwise user study was conducted, including a monitored user activity, usability and user experience
survey, and an exit interview.
• Summary statistics were used to analyze the survey results, and an inductive thematic analysis method was
used to analyze the transcripts.
Step 4. Development and usability
evaluation of the prototype data
dashboard for STIs in New York
State

• Purpose: Integrate ﬁndings from the prior steps into the design, development, and evaluation of the proto-
type dashboard.
• A prototype dashboard was developed using the NYS STI surveillance data (data preparations in R and
data visualizations in Tableau).
• Seventeen participants were recruited with the assistance of the AIDS Institute Ofﬁce of Planning and Com-
munity Affairs, most of whom had participated in Step 3.b

• A usability evaluation was conducted, including a free exploration of the dashboard that was monitored
for potential usability problems, and an usability survey to learn about the user experience.
• An experiment was embedded in the usability evaluation to test the methods to visualize missing data. Par-
ticipants completed tasks using 2 experimental conditions, one displaying the missing values as a separate
category (common practice on data dashboards) and one showing the imputed values added to other
categories.
• A comparison of responses in the 2 conditions was tested with a paired t test, and a qualitative synthesis of
usability observations were conducted to ﬁnd generalizable insights.
• Findings of the experiment and the usability evaluation informed the ﬁnal prototype.

a This checklist is now published28 and can be used in addition to other published work for evaluating data dashboards’ usability29 to avoid usability
issues without the effort of conducting usability testing.
b For the expert review (Step 2), one of the reviewers was an AIDS Institute Ofﬁce of Sexual Health staff member. All participants in the pairwise user
study (Step 3) were from the community, and represented a mix of direct service providers, healthcare administrators, and volunteers. The Step 4 participants
were similar to Step 3 participants, with no AIDS Institute staff included.

300

Participants from Step 3 were recruited for a Zoom-based
usability evaluation of the prototype, in which participants
were asked to freely explore each page, use interactive fea-
tures, and narrate what they saw. In addition, the participants
were asked to use the data dashboard to complete some tasks
so potential usability problems would emerge. Details of the
data collection meetings are available in Supplementary
Appendix S2. When working with the data dashboard, partic-
ipants used their pointing device to point to where they were
looking on their screen and verbalized their thoughts in a sen-
tence such as, “The red button is the first thing that caught
my eyes. I am wondering what this button will do, and I’m
going to click to find out.” The moderator monitored users’
activities and specific usability problems encountered and
took notes of usability issues as well as the way participants
interacted with the data dashboard (eg, the first thing to
which they pointed on each page, and if they read the guides
or used the interactive features at any time during their inter-
action). The moderator synthesized her notes to identify com-
mon usability issues and generalizable insights for other data
dashboards.
One specific issue that emerged in Step 3 was how to
present missing race and ethnicity data, which are common in
chlamydia and gonorrhea surveillance data.34 Two versions
of a visualization of cases stratified by race and ethnicity,
using different methods to present missing demographic infor-
mation, were included in the prototype to assess users’ under-
standing and preferences. The findings of the experiment and
the usability evaluation were incorporated in the final proto-
type data dashboard.

RESULTS
Key findings from usability evaluations
Table 2 summarizes key findings that influenced the design.
The stakeholder requirements gathering (Step 1) revealed
important
considerations
about
the
data
structure
and

limitations, organizational context, compatible software, and
resources. For example, the AIDS Institute preferred Tableau
for consistency with other projects and easier maintenance.
Another finding was that the final data dashboard would
need to be hosted on an external organization’s website due
to state government agency “executive clearance” require-
ments that each website update be reviewed and approved
before release to the public.
The evaluation of existing STI data dashboards (Step 2)
uncovered a tension between complexity and usability. Com-
plex data dashboards, with multiple visualizations and inter-
active features, were more suitable for public health experts
interested in specific populations but received lower usability
scores because of their limited usefulness for novice users. In
contrast, simple data dashboards received higher usability
scores but were less useful for expert users. When we exam-
ined filtering or faceting, 2 common methods to deal with
complexity in data visualization,35 data dashboards that used
both methods simultaneously achieved a good balance of
usability and complexity that would be useful for expert and
novice users.
The user study (Step 3) identified important preferences
among target users. First, participants were more attentive to
the content with the use of simple visualization techniques
such as bar charts and line charts. Second, some participants
were concerned about the potential misinterpretation of dis-
ease maps. They shared that showing highly impacted regions
in dark colors could be stigmatizing. Third, participants
found charts showing the number of STI cases stratified by
race and ethnicity with a “missing” category (including cases
for whom the race and ethnicity information was not avail-
able) to be confusing and raised concerns about the trustwor-
thiness of the data dashboard. Fourth, participants raised
concerns about the use of outdated terminology for popula-
tion groups (eg, transgender male to female). Fifth, navigation
and interaction possibilities were not immediately clear to all
participants, and many needed guidance.

Table 2. Key ﬁndings from evaluations that inﬂuenced the data dashboard design

Key findings

Step 1 ﬁndings
• Tableau was the desired platform for consistency with the AIDS Institute’s other projects and easier maintenance.
• The ﬁnal data dashboard had to be hosted on an external organization’s website due to organizational rules.
Step 2 ﬁndings
• Using a usability checklist could inform the design of layout, text, and chart to prevent some of the common usability
problems on STI data dashboards.
• When showing granular data (eg, by sex, age, region), ﬁlters and faceting should be used to produce charts that are useful
for domain experts and understandable for non-expert users.
Step 3 ﬁndings
• Simple and familiar visualizations (eg, bar charts and line charts) should be used to focus users’ attention on the content
rather than the visualization technique.
• Maps should be used with caution to avoid stigmatizing highly impacted regions.
• The reason for missing data and its effects on interpretations should be explained to improve users’ trust in the data.
• Up-to-date terminology and clear explanations should be used for classifying population groups based on sex, race and
ethnicity, and other demographic variables.
• Guidance should be provided to help users navigate and learn about interaction possibilities.
Step 4 ﬁndings
• On multi-page data dashboards, functionality and interactivity should be consistent across pages, so users can learn once
and use their knowledge throughout.
• Prompts should direct users to notes and explanations because some users only focus on the interactive features and
ignore the text on the data dashboard.
• Notes should discuss both what is included as well as what is excluded (eg, diseases for which reporting is not required by
law and surveillance data are unavailable for inclusion should be explained).
• The data visualization principle of “removing extraneous ink” should be checked with end-users to ensure that charts are
comprehensible.
• Data analysis terminology (eg, ﬁlter, cluster, aggregate) should be avoided to prevent confusion among users without
data analysis expertise.
• The visualization with the added imputed values improved accuracy in interpretation and conﬁdence in the data.

301

The usability evaluation and the embedded experiment in
Step 4 had several findings. First, participants repeatedly dis-
cussed how consistency in layouts and interaction possibilities
helped them learn and use that knowledge throughout the
dashboard. Second, participants exhibited different reading
patterns, with some reading all guides and notes before inter-
acting with the charts and others ignoring the text and using
the interactive charts exclusively, which led to later confusion.
Third, participants frequently asked about the excluded dis-
eases, regions, and populations. For example, human papillo-
mavirus was not included because data were not available,
but participants found it confusing that some STIs were omit-
ted from the data dashboard. Fourth, following the data visu-
alization principle of “removing extraneous ink,”28 some
items were removed (eg, axis titles that were repetitive of page
titles). However, these choices reduced chart comprehension

among some participants. Fifth, the initial terminology used
to explain interactivity options (eg, filter, cluster, aggregate)
was unclear to users, and they requested more common terms,
such as drop-down menus. Finally, in the embedded experi-
ment, the visualization with the added imputed values
improved users’ accuracy in interpretation and their confi-
dence in the data.

Final data dashboard prototype
Figure 1 shows one page of the final prototype data dash-
board, which incorporates changes made in response to the
Step 4 feedback. A multipage format was selected to help
users digest each piece of information and encourage them to
assess information from different perspectives. Arrow “a”
points to the use of contrast in the navigation bar to help
users see their current location and other pages available for

Figure 1. Screenshot of one data dashboard page demonstrating the features included based on the usability evaluations. Note: Data are unvalidated and
should not be used for program planning or other purposes. Arrows indicate features included in response to issues identiﬁed during the usability
evaluations.

302

their exploration. Arrow “b” points to the reading and inter-
action guides for each page to support novice users. Arrow
“c” points to the filters for expert users to drill down into spe-
cific population groups. Each filter had a drop-down menu
and a prompt to encourage users to read the footnotes. Arrow
“d” points to the faceting technique to produce simpler charts
for
nonexperts.
Arrow
“e”
shows
the
extensive
data
footnotes.

Figure 2 shows another data dashboard page that displays
geo-faceting as a solution for a concern raised in the usability
evaluation about inadvertently stigmatizing highly impacted
counties in standard maps with higher-morbidity counties
shaded in a darker color. Moreover, equal-sized boxes
allowed each county to have the same prominence regardless
of their relative population size or land area. The layout and
available interactions were consistent with prior pages for
improved usability. The final user study found that the geo-
graphical resemblance between the layout of the county charts

and New York State was not clear to all users. The final pro-
totype included bold and underlined font in the reading guide
to communicate the positioning to users, county names on
each chart, and a zooming function (zooming each box when
hovered over) to provide additional guidance.

DISCUSSION

The prototype design was accepted by the AIDS Institute and
is currently in the process of being implemented as a public-
facing data dashboard. Several research methodology choices
enabled the successful use of the human-centered design
approach. First, traditional human-centered design methods
were modified to be more pragmatic, which was critical dur-
ing the COVID-19 pandemic (a highly contagious respiratory
disease caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus) when public health
staff were incredibly busy. The pragmatic modifications
included learning from existing data dashboards instead of

Figure 2. Screenshot of one data dashboard page demonstrating the use of geo-faceting to map infection trends in the counties of the New York State.
Note: Data are unvalidated and should not be used for program planning or other purposes.

303

starting from scratch and conducting virtual meetings instead
of observing user behavior in their workplace. Also, we
recruited participants from practitioners who already had
close relationships with the AIDS Institute as community-
based public health champions. These participants were
knowledgeable about STIs but most of them had little pre-
vious experience with data dashboards. Therefore, we did not
expect them to understand data dashboards better than a lay-
person. Moreover, they work directly with healthcare pro-
viders and patients, and could share their own professional
experiences with the dashboard and represent the needs of
community members.
A second critical factor contributing to project success was
the engagement of the AIDS Institute throughout the project
lifecycle to increase the likelihood that research findings
would be implemented. In Step 1, multiple meetings with the
AIDS Institute were conducted to understand the organiza-
tional context, their goals for the data dashboard, and the
data presented on the data dashboard. In Step 2, one AIDS
Institute staff member participated as an expert evaluator. In
Step 3, AIDS Institute staff identified a participant pool from
its
existing
workgroups,
and
community-based
listservs
assisted with recruitment. In Step 4, early findings from the
usability evaluations were discussed with AIDS Institute staff,
and they were invited to contribute ideas for solutions for the
found usability problems. Collaborating with practitioners
enhanced the usefulness of findings for stakeholders and
ensured buy-in and collective ownership of the final design.
Our methods have several contributions to usability evalua-
tion practices. First, traditional human-centered methods sug-
gest starting with the users’ current technology and improving
areas in which the current technology does not meet the users’
needs.36 In this study, we initially considered New York State
dashboards such as the influenza tracker but decided to go
beyond the state health department to review all STI data
dashboards on other comparable health department websites.
The reviewed data dashboards had different levels of com-
plexity, which we found was related to the number of identi-
fied usability problems. These findings led us to explicitly
consider an appropriate balance between complexity and
usability throughout our data dashboard design process. Sec-
ond, for understanding users’ needs and preferences, 2 tradi-
tional
human-centered
methods
are
contextual
inquiry
(observation of user activities in their work environment) and
domain knowledge workshops (conducting workshops with
users to discuss their work practices in detail). These methods
need heavy investment from domain experts, which is not
realistic in many situations.10,11 Contextual inquiry requires
the acceptance of researchers in users’ work environments
and their interruptions for inquiries Domain knowledge
workshops require users to attend lengthy workshops to dis-
cuss their work practices. Both were impractical in our con-
text, between staff being diverted to the COVID-19 response
(thereby severely constraining their time) and staff working in
confidential spaces due to the sensitive data (thereby making
it difficult for a researcher team to gain security clearances to
observe workflows directly). Our virtual meetings in Steps 3
and 4 may have been limited compared to the traditional
methods because the data collection was not in the users’
work environment, and we could not collect some potentially
useful data such as eye movements or facial expressions.
However, our meetings required 2 h of participants’ time
(outside their working hours), was easier to schedule as

virtual meetings with 1 or 2 participants (vs intensive long
workshops with many participants), and did not require us to
obtain special approvals to observe their interactions with the
technologies.
Using the human-centered design approach helped us pre-
vent some of the usability problems that were found in pre-
vious usability evaluations of public health data dashboards.
For example, one of the usability problems found in previous
dashboard evaluations is that data were not available at a
granular level.4 We provided multiple filters (with dropdown
menus) on each page of the dashboard to enable access to
granular data by county, by sex, by age, and by race and eth-
nicity. Moreover, we discussed the levels of these variables
with participants to ensure the output would be useful for
them. For example, STI clinics sometimes focus on a specific
age group (eg, adolescents) or a specific population group (eg,
Black women). We used our participants’ comments about
target audiences to ensure these groups were included in our
dropdown menus. Another usability problem found in pre-
vious dashboard evaluations is that the terminology (eg, sur-
veillance, prevalence, or antiviral resistance) was not suitable
for those unfamiliar with health-related information.4 Our
participants had experience directly working with general
consumers and helped us avoid terminology that would not
resonate with laypersons and develop footnotes to facilitate
data interpretation.
This project had several limitations. First, focusing on one
disease area and state might limit the generalizability of find-
ings. Second, although the evaluators and participants com-
prised diverse groups, their opinions may not reflect all
stakeholders’ opinions. Third, the data collection of this proj-
ect was conducted virtually because of the concerns regarding
COVID-19 transmission and the difficulties of scheduling
time with busy public health experts during the pandemic.
Virtual meetings limited the ability to collect additional user
data such as body expressions and eye movements. Finally,
based on the human-centered design framework, a long-term
and consistent evaluation of the data dashboard is necessary,
which was not yet possible because the dashboard is currently
being implemented. However, this is a promising area for
future research to investigate the emerging usability problems
as technology changes and the user base grows.