https://doi.org/10.1177/19322968231212220

Journal of Diabetes Science and Technology
2024, Vol. 18(1) 22­–29
© 2023 Diabetes Technology Society
Article reuse guidelines: 
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
DOI: 10.1177/19322968231212220
journals.sagepub.com/home/dst

Symposium/Special Issue

Introduction

The rapid rise in prevalence of diabetes in the United States 
since 1944 has been nothing short of an epidemic.1 According 
to the Pan American Health Organization, as of November 
2022, approximately 62 million people in the United States 
were diagnosed with diabetes with projections suggesting 
that 109 million people will be diagnosed with diabetes by 
2030.2 In 2021, the United States spent 966 billion dollars on 
health care for adults aged 20 to 79 years, tripled from the 
232 billion dollars spent 14 years earlier in 2007.3 To address 
the needs of the growing patient population, health care sys-
tems need to adopt alternative treatment approaches.
One such care pathway that has gained popularity, particu-
larly after the COVID-19 pandemic, is to augment traditional 

care with self-management capabilities. The Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has demonstrated that 
when patients with diabetes learn how to self-manage their 
condition, they achieve significant health improvements, 
including lower A1C levels, reduced medical expenses, and 
an enhanced quality of life.4,5 Despite the demonstrated suc-
cess, certain barriers impede the widespread adoption of 

1212220 DSTXXX10.1177/19322968231212220Journal of Diabetes Science and TechnologyBonet-Olivencia et al
research-article2023

1Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, Texas A&M 
University, College Station, TX, USA

Farzan Sasangohar, Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, 
Texas A&M University, 3131 TAMU College Station, TX 77843-3131, 
USA. 

User-Centered Design of a Diabetes 
Self-Management Tool for Underserved 
Populations

Samuel Bonet-Olivencia, PhD1, Jesus Carrillo-Leal, BS1
,  
Arjun Rao, PhD1, and Farzan Sasangohar, PhD1

Abstract
Background: User-centered design (UCD) or user experience design (UXD) methods have gained recent popularity for the 
design of mobile health (mHealth) interventions. However, there is a gap in application of these methods for diabetes self-
management. This study aims to document the UCD process for a self-management mobile application aimed for patients 
with diabetes in underserved communities.

Methods: A UCD mixed-methods approach including interviews with patients and providers, a review of literature, and 
a technology landscape analysis were used to define the app functional information requirements that informed the user 
experience/user interface design process. Usability studies with the app designers and developers, intended users, and a focus 
group of nurse educators and dieticians were used to test and improve the design.

Results: An mHealth app was developed with health-tracking features for stress, blood sugar, food, exercise, medications, 
weight, and blood pressure. We tackled a range of usability and user experience challenges, which encompassed addressing 
issues like low health literacy by employing a combination of user interface design principles, intuitive visualizations, 
customizable icons, seamless database integration, and automated data input features. Special attention was given to the 
design of educational content accounting for the intended users’ cultural background and literacy levels.

Conclusions: User-centered design approach contributed to a better understanding of the intended users’ needs, 
limitations, mental models, and expectations, facilitating the design of a comprehensive mobile app for patients with diabetes 
in underserved communities that includes essential features for self-management while providing a strong educational 
component, addressing an important gap in the literature.

Keywords
diabetes, mHealth, mobile applications, self-management, underserved populations, user-centered design

23

self-management methods. For instance, as of 2021, the US 
Census Bureau reported that 37.9 million Americans are clas-
sified as low-income individuals6 who have been associated 
with low health literacy.7 In addition, cultural beliefs and lack 
of methods to manage their condition can also hinder effec-
tive self-management.8 However, ongoing innovations aim at 
overcoming these obstacles and empowering individuals to 
better manage their condition.
One such innovation is mobile health (mHealth) which uti-
lizes wireless technology to enhance the delivery and outcomes 
of self-care.9 Although often considered effective in empower-
ing patients and serving as a reliable platform for delivery of 
information, mHealth also has limitations such as wide-scale 
adoption, primarily associated with the remote nature of care 
and dependence on the user’s behavior.9 Older patients, in par-
ticular, may encounter difficulties due to limited technological 
literacy, and the general usability of health apps presents a 
common barrier in implementing such systems.10 Despite these 
barriers, mHealth has demonstrated effectiveness in managing 
cardiovascular diseases, facilitating prevention efforts, promot-
ing lifestyle changes, and supporting diabetic care.11 However, 
gaps have been identified in mHealth studies such as a lack of 
research on the development of user-centered design (UCD) 
systems. User-centered design involves creating systems that 
prioritize the user’s needs12 and is often overlooked in the 
development of mHealth applications. This study aims to docu-
ment the UCD process for GlucoseCoach, a self-management 
mobile application intended for patients with diabetes in under-
served communities.

Methods

As depicted in Figure 1, a mixed-methods UCD approach 
was utilized to engage users and stakeholders to derive func-
tional requirements for the design of an mHealth app for 

diabetes self-management. The Institutional Review Board 
at Texas A&M University approved the study protocols 
(IRB2018-0150, IRB2018-1503D, IRB2020-1130M). All 
participants provided written consent.

Interviews With Patients and Health Care 
Providers

In our previously published work,10 feedback from 97 
patients and 11 health care providers in underserved com-
munities of south Texas was elicited to inform the design of 
the mobile interface. An interview guide was designed to 
elicit responses that identify patients’ attitudes, behaviors, 
knowledge levels, and risk perceptions, along with accept-
ability and usability requirements with respect to the use of 
mHealth technologies for diabetes self-management. A sec-
ond interview guide was designed for health care providers 
to capture perceptions and expectations of mHealth technol-
ogies for diabetes as well as barriers and opportunities for 
adoption and impact on their workflow.

Literature Review

A literature review was conducted to identify themes that 
could inform the mobile app design. Articles were reviewed 
on topics related to (1) diabetes management specific to 
underserved communities, (2) challenges and opportunities 
of mHealth for self-management of diabetes, (3) design and 
development of mHealth applications for self-management 
of diabetes, and (4) findings from usability studies.

Technology Landscape Analysis App Review

A technology landscape analysis11 of diabetes self-management 
apps available in the market (Google Play and iOS Store) was 

Figure 1.  Overview of UCD methods used. 
Abbreviations: UCD, user-centered design; UX/UI, user experience/user interface; mHealth, mobile health; FIRs, functional information requirements.

24	
Journal of Diabetes Science and Technology 18(1) 

conducted with the purpose of obtaining insights into existing 
apps, such as number and kind of features available. Four key-
words were used in the search for apps: diabetes, diabetes man-
agement, diabetes tracker, and glucose. The review included 
only free apps in English, with a minimum four-star rating, 
intended for patient use, updated within the last two years from 
the review date, which downloaded and worked correctly, and 
included a basic feature to record blood glucose levels.

Functional Information Requirements

One of the notable challenges in digital health design is the 
bias in requirements toward certain platforms, functionality, 
and/or existing systems. The study employed the functional 
information requirements (FIRs)12 method. This method uses 
a hierarchical approach to decompose goals (eg, improve 
health awareness) into several high-level functions (eg, log-
ging). Each of these functions is then further decomposed 
into more specific or low-level functions (eg, food logging) 
for which display or user input requirements (eg, meal type 
or portion) are defined (Figure 2). These platform-indepen-
dent display requirements would then feed the initial design 
that includes wireframing and prototyping. Findings from 
the interviews, the literature review, and the technology land-
scape analysis app review were integrated toward the defini-
tion of FIRs to inform the design of patient-centered functions 
and interactive features of the mobile app.

User Experience/User Interface App Design

The FIRs were used to design a comprehensive set of wire-
frames. Wireframing is commonly used as the initial step in 
conceptual design of digital interfaces, serving as a guide to 
identify the location of the major navigation and content ele-
ments on each screen. The wireframes were then used for the 
high-fidelity visual prototyping of the mobile app interfaces, 

using a collaborative interface design tool called Figma.13 
The wireframing stage supported the development of low-
fidelity prototypes to test alternatives; to organize the infor-
mation layout; to test user flows; and to evaluate the steps, 
actions, and decisions the user has to make while navigating 
the mobile app. Once the overall information layout and 
flows were completed, a high-fidelity prototype was devel-
oped to add visual details such as colors, graphics, and ani-
mated features.
High-fidelity and interactive prototypes were first evalu-
ated using internal formative usability testing of the proto-
type with designers, developers, and usability experts. This 
effort was followed by an external usability testing phase 
where a remote synchronous walkthrough method was used 
with nine patients with diabetes in underserved communities, 
where the participants interacted with the prototype to com-
plete several tasks assessing the depth and breadth of various 
functionality provided as well as overall usability and expe-
rience. The participants had type 2 diabetes. There were four 
men and five women, with ages ranging from 39 to 62 years, 
and an average of 53 years. All participants were Hispanic. 
Only two out of the nine participants had previous experi-
ence interacting with mobile app for anything related to dia-
betes care management. A structured usability test 
moderator’s guide was developed including scripts, ques-
tionnaires, and task descriptions. The usability testing ses-
sions were audio- and video-recorded for further analysis 
and identification of user preferences and usability problems. 
A focus group with six nurse educators and one dietician 
who provide services to patients with diabetes in underserved 
communities was also conducted. Focus group participants 
interacted with the prototype and provided their perspectives 
about the educational content, design, and functionality of 
the mobile app prototype. The focus group was only made up 
of diabetes educators; however, in the future, feedback from 
physicians will be requested.

Figure 2.  Example of the functional information requirements (FIRs) development for one high-level function (self-management).

25

Results

Interviews With Patients and Health Care 
Providers

Findings from our previous work (see Bonet Olivencia 
et al10 for detailed documentation of findings from inter-
views) suggested that patients and providers consider log-
ging and tracking blood glucose levels, physical activity, 
nutrition, medication intake, and insulin dosage as impor-
tant features to support self-management of diabetes. 
Participants also emphasized the integration of reminders 
and educational content. Providers highlighted the need to 
consider patients’ linguistic abilities and health literacy 
levels in the design of the user interface (UI). Findings 
suggested that potential issues with information visualiza-
tion, information recall, and data entry tasks could be miti-
gated using simplified interfaces, icons, nutritional 
databases, and autofill features.

Literature Review

Published literature suggests the importance of including 
rich but simple educational content, such as tips for blood 
sugar control, nutrition, and exercise.14 To address issues 
related to ease of use, literature has suggested integrating 
clearly labeled buttons and using usability heuristics, which 
are widely used and accepted principles to improve user 
experience (eg, Nielsen’s heuristics),15,16 while accounting 
for potential low literacy and numeracy.17 Literature also 
highlights integrating accurate logging and tracking features 
that provide the users the ability to insert data and simple 
visualizations of their data.18 Including a reminder feature 
for glucose testing, meals, and medication intake has also 
been highlighted.19 To facilitate data entry and increase the 
likelihood of engagement and app usage, researchers have 
highlighted the importance of having a feature to connect 
and sync devices such as glucometers with the app.9 A fea-
ture to allow patients to share their data with health care pro-
viders has also been highlighted.19

Best-in-Business App Review

A total of 1000 apps resulted from the search in Google Play 
Store, with 99 apps complying with the inclusion criteria for 
review. Search of the iOS Store yielded 665 apps of which 70 
met the inclusion criteria. From the main features identified 
in the interviews and the literature review, namely, (1) educa-
tion, (2) notifications/reminder, (3) graphs and charts, (4) 
social support, (5) incentives/motivation, (6) food tracking, 
(7) carb tracking, and (8) data sharing with provider, only 11 
of the apps reviewed from Google Play Store included 5 or 
more of the mentioned features, while only 7 iOS apps 
included 5 or more of the mentioned features (Table 1). 
Education was the least represented feature in the reviewed 

apps (only 13% of apps in Play Store and 10% in iOS Store). 
In addition, less than 20% of apps reviewed permitted carb 
tracking.

Functional Information Requirements

Informed by the interviews, literature review, and app review, 
several goals were defined for GlucoseCoach: (1) improve 
access to useful self-care information, (2) provide user sup-
port when required, (3) maintain the user’s awareness of 
their condition, (4) enable user to manage their diabetes, (5) 
allow the user to share information with their provider, (6) 
allow the user to keep track of their clinical information, and 
(7) change user’s lifestyle/behavior. The FIR analysis was 
conducted to decompose high-level app functions into mid-
level and low-level functions; the interface elements required 
for those functions; the type of input required; and the feed-
back to be provided to the user for these goals (Figure 2).

User Experience/User Interface App Design

To enhance users’ interaction with the app and facilitate infor-
mation processing, the use of textual information was reduced 
by the integration of simple visualizations such as images, 
graphs, and videos. The main app display (Home page) 
included dashboard-style widgets with summarized data to 
simplify access to user data and improve tracking user prog-
ress using intuitive graphs and visualization (Figure 3).

Table 1.  Reviewed Apps That Included Five or More of the 
Mentioned Features.

App store
App name
Number of 
features

Google Play
mySugr
6
forDiabetes: diabetes self-
management app
6

Life in Control DIabetes Coach
6
GlucoCare- A Diabetes 
Management App
6

One Drop Diabetes Management
DIABNEXT
Diaguard: Diabetes Diary
SocialDiabetes
Glycemic Index & Load: low- carb 
and diet & fIber

ManageAm App
Noom
6
iOS
mySugr
6
Noom
6
One Drop Diabetes Management
SocialDiabetes
Ellie Healthcare
Mumoactive Diabetes
Virta Health

26	
Journal of Diabetes Science and Technology 18(1) 

To enhance user interaction, redundancy in design features 
was integrated to provide alternative navigation paths. For 
example, the data input task for any of the categories could be 
completed either in the home screen of the app or by interact-
ing with data entry features in the Data section tab (Figure 4). 
Similarly, the data visualization screens could be accessed 
either through the Widgets or the Data section tab. Consistency 
in UI design was considered by keeping the use of language, 
icons, symbolisms, and other recurring elements consistent 
throughout the screen design. To facilitate the learning pro-
cess on how to use the app, high similarity was kept among 
the data input and data visualization tasks across categories. 
Given the recognized burden that data entry tasks imply, a 
syncing feature was added to facilitate the connectivity of the 
app with platforms and devices, such as glucometers. As a 
result, a comprehensive list of devices that patients with dia-
betes use and their potential to connect to the mobile app for 
diabetes management was created. In addition, several pub-
licly available databases for food and medication were identi-
fied to support autofilling and facilitate data entry tasks.
Developing educational content was a major focus during 
the design process. The research team compiled a compre-
hensive list of educational resources (ie, digital flyers, and 
videos) from reliable sources such as the American Diabetes 
Association and the CDC. A literature review was conducted 
to inform the development of a set of guidelines for the gen-
eration of educational materials for underserved populations 
with low literacy, low health literacy, and age-related chal-
lenges. One of these guidelines was the simplified linguistic 
and word use,20-23 which involves the simplification of the 
text reading level, length, and complexity; the use of an 
active natural tone; and minimizing technical jargon. Another 
important consideration is typography20-23 to improve read-
ability of text and maximize message identification through 
the careful selection of font style, size, highlighting (eg, 
bolding or underlining), and the incorporation of white 

space. Another important consideration was using simple 
and cultural-sensitive visualizations20,21,23-26 to amplify the 
efficacy of the intended message. The last guideline identi-
fied intuitive structure,20-23 which aimed at proper use of 
color, sequencing, and information chunking to form the lay-
out of the material. These guidelines, in conjunction with the 
educational content identified from reliable resources, were 
used to develop short educational scripts to be integrated in 
multiple sections of the app and to create multimedia con-
tent. The multimedia content was divided into topic modules, 
consisting of multiple animated and voiced-over short vid-
eos, with a maximum duration of three to five minutes. In 
addition, a disclaimer has been included in the application to 
inform users that the educational content does not replace 
medical advice.

Figure 3.  Example of the widgets with summarized data.

Figure 4.  Redundancy in the design of data input tasks.

27

Usability Testing

A round of formative usability testing with design experts 
was used to evaluate the design in terms of placement of fea-
tures and flows and to test whether the entire experience was 
intuitive. A second round of usability testing focused on the 
aesthetics, functionality, and usability issues of the modified 
app. Several issues related to affordances27 (or how the visual 
appearance of an element may not imply proper usage [eg, a 
feature that looks like a button may invite pushing]), mode 
confusion28 (or not clearly stating the mode in which the 
information is provided [eg, not clearly stating the transition 
from a page that allows data entry to a page that only dis-
plays information]), and the competition of primary goals 
versus secondary goals were identified while attempting to 
input data or access recorded data. To address this issue, the 
data entry and the data visualization screens were connected 
through buttons and icons the user can interact with to facili-
tate the process of switching between the screens for both 
functionalities (Figure 5). Participants also expressed their 
expectation to see tips, suggestions, and personalized recom-
mendations based on their data. Pop-up notifications have 
been integrated to redirect the user attention to important 
information such as blood sugar values outside the healthy 
range, tips, suggestions, and recommendations based on their 
data. Changes in the vocabulary used throughout the app 
design were made to adjust to user expectations.
The focus group with nurse educators and the dietician 
highlighted the importance of keeping the food-related con-
tent simple, using images, lists, and simple vocabulary. While 
the focus group participants complimented the food-tracking 
feature design, they advised to be careful with the selection of 
food-related images to be used in the app, as users may mis-
interpret them as representations of “recommended” or 
“acceptable” portions. Suggestions about topics to include in 
the education section of the app included survival skills; 
courses of action on what to do in case of hyperglycemia or 
hypoglycemia; symptom recognition; and guidelines for 
action, medication, and nutrition. The focus group recom-
mended the integration of the blood pressure and stress man-
agement features in the app, as they were not initially included 
yet are essential aspects often neglected when it comes to dia-
betes management. In addition, the focus group recommended 
functionality to track A1C and blood sugar level values.

Discussion

The evidence of benefits of mHealth has been emerging in 
recent literature.29 While UCD has been widely used in the 
design of medical devices, its application for the design of 
mHealth tools, particularly for self-management of diabetes, 
remains understudied. User-centered design approach which 
involves relevant stakeholders at different stages of the app 
design provided rich data to inform key app features and 
functionalities as well as the iterative design of GlucoseCoach. 
A key aspect of UCD is the elicitation of requirements to 

ensure the resulting app meets the intended users’ needs and 
expectations. This article documents various methods used 
for UCD of a diabetes self-management app which resulted in 
various essential features, some of which are in line with pub-
lished guidelines on mHealth apps in general such as moni-
toring capability for blood sugar, food, exercise, medications, 
and weight30-32 as well as several requirements specific to 
underserved communities such as intuitive visualizations and 
simplified educational content to address low health literacy. 
Furthermore, the research informed the integration of features 
to monitor other essential aspects for diabetes management 
such as stress and blood pressure,33,34 which are often over-
looked when it comes to self-management.
Our review of apps suggested a noticeable underrepresen-
tation of educational features in available apps. However, 
design of intuitive, authoritative, and effective educational 
content was highlighted in various stages of this research. 
Therefore, considerable effort was given to the development 
of educational modules while accounting for known limita-
tions of underserved population such as low literacy, low 
health literacy, and age-related challenges. In addition, ele-
ments of UI design such as good redundancy, consistency, 
similarity, and simple visualizations were applied throughout 
the app screens to overcome the limitations. While initial 
usability testing showed promise, more work is needed to 
evaluate the long-term engagement and usage of GlucoseCoach.
An essential element of UCD is participatory and iterative 
nature of design and development. In our application of 
UCD, relevant stakeholders were involved in all stages of the 
design process and their feedback has led to a more intuitive 
and usable app (see Figure 6). One of the limitations of this 

Figure 5.  Connection of data entry and the data visualization 
screens using buttons and icons.

28	
Journal of Diabetes Science and Technology 18(1) 

work is that the design requirements and evaluations were 
conducted with intended users from various representative 
underserved communities in South Texas and the result may 
not generalize to all underserved populations. In addition, 
only one round of usability testing was conducted with a 
relatively small sample of representative users and nurse 
educators. Future work should include several rounds of for-
mative usability testing with other stakeholders including 
health care providers to understand their perspectives and 
inform potential changes to improve the app design.

Conclusion

This article highlights the utility of applying a mixed-meth-
ods UCD approach to design a diabetes self-management 
mobile app for patients in underserved communities. This 
immersive experience accounting for the intended users’ 
mental models and expectations facilitated the design of a 
comprehensive mobile app with essential features and a 
strong educational component, covering an important gap in 
the available apps in the market. Limitations in intended 
users’ literacy, health literacy, and previous experience with 
technology were addressed using elements of UI design, 
simplified interfaces, adjustable icons, databases, and auto-
fill features to simplify information visualization, informa-
tion recall, and data entry tasks. Multiple types of simple 
visualizations facilitated interpretation of diabetes data. 
Usability studies with intended users evaluated the design 
and informed changes to improve the match between the 
users’ mental models and app design. Design guidelines 
were compiled and applied to develop education material 

sensitive to intended users’ socioeconomic limitations and 
cultural backgrounds to promote a healthy attitude toward 
diabetes care. The findings from usability evaluations show 
an overwhelmingly positive perceptions which we believe 
are attributed to the UCD process.

Abbreviations

CDC, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; FIR, functional 
information requirement; mHealth, mobile health; UCD, user-cen-
tered design; UX/UI, user experience/user interface; UXD, user 
experience design.