An ofﬂine mobile nutrition monitoring intervention for
varying-literacy patients receiving hemodialysis:
a pilot study examining usage and usability

Kay Connelly,1 Katie A Siek,2 Beenish Chaudry,1 Josette Jones,3 Kim Astroth,4

Janet L Welch5

ABSTRACT
Objective Design and evaluation of the dietary intake
monitoring application (DIMA) to assist varying-literacy
patients receiving hemodialysis to adhere to their
prescribed dietary regimen.
Methods An iterative, user-centered design process
informed by Bandura’s social cognitive theory was
employed to design DIMAda mobile application that
utilizes touch-screen, visual interfaces; barcode
scanning; and voice recording to assist varying-literacy
patients receiving hemodialysis to self-monitor their diet.
A pilot ﬁeld study was conducted where 18 patients
receiving hemodialysis were recruited face-to-face from
two dialysis facilities to use DIMA for 6 weeks. Subjects
recorded their dietary intake using DIMA and met with
research assistants three times each week. All
interactions with DIMA were logged. Subjects’
interdialytic weight gain was recorded throughout the
study. At the end of the study, two face-to-face
questionnaires were administered to assess usability and
context of use.
Results Subjects were able to use DIMA
successfullyd12 subjects used DIMA as much or more
at the end of the study as they did at the beginning and
reported that DIMA helped them change their diet.
Subjects had difﬁculty using the barcode scanner.
Viewing past meals was the most used of the reﬂection
mechanisms in DIMA.
Conclusion Results suggest that while many design
features were useful, some could be improved. In
particular, future versions of DIMA will be on
a smartphone using a camera for barcode scanning,
integrate feedback and past meal reﬂection into the
normal ﬂow of the application, and support visual cues
when selecting food items.

BACKGROUND AND SIGNIFICANCE
Patients receiving hemodialysis have little to no
residual kidney function making ﬂuid and electro-
lyte management key elements of their medical
treatment. These patients typically undergo dial-
ysis
treatment
three
times
a
week
and
are
prescribed a diet that restricts sodium, potassium,
phosphorus, and ﬂuid intake.1 Effective dietary self-
management helps prevent poor health outcomes.
Inadequate self-management may lead to increased
blood pressure,2 reduced heart,3 physical,4 and
cognitive function,5 reduced bone health,6 and
increased mortality.7
8 Unfortunately, the target
population often lacks the computational, literacy,
and memory skills necessary to track their ﬂuid and

nutrient intake.9 10 Indeed, as many as 80% of
patients do not restrict their ﬂuid intake11 and 67%
do not sufﬁciently limit their nutrients.12

Electronic dietary self-monitoring can provide
patients with just-in-time13 information that can
inﬂuence their dietary choices at critical decision-
making moments. There are currently no dietary
monitoring applications that meet the literacy and
disease-speciﬁc requirements of patients receiving
hemodialysis. Most dietary monitoring applica-
tions target individuals attempting to lose weight,
and utilize text-based input,14e17 which is inap-
propriate for varying-literacy populations. Alterna-
tive methods of data input include scanning
receipts and barcodes,13
18e20 both mechanisms
which require signiﬁcant technical sophistication.
Taking pictures of food is an easy input mecha-
nismdeither as a delayed nutrition analysis tool21

or a reﬂective prompt.22 Although taking pictures
is ideal for low-literacy populations, it is not
conducive to real-time feedback.

In applications for patients with chronic disease,
researchers have primarily explored how to help
people with diabetes monitor and reﬂect on their
dietary intake. A popular trend is to pair images of
food with contextual23 or personal health data24 25

to
support
reﬂection.
However,
Arsand
and
colleagues found subjects were not interested in
taking pictures of their food.24

There have been two studies that explored off-
the-shelf nutrition monitoring PDA applications to
assist patients receiving hemodialysis self-monitor
diet.26 27 Dowell and Welch focused their results on
the technology form factor,26 whereas Sevick and
colleagues measured improved dietary compliance.27

Although both of these studies were encouraging,
the small sample size (n<5) and required high
literacy, numeracy, and technology knowledge made
it unsuitable for the target population.

In this paper, we ﬁrst describe the design of an
ofﬂine mobile dietary intake monitoring applica-
tion (DIMA) that was created by an interdisci-
plinary team. The team utilized an iterative design
process where the needs and abilities of the target
patient population were integrated into the ﬁnal
design. A signiﬁcant challenge was the varying
literacy and numeracy in the target population,
requiring
a
non-textual
and
non-numerical
design. We describe the DIMA application and the
rationalization for our design choices.
We then provide a user evaluation of DIMA from
a 6-week pilot ﬁeld study with 18 patients receiving
hemodialysis. Another paper examines the clinical

1School of Informatics and
Computing, Indiana University,
Bloomington, Indiana, USA
2Department of Computer
Science, University of Colorado,
Boulder, Colorado, USA
3School of Informatics, Indiana
University-Purdue University at
Indianapolis, Indianapolis,
Indiana, USA
4Mennonite College of Nursing,
Illinois State University, Normal,
Illinois, USA
5School of Nursing, Indiana
University, Indianapolis, Indiana,
USA

Correspondence to
Dr Kay Connelly, School of
Informatics and Computing,
Indiana University, Informatics
East 260, 919 E 10th St,
Bloomington, IN 47408, USA;

Received 30 November 2011
Accepted 15 April 2012
Published Online First
12 May 2012

705

outcomes of subjects enrolled in the pilot study (unpublished
data), whereas this paper focuses on usage and user perceptions.
Speciﬁcally, our research questions were:
RQ1: Will subjects use DIMA over the 6-week period to monitor
their diet?
RQ2: Which features of DIMA are most useful to help subjects
monitor their diet?

METHODS
We designed DIMA through an iterative, user-centered design
process. Our design was informed by Bandura’s social cognitive
theory28 where we aimed to improve health outcomes by
designing a self-monitoring application that provided subjects
with the ability to observe, recognize, and change their behavior.
We were careful to incorporate foods, beverages, and supplements
that were relevant to this particular disease and population.

DIMA application design
DIMA (ﬁgure 1) runs on an iPAQ hx2495b PDA (Hewlett-
Packard, Palo Alto, California, USA) running Windows Mobile
5.0. We chose a PDA because it is a low-cost, mobile device with
a large touch screen. A mobile device provides patients with the
ability to record foods and drinks as they consume them within
or outside of their homes. DIMA utilizes a Socket SDIO In-Hand
Scan Card (SDSC Series 3E; Socket Mobile, Newark, California,
USA) barcode scanner for easy food item input, and a touch
screen to input those items without barcodes. Computer
scientists on the Indiana University Bloomington research team
designed and developed DIMA with feedback from the Indiana
University
Indianapolis
health
professional
research
team.
Overall, the DIMA application underwent four revisions, three
b-tests, and a comprehensive review by health professionals
before being deployed for evaluation.

Navigation
In a previous study,29 we tested three typical navigation struc-
tures with the target population. We found that they make the
least mistakes with linear navigation where users traverse down
one path and make a single choice on each screen. Once a task is
complete, the user is brought back to the beginning or home
screen. Consequently, DIMA uses a linear navigation with home
buttons on every screen.

Build a meal
We found patients receiving hemodialysis typically think of their
daily nutrition in terms of prepared meals (eg, ‘I ate lasagna’),
instead of how nutrition monitoring applications typically
workdlogging individual ingredients that make up a meal (eg, ‘I
ate pasta, tomato sauce, and cheese’).30 The build-a-meal meta-
phor emphasizes this conceptualization of an entire meal. The
meal concept is immediately evident on the ﬁrst DIMA screen
(ﬁgure 2A) where users can review past meals they have entered
by clicking the multiple place settings, or enter a new meal by
clicking the single place setting. When the single place setting is
clicked, users go to the build-a-meal screen (ﬁgure 2B).

To add a food item from the build-a-meal screen, the user
must select either scanning (right) or icon input (middle). To
delete a food item, the user taps on the food icon they wish to
delete on the build-a-meal screen and conﬁrms the deletion on
a subsequent screen.

Barcode scanning
Previous studies showed that this population was capable of
scanning barcodes during dialysis sessions and at home.31 Once

the user selects entering a food item with scanning, they simply
press the single button on the scanning screen and aim the
scanner at the barcode (ﬁgure 2C). Once a subject successfully
scans a barcode, DIMA automatically returns to the build-
a-meal screen, and a picture of a barcode is included in the
current meal (ﬁgure 2D).

Icon interface
When designing the icon interface, there must be a balance
between how subjects think about food they consume and

Figure 1
The dietary intake monitoring application (DIMA) is a mobile,
electronic food diary.

706

Figure 2
Application ﬂow to add three items to a meal and then look at detailed feedback: (A) ﬁrst screen; (B) build-a-meal screen; (C) empty
scanning screen; (D) build-a-meal screen with barcode; (E) food category screen for icon selection; counter clockwise from top left: food groups, drinks
and ice, snack foods, favorites, supplements, and prepared foods; (F) food group screen; (G) fruits screen; (H) search by color screen for red
fruitsdvoice recording is at the bottom; (I) build-a-meal with apple added; (J) food category screen; (K) drinks and ice screen; (L) soda screen;
(M) drink container screen; (N) portion of container consumed screen; (O) build-a-meal with soda added; and (P) detailed feedback screen.

707

information presentation on a small screen. Too many food
items on a single screen make it difﬁcult to ﬁnd the food, so
food must be grouped into categories (ﬁgure 2E). The USDA
food groups are an obvious categorization because dietitians use
them when educating patients. In addition, our prior work
found patients often think about foods that they should not eat
(eg, many snacks) and prepared meals.30 Other important
categories are ice and supplements, as patients receiving hemo-
dialysis use ice as a self-care strategy to limit ﬂuid intake and
consume liquid supplements to prevent malnutrition. Finally,
patients often eat the same foods regularly. Thus, DIMA has
a favorites screen to access frequently consumed foods.

Portion sizes
While it may be too overwhelming for a non-technical popula-
tion to select portion sizes for all foods, DIMA includes a portion
interface for ﬂuids because it is critical information to collect and
display to patients receiving hemodialysis. As soon as a drink, ice,
or supplement is selected, a portion screen appears, prompting
the user to select the size of the container (ﬁgure 2M) and then
the amount they drank (ﬁgure 2N). The two-part portion size
interface allows subjects to select volumes from 2 to 20 oz.

Voice recording
DIMA includes a mechanism to voice record a food item if users
are unable to scan the barcode or ﬁnd the icon. Voice recorded
items are not processed in real time, and thus their nutrient
values are not included in the real-time feedback. We previously
found that subjects preferred voice recording food items over
barcode scanning31; however, they had difﬁculty recording items
that could be parsed in real time.32 Thus for DIMA, the voice
recording option is only available after the user either tries but is
unsuccessful in scanning a barcode, or navigates the icon screens
in an attempt to ﬁnd a food item that is not present (ﬁgure 2H).
This design decision forced subjects to attempt to enter food
another way and receive real-time feedback before they tried
voice recording.

Feedback
Patients receiving hemodialysis must balance their diet by
limiting ﬂuid, sodium, potassium, and phosphorus, while
ensuring they consume enough calories and protein. Providing
real-time feedback is essential to empower patients to make
good dietary choices in everyday life. DIMA feedback is tailored
to individual patients based on their prescribed diet. DIMA could
not include feedback for all six items on every screen because of
the limited screen size. Instead, DIMA has a feedback bar at the
bottom of the build-a-meal screen that provides the user with
the ability to see their consumption levels for the most critical
nutrients at a glancedﬂuid, sodium, and potassium. If users tap
on the feedback bar, they are taken to a screen to view all of the
monitored nutrients (ﬁgure 2P).
The feedback icons for nutrients that should be limited use
a ﬁll-up metaphor, where they start empty and gradually ﬁll up
as nutrients are consumed, turning red when near their limit.30

In contrast, the two nutrients that patients need to consume
a minimum of each day have smiley face feedback icons that are
gradually ﬁlled in. Patients know they have reached their daily
goal when the smiley face is completed.

Study design
The Indiana University Institutional Review Board approved
a randomized controlled pilot study of patients receiving
hemodialysis, and this paper only reports ﬁndings from the

intervention (DIMA) group. Subjects were recruited in-person
from two dialysis facilities. Subjects were at least 18 years old,
alert and oriented, prepared their own meals, on hemodialysis
for at least 3 months, and self-reported difﬁculty with at least
one component of their diet. Literacy, numeracy, and technology
knowledge were known to be varied in the recruitment sites,
and thus were not considered for individual subject recruitment.
Our previous studies testing speciﬁc design features in isola-
tion had a clear ‘wow factor’, where subjects actively used the
technology for 1e2 weeks, but then usage dropped off dramat-
ically once the technology was no longer novel and exciting.31 A
major goal of this study was to see if subjects would use DIMA
longer if they received real-time dietary feedback. We were also
interested in the speciﬁc design considerations discussed in the
‘DIMA application design’ section above. We logged every
interface click and constructed rich usage interaction patterns
for each subject. Unfortunately, subject 17 lost his PDA during
the study, and so we only have a partially complete interaction
log for that subject.

Setup
Research assistants (RAs) were trained to use DIMA. The RAs
met and trained subjects to use the PDA and DIMA on average
for three dialysis sessions. After subjects passed a competency
assessment test for DIMA and PDA usage, they entered the 6-
week self-monitoring phase.
During self-monitoring, subjects took their PDAs home to
record their dietary intake. They met with an RA each subse-
quent dialysis session. RAs charged the PDAs, downloaded
DIMA food logs and saved voice recordings to help the research
team identify foods that were not included in DIMA. At the
end of the study, RAs verbally administered two usability
questionnaires
to
assess
subjects’
perceptions
of
DIMA.
Subjects received a total of $25 for completing each interview.
Compensation was not linked to DIMA usage.

Subjects
Twenty-four subjects were recruited to use DIMA from two
inner-city dialysis units that have varying literacy rates.10 29 Five
subjects dropped out after baseline interviews: one subject did
not want the research team to access his/her medical records,
two subjects had difﬁculty seeing or using DIMA, one subject
had a stroke and one subject became pregnant. Of the remaining
19, one subject withdrew during the intervention delivery
because of extended illness. Two additional subjects withdrew
post-intervention and prior to completing the ﬁnal instruments
(one had a kidney transplant and one started home dialysis);
however, they had completed the usability questionnaires
reported here, so we include them in the current analysis. The
subject attrition rate for this study was 25%, less than the
average attrition rates in our previous work.31 32

In this paper, we report on 18 subjects. Thirteen subjects were
female and all were African Americans. On average, subjects
were aged 53 years (SD 15.1). Subjects had been on hemodialysis
from 3 months to 9 years. The main causes of renal disease were
hypertension and type II adult onset diabetes. Each subject had
at least one other comorbidity.
Many low-literacy patients refuse to participate in any study
that requires reading (including taking a literacy test), because
they lose standing with their peers. Further, patients are reluc-
tant to participate in studies outside of the dialysis unit because
of the time commitment required by hemodialysis. Thus, we
used education levels as a proxy for literacy. In the USA, 76% of
adults without a high school diploma and 44% of those with

708

only a high school diploma have basic or below basic literacy
skills.33 Four subjects had less than a high school diploma and 14
subjects had only a high school diploma, which would indicate
approximately 50% of subjects had basic or below basic literacy
levels. This corresponds to a previous study where 60% of the
patients in this unit had basic or below basic literacy levels as
measured by the Rapid Estimate of Adult Literacy in Medicine
test (REALM).34 35

RESULTS
To answer our two research questions, we used four sets of
metrics:
1. Monitoring frequency computed through recorded meal logs
2. Use of individual features within DIMA using detailed
application usage logs
3. A 27-item post-intervention usability questionnaire devel-
oped by Susan Rawl and colleagues, modiﬁed for DIMA
4. A 33-item post-intervention questionnaire measuring the
usability of speciﬁc features and context of use, developed
speciﬁcally for the DIMA pilot.
Sample questions from the post-intervention questionnaires
are included in box 1. Here, we highlight the most relevant
results as we discuss each research question.

RQ1: Will subjects use DIMA over the 6-week period to monitor
their diet?
Seventeen subjects felt the PDA was easy to use and enjoyed
using it. All subjects used DIMA in their homes; however, six did
not use DIMA while they were out or around strangers.
We deﬁned subjects’ monitoring frequency in terms of how
many times they input food items during a day. A high rating (2)
indicates a subject entered food items at different times during
the day and thus could make the most of the real-time feedback
for decision making. A moderate rating (1) was for when
subjects entered items only once a day, and thus could reﬂect on
their meal choices but were less likely to beneﬁt from real-time
feedback throughout the day. A low rating (0) was for when
subjects did not enter any food items in a day. We highlighted
the frequency trends in ﬁgure 3 by plotting the 2-week average
frequencies for all subjects. Figure 3A shows subjects who
increased their frequency by more than 10% (n¼9), ﬁgure 3C
shows subjects who decreased their frequency by more than
10% (n¼6), and ﬁgure 3B shows the subjects (n¼3) who stayed
within 10% of their monitoring frequency from the beginning to
the end of the study.
In previous studies, we found subjects typically undergo
a wow factor phase where they use an application a lot in the
beginning of the study and then decrease participation because
they lose interest over time. An example of this is shown in
ﬁgure 3C, where the line points to a subject who had a moni-
toring score of 1.43 in the ﬁrst 2 weeks of the study, but had
dropped off signiﬁcantly by the last 2 weeks (monitoring
score¼0.57). While there were six subjects who demonstrated
the wow factor to varying degrees, the majority of subjects
(n¼12) had little change in monitoring frequency or actually
increased frequency by the end of the study. Thus, we conclude
that DIMA was useful for the majority of subjects to continue
using the application for the entire 6 weeks when compared to
our previous study where subjects did not receive feedback and
did not regularly participate after 2 weeks.31

Despite this continued usage, subjects did not record every-
thing they consumed. Over the course of the study, the average
interdialytic weight gain of subjects was 0.84 kg, which equates

to approximately 840 ml of ﬂuid consumption. We found that
the average ﬂuid intake recorded with DIMA per day for each
subject was 471 mld56% of what they actually consumed.

RQ2: Which features of DIMA are most useful to help subjects
monitor their diet?
Application logs showed that with the exception of barcode
scanning, subjects were able to use most features within DIMA.
The icon interface was used an average of 445 times per subject,
whereas scanning was used an average of 42 times per subject.
Subjects could not successfully scan an item 87.9% of the time
they attempted to do so. Only four subjects successfully scanned
an item on their own. Of the 3622 items entered by subjects
with the icon interface, 43% could reasonably be expected to
have had barcodes.

Box 1 Sample questions from two post-intervention
questionnaires

Sample questions from the 25-item modiﬁed Rawl
usability questionnaire (5-point Likert scale)
The PDA was easy to use.
I enjoyed using the PDA.
The feedback pictures on the PDA were helpful.
The PDA made me think about how to change my diet and ﬂuid
intake.

Sample questions from a 33-item context-of-use and
usability questionnaire
When you use the PDA, do you ﬁnd the feedback clear and
understandable?
When you use the PDA, do you use it at home?
When you use the PDA, do you use it when you eat away from
home?
When you use the PDA, do you take it when you leave the house?
When you use the PDA, do you think that the feedback applies to
you?
When you use the PDA, do you change what you eat and drink
based on the feedback?
When you use the PDA, do you ever use it in front of friends?
When you use the PDA, do you ever use it in front of strangers?
When you use the PDA, do you ever use it in a restaurant?
When you use the PDA, do you ever use it at home?
When using the PDA, was it easy or hard for you to use the
scanner?
When using the PDA, was it easy or hard for you to select the
icons on the screen?
When using the PDA, was it easy or hard for you to use the voice
recorder?
When using the PDA, was it easy or hard for you to ﬁnd a food on
the screen that you have found before?
When using the PDA, was it easy or hard for you to ﬁnd a food on
the screen for the ﬁrst time?
Did you ﬁnd it easy or hard to ﬁnd the food you are looking for
with the icons?
Did you ﬁnd it easy or hard to ﬁnd the feedback about your water
and diet intake?
Did you ﬁnd it easy or hard to see the total meal you have
entered?
Did you ﬁnd it easy or hard to understand the information on the
screen?

709

Fourteen subjects thought it was easy to ﬁnd foods using the
icon interface as opposed to nine subjects reporting the scanner
as an easy input mechanism. Although 10 subjects thought
ﬁnding a food item was difﬁcult the ﬁrst time they attempted
to ﬁnd the item via the icon interface, 15 subjects reported
that it was easy to ﬁnd the food the next time they tried to ﬁnd
the item.
A total of 71 voice recordings were made by six subjects
during the studyd12 recordings had multiple food items. Of the
total 95 items recorded, 18 could have been scanned and 39
entered with icons.
The
disease-speciﬁc
interface
components
were
used
by
subjects. The most frequently used was ice, which was selected
a total of 140 times by 15 subjects. In addition, seven subjects
recorded supplements over the course of the study for a total of
53 times.

Reﬂection on diet
DIMA provides two ways for subjects to reﬂect on their dietary
intakedviewing intake levels and reviewing past meal record-
ings. Subjects viewed their past meals (average¼93) more than
their full feedback levels (average¼70). Subjects could always
view the three most important feedback levels on the ﬁrst screen
and build-a-meal screen, making it difﬁcult to fully evaluate
feedback through the usage logs.
Reﬂection: All subjects who viewed past meals started a new
meal soon afterwards. Thirteen subjects started or ended their

day by reﬂecting on their past meals for 11.61 days during the
42-day study. Subjects reﬂected more on past meals during the
ﬁrst 2 weeks of the study (43.11% during this time).
Feedback use: All subjects agreed that the feedback icons were
helpful in monitoring their dietary intake, but one subject noted
that the feedback was not understandable. Nine subjects rarely
went over limits and thus sporadically looked at the feedback
page. The other nine subjects viewed the feedback page at least
twice a week throughout the study. We expected subjects to
look at their feedback levels more after they went over their
limits and then not exceed the limits as much, as shown in
ﬁgure 4 during week 2; indeed three subjects were over their
limits until they began accessing the feedback page at the end of
the study. Six subjects continued to go over their limits even
after looking at the feedback page.
To
further
examine
subject
usage
of
speciﬁc
interface
components, we split subjects’ 2-week average frequency metric
into three groups: high (>1.3), medium ($0.6, #1.3), and low
(<0.6). Table 1 summarizes the results from one-way ANOVA
testing for frequency of using the different input mechanisms
(Icon, Scan, and Voice) and reﬂection mechanisms (PastMeals
and Feedback). Frequency of using the feedback page differed
signiﬁcantly (F(2,45)¼4.31, p¼0.019). Post-hoc TukeyeKramer
tests showed that the high group used feedback signiﬁcantly
more than the other two groups at the 0.05 level of signiﬁcance.
There was no statistically signiﬁcant difference between the
medium and low groups. Overall, frequency of using the

Figure 3
Two-week frequency averages by subjects with (A) upward trends, (B) no change, and (C) downwards trends.

Figure 4
Overview of subject 7’s
feedback page views and days over
limits. The + under the number
indicates meetings with research
assistants.

710

PastMeals page missed the signiﬁcant cut-off (F(2,45)¼3.01,
p¼0.059), but TukeyeKramer post hoc comparisons indicate
that the high group used PastMeals signiﬁcantly more than the
low group.
Icon use differed signiﬁcantly across all three groups (F(2,45)¼
10.85, p¼0.00014), and post hoc TukeyeKramer tests showed
signiﬁcant differences between all pairs of groups at the 0.05
signiﬁcance level. There were no statistically signiﬁcant differ-
ences between groups for using scanning or voice recording
input.

DISCUSSION
One limitation of the study was that given the difﬁculty in
obtaining actual consumption levels, we do not know how
compliant subjects were in monitoring. Interdialytic weight gain
values do tell us subjects only recorded 56% of the ﬂuid they
consumed, so we would expect similar percentages for non-ﬂuid
foods as well. Another limitation is that we used a proxy for
literacy instead of measuring literacy directly. Our proxy is
consistent with a prior study that measured literacy with this
population,35 increasing our conﬁdence that it is sufﬁcient.

The majority of subjects could and did use DIMA to monitor
their nutrient and ﬂuid intake. Only six subjects signiﬁcantly
decreased their DIMA usage during the ﬁeld trialdin compar-
ison to our previous work where all subjects decreased their
usage after the wow factor wore off. One of the major differ-
ences in this study is that subjects received personalized, real-
time feedback based on what they input. All subjects felt the
feedback was directly applicable to them and the majority
reported that using DIMA caused them to change (n¼11) or
think about how to change (n¼17) their diet. Subjects who used
DIMA more viewed the feedback page signiﬁcantly more as well.
Other research also provided real-time feedback, but had
decreased usage by the end of the study.17

Table 2 summarizes the key results that suggest changes to
the DIMA design. When we started this project, low-cost,
touch-screen smartphones were not available. The next iteration
of DIMA will be on a smartphone platform. While smartphones
have a similar affordance to a PDA, the phone functionality
makes them more convenient. DIMA on a smartphone is likely
to result in fewer subjects forgetting the device at home;
however, the shorter battery life will require subjects to

Table 1
One-way ANOVA results for interface component by three DIMA usage levels based on 2-week
average frequency: L<0.6, 0.6#M#1.3, 1.3<H

Interface
component
F score
p Value

TukeyeKramer (0.05), mean difference (honesty
signiﬁcant difference)

HeM (HSD)
HeL (HSD)
MeL (HSD)

Icon
F(2,45)¼10.85
0.00014*
4.72 (4.62)*
10.83 (5.73)*
6.10 (5.87)*
Voice Record
F(2,45)¼1.70
0.20
Scan
F(2,45)¼1.26
0.29
Feedback
F(2,45)¼4.31
0.019*
1.22 (1.22)*
1.51 (1.51)*
0.29 (1.55)
PastMeals
F(2,45)¼3.01
0.059
0.43 (1.37)
1.72 (1.70)*
1.23 (1.74)

*Signiﬁcant results.
H, high; L, low; M, medium.

Table 2
Results that suggest a needed change to DIMA, along with associated suggested changes

Result
Suggestion for design
Issues to consider

Some subjects did not take DIMA out of the home
and/or did not use DIMA in front of strangers.
Make DIMA available on a smartphone. The phone
features will encourage users to have DIMA with them
at all times, and the phone is less likely to have
a stigma associated with it when used in the presence
of others.

Battery will drain faster, so may need to remind users
to charge phone. Additional monthly cost of phone,
and potentially a data plan.

Subjects only recorded on average 56% of ﬂuid intake
in DIMA.
Include a reminder feature during common eating
times. With phone implementation, context-aware
reminders can also be used, based on the location of
the subject and past meal entry times.

Reminders can become irritating, resulting in users
ignoring them.

Subjects failed most of the times they attempted
scanning.
Use the camera feature in the phone to take a picture
of the barcode, which is easier to use than the socket
scanner used in this study.
Most subjects did not scan when a barcode was
available.
In addition to change in scanner technology, include
a scanned item picture in the current meal, instead of
a barcode picture.

Several thousand barcodes must be associated with
a picture in the database.

Some subjects started a new meal immediately after
viewing PastMeals. Some subjects often viewed
PastMeals at the beginning or end of the day.
PastMeals was used more often during the ﬁrst
2 weeks.

Support easier viewing of past meals by altering the
ﬁrst page so it has one button to start a new meal at
the top third of the screen, with the bottom of the
screen containing a review of the most recent meals.
Thus, past meals are always easily viewable before
starting a new meal.

For evaluation, it will be difﬁcult to measure if subjects
view PastMeals, since they will no longer have to
perform an action to access it.

Some subjects stayed within their limits only after
starting to view feedback near the end of the study.
Incorporate viewing full feedback automatically: after
saving the current meal, have DIMA go to the feedback
page. User must acknowledge feedback to continue to
the ﬁrst page.

Again, it will be difﬁcult to measure if subjects look at
the full feedback, although in this case, we can detect
how long they keep the feedback page open before
accepting it and returning to the ﬁrst page.
Some subjects continued to go over their limits after
reviewing feedback.
Incorporate visual cues as subjects select food icons:
foods that will keep consumption of critical nutrients
within limits have a different background/border than
foods that will exceed limits.

711

remember to charge the phone. We must carefully consider
privacy, usability, and cost issues to determine if DIMA should
synchronize with a remote personal or electronic health record.
While such synchronization may be desired by healthcare
workers, the necessary data plan is currently too costly for many
subjects with low-socioeconomic status, and subjects may not
want to share the information with providers. Indeed, many
subjects over the course of this project have speciﬁcally indicated
they were not always truthful to their providers about their
eating habits, and would be reluctant to use a technology that
shared such information.
The smartphone will allow us to integrate context-aware
reminders to remind subjects to record meals when they are
most likely to be eating (based on location and time). In addi-
tion, we will switch to an easier-to-use camera-based scanner
and incorporate images of the items scanned on the build-a-meal
page, not just a generic barcode icon.
Finally, we plan to enhance our feedback and reﬂection
mechanisms by making them viewable by default: the ﬁrst page
will provide a view of the most recently consumed meals, the
full feedback page will be shown every time a meal is saved, and
visual cues will be integrated during food entry to highlight
foods that will not place the subject over their daily limits. We
are currently making these modiﬁcations before we plan a longer
and larger ﬁeld study.

CONCLUSIONS
This study provides insights and validates many of the design
choices suggested by our prior user studies. Two-thirds of
subjects continued to use the application and reﬂect on their diet
over a 6-week perioddbypassing the typical wow factor period.
The usage logs and user feedback also suggest changes to the
DIMA design.

Contributors All of the authors contributed to the design of the study, the
performance of the study, and the writing of the paper.

Funding This research was supported by a grant made available by the National
Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering (R21 EB007083), a National
Science Foundation research infrastructure grant (NSF RI Grant CNS-0202048 A004),
and a T32 Postdoctoral Training Grant (NIH T32 NR007066).

Ethics approval This research was approved by the Institutional Review Board of
Indiana University.

Provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.