© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015 
A. Rocha et al. (eds.), New Contributions in Information Systems and Technologies,  
213

Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing 354, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-16528-8_20 
 

Using a Hybrid User Centered Methodology 

António Pedro Costa1,3, Luís Paulo Reis2,3, and Maria João Loureiro1 

1 CIDTFF - Research Centre "Didatics and Technology in Education of Trainers",  
DE/UA - Education Department, University of Aveiro, Aveiro, Portugal  

2 DSI/EEUM – Information Systems Department, School of Engineering,  
University of Minho, Guimarães, Portugal 

3 LIACC - Artificial Intelligence and Computer Science Laboratory, Porto, Portugal 

Abstract. This paper describes the lessons learned on the development of 
educational applications using a Hybrid User Centered Development 
Methodology (HUCDM). This is a simple, iterative and incremental 
development process that has as building blocks the principles of User Centered 
Design (UCD), specified in the International Organization for Standardization 
9241-210 - Ergonomics of Human -System Interaction (210: Human -centered 
design for interactive systems), together with practices and values from agile 
software development methods. The process consists of four main stages: 
specification/planning, design, implementation and maintenance. Prototyping 
and evaluation are carried out across the entire process. By developing a 
application in a Small and Medium Enterprise (SME) we were able to learn 
several lessons that may be useful for other educational software developers 
such as the need to involve the user in the evaluation (as verifier), but also to 
integrate him into the team, as informant or co-designer. This improves user 
satisfaction in comparison to involve the user only on the evaluation phase. 

Keywords: Software Engineering, Educational Software Development 
Methodologies, Agile Methods, Hybrid Methodology Hybrid for User Centered 
Development, User Centered Design. 

1 
Introduction 

Software development concerns the computer programming, documenting, testing, 
and bug removing needed for the creation of applications and frameworks that may 
result into a final software product. It refers to a process of writing and maintaining 
the source code, but in a wider definition it also includes all that is involved in the 
creation of the desired software until its final use, and its planned and structured 
process of development. Software development includes research, methodologies, 
development processes, specification, prototyping, 
modification, reuse, re-
engineering, maintenance, or any other activities that help the development of the 
final software product.

214 

Software Engineering appeared to face the need for better quality control of the 
software development process. It mostly aims to apply systematic approaches from 
engineering to the software development process. There are several approaches to 
software development such as the traditional waterfall model and newer agile 
software development processes. 
In general, software development is a highly complex activity. Several software 
development methods including distinct stages have been proposed in the literature. 
Sommerville [1] states that the key stages in software development, are common to 
most methods, comprising: 

• Software specification - software features and constraints on its operation must 
be completely defined; 
• Software design and implementation - the software to meet the specifications 
have to be produced; 
• Software validation - the software must be validated to ensure it is what 
customers/users want; 
• Software development - the software must evolve to meet the requirements of 
customers/users. 

Software development is a highly complex activity, and in the large majority of cases 
it occurs without being properly planned, supported only by short-term decisions of 
[2]. This approach may work for small software packages and projects, but as the 
system grows, so the difficulty of adding new features also grows. Additionally, 
Shneiderman & Plaisant [3] state that 60% of the software development projects fail 
in setting goals. This particular problem arises because in most projects there is a lack 
of communication between team members and between team members and end users. 
Therefore, choosing the appropriate method for developing software have obvious 
economic and competitive advantages, gains in terms of quality. However, if a less 
appropriate development method is selected, the more likely the project will exceed 
its time limits and problems will arise such as economic problems [4]. 
This paper includes a brief theoretical background on the evolution of software 
development methodologies, referring to examples of methods used in the 
development of educational software packages. Subsequently, a brief UCD 
description is made based on the exposition of its assumptions and on its importance 
for the development of educational software. Next, a brief description of the HUCDM 
and finally, it includes a brief reflection about HUCDM and some final 
considerations. 

2 
Educational Software Development Methodologies 

The first methods (referred in the literature as disciplined, traditional or classic) 
derived from the most common processes of software development. The method of 
water cascading or software development life cycle, emerged in the 70s and provided 
the theoretical basis for most of the subsequent methods. It is sometimes referred to as 
a generic method for developing software [1]. However, according to Larman and

215 

Basili [5], the iterative and incremental method already was dated back from de 50’s 
and there were concrete examples of projects in the 70’s using it. In the 80’s emerged, 
among other methods, spiral and prototyping methods. In the 90's, agile methods and 
real examples of the integration of iterative and incremental approaches [1], [5], [6], 
[7], [8], [9], [10]. Agile methods such as Extreme Programming (XP), Scrum and 
Crystal Clear, by involving users in the development process, seek to provide and 
prioritize new requirements of software and evaluate their iterations. They give focus 
to the role of people, and the skills of the development team should be recognized and 
exploited. The team members are free to use their own methods of work without 
being prescribed obligatory processes [1], [10], [11], [12], [13], [14]. 
Specifically in what regards to the development of educational software, the 
methods described in the literature, have their genesis in premises of the above 
methods. Examples are the two methods used in the development of the following 
software packages (see Table 1): Univap Virtual [15] and Softvali [16]. 

Table 1. Software Development Main Stages 

Development Stages [1] 
Univap Virtual [15] 
Softvali [16] 
Specification  
Analysis and Planning 
Conception 
Design and Implementation 
Pre-Production 
Elaboration and Construction  
Validation 
Production    Post-Production 
Finalization 
Evolution 
------ 
Feasibility Analysis 
 
Although arising with different designations, analysis, design and implementation 
phases that are able to identify these processes. They were introduced in early 
proposals for software development methods. In the phase concerning analysis a 
survey on software requirements, educational objectives and the target audience is 
performed. In the Univap Virtual, at this stage, a survey concerning scientific 
information on the subject of educational resource is still made. 

3 
The Role of User Centered Design 

HUCDM is based on principles of agile methods such as keeping the simplicity (it is 
developed the essential in order to respond to current requirements). The team 
(mainly programmers) seeks to correct and improve the software code continuously. 
Delivery is incremental, since the software is built in modules. Thus, while a solution 
is tested/validated/evaluated before the increment others are developed based on the 
requirements [17]. 

UCD is used to describe the processes of a project where end users have large 
influence and intervention on how it is conducted. Some UCD methods inquire users 
about the needs they have in a particular educational area, involving them in specific 
parts of the development process. On the other hand, there are methods in which users 
have greater presence integrating the team, i.e., they are involved as elements 
throughout the process [18].

216 

UCD is described in ISO 9241-210 [19] - Ergonomics of Human -System 
Interaction (210: Human -centered design for interactive systems). This standard 
describes an ideal situation where there are no barriers to the use of UCD 
assumptions, except for the possible lack of competence on the part of the 
development team [20]. Authors like Facer & Williamson [21], among others, 
emphasize that UCD is a methodology that combines, among other things, the 
participation of the user and formative evaluation of prototypes. According to ISO 
9241-210 [19] standard, UCD projects are governed by six principles:  

i) 
Explicit understanding of users, tasks and environments; 
ii) 
Establishment of a multidisciplinary team;  
iii) 
Interaction between the user and the system;  
iv) 
Active involvement of users;  
v) 
User experience; and  
vi) 
The iteration of design solutions. 

The methods used to develop the Univap Virtual [15] and Softvali [16] are based 
on UCD assumptions, including the establishment of multidisciplinary teams, 
organized by education professionals (researchers from psychology and pedagogy), 
professionals in the field of computer science, specifically in the area of programming 
and software engineering, usability designers with usability knowledge and finally 
teachers and students. 
Another method that incorporates UCD assumptions, is the Logical User Centered 
Interactive Design (LUCID), in which Kreitzberg [22] identifies six phases: viewing, 
discovery, project base, project detail, construction and launching. As most of the 
previous methods it is based on UCD principles. LUCID employs rapid prototyping 
and iterative usability tests. 
Based on what we described in this section, we completely agree with the report 
"Quality Framework for UK Government Website Design: Usability issues for 
government websites", when it argues that UCD is a complement to software 
development methods and is not a substitute for them [23]. 

4 

By the assumptions and methods defined in User Centered Design, it appears that one 
of the proposed improvements to be implemented involves not only to involve the 
user in the evaluation (as verifier), but to integrate him into the team, as informant or 
co-designer [24]. Iterative Design is one of the most important Methods for User 
Centered Design and user satisfaction is the most effective measure [25], [26]. This 
reinforced the importance of involving the user not only in the evaluation phase. 
However, it is considered that the integration should be performed only in some 
phases of the process, as is advocated by the authors of We!Design [27], which are 
refered below.

217 

4.1 
User Involvement 

Identified in the literature and development of Courseware Sere that user involvement 
in the development process provides a source of knowledge about the context of use, 
tasks, and how users tend to work later with the software. It is emphasized, however, 
that the degree of user involvement can vary depending on the tasks being performed. 
This form of involvement is usually referred to as Participatory Design. As 
mentioned, this methodology end users move from a less active role, such as checkers 
(testers), as happened in the Courseware Sere, for more interventional roles as 
informers or co-designers [28], with regarded as members of the multidisciplinary 
team. The new methods of User Centered Design, which aims to integrate the Hybrid 
Methodology for User -Centered Development, include the integration of the user in 
the early stages of the development process. 

4.2 
Introduction of new methods of User Centered Design 

As previously stated and based on the study presented by Martin Maguire "Methods 
to support human- centered design" [29], it is concluded that the Hybrid Methodology 
for User Centered Development at the stage of analysis and planning must incorporate 
new methods of User Centered Design (Fig. 1). 
 

 

Fig. 1. User Centered Design Methods

218 

In Table 2 some of the methods identified in Figure 1 are reported, which can be 
applied in new projects. 

Table 2. Proposal of new methods of user centered design (adapted from Maguire [29]) 

Method 
Description 

Identification and analysis of 
stakeholders 

Identify all user groups (end users, experts, 
responsible for installation and maintenance) 
and other stakeholders (those who can 
influence or are affected by software) 
including support teams, sales and marketing 
teams and different customers who may 
purchase the resource. This survey can be 
complemented with an analysis of the 
market. This stage are assigned roles and 
responsibilities.  
Approach to the method: meeting with the 
project manager and user representatives to 
discuss roles in more detail. 

Analysis of the use context (Bevan 
& Macleod 1994; Kirakowski & 
Cierlik 1999; M. C. Maguire 1998; 
Thomas & Bevan 1995) 

Characterization of the user group (skills and 
experience, 
task 
knowledge, 
training, 
qualifications, language skills, physical and 
cognitive 
abilities 
and 
attitudes 
and 
motivations), the (list of tasks, objectives, 
output, distance, frequency, extent, duration 
and task dependencies) and the technical, 
physical and organizational environment 
(hardware, 
software, 
internet 
network, 
characteristics 
of 
rooms, 
organizational 
goals, policies, ICT, technical support).  
Approach to the method: meeting with 
representatives from each user group and 
representatives of the project team. 

Focus groups 

Group discussion of potential users about 
what they intend to be designed into the 
software.  
Approach to the method: in person or 
through distance communication platform, 
users discuss the requirements. 
 
The selection of methods for "Identification and analysis of stakeholders" and 
"Analysis of context of use", proposed in Table 2, is based on the analysis of the 
development of Courseware Sere process and identification of the main factors of 
motivation of the professionals software development. Thus, being associated to the 
time and budget allotted for the project, demotivating factors [30] and knowing 
restrictions, the most relevant methods, "Field studies" and "Interviews with users" 
require a long time for its implementation and commonly greater investment [31], we 
opted to choose methods to balance these two factors.

219 

4.3 
Multidisciplinary Teams 

Assuming that the improvement of Hybrid Methodology for User Centered 
Development is continuous, the need to introduce other methods of User Centered 
Design, beyond those presented in Table 2, may be a reality. However, this will be a 
challenge for multidisciplinary teams using a hybrid methodology for User Centered 
Development, depending on the skills of each element. 
In an upcoming project, an important factor would be to ensure that as one of the 
team members, were given the responsibility/role of "facilitator of User Centered 
Design" in the development process. The facilitator of User Centered Design mediates 
the relationship between users and the elements of the multidisciplinary team and 
should have a multidisciplinary background (for example, see how users interact with 
educational software and understand the context of use) [20]. 
Is reflected in this study what Guerra [32] had already identified in his study "the 
success of working in multidisciplinary teams depends on how each element is 
organized, communicates and relates to each other and there should be one (or more) 
element (s) to assume (s) the leadership of the team. In this line, it is considered that 
the diversity of skills/roles of the various elements of the multidisciplinary team may 
also have created weaknesses throughout the development process. These difficulties 
have focused primarily at the level of the difference in attitudes of the team members, 
as well as communication failures. " 
Working in multidisciplinary teams can create different involvements. For 
example, the company that developed the Courseware Sere, the Ludomedia, you want 
it to have reduced development costs. On the other hand, an external developer might 
want to make the most of their collaboration. These aspects should be considered to 
ensure that the expectations of both parties are not frustrated and the end result 
satisfies the user [9]. However, the end-user satisfaction can be called into question if 
one cannot strike a balance between the quality of the product (in this case the 
educational software), the term for the design and the associated costs. 

4.4 
Barriers of User Centered Design 

It was identified in the development of Courseware Sere the importance of taking into 
account the assumptions and methods of User Centered Design. According Abras, 
Maloney-Krichmar & Preece [18], two of the disadvantages of User -Centered Design 
is that projects need more time to be developed and therefore become more 
expensive. Moreover, Duim, Andersson, & Sinnema [33] state that the most costly 
phase of the life cycle of a software is the maintenance. As described, the courseware 
development process was lengthy. However being the educational resource in its 3rd 
version, however, it is considered that, as stated by Shneiderman & Plaisant [3], "User 
Centered Design methodologies leads to systems that generate fewer problems during 
development and have lower maintenance costs over their lifetime". 
The survey on the integration of User Centered Design in enterprises carried out by 
Venturi & Trust [34], claims that only large companies integrate User Centered 
Design, however with reduced use by professionals (only 1%). The development 
process of Courseware Sere, reinforces what these authors claim, namely that the 
development of prototypes are one of the most used [34] and, when evaluated by end

220 

users techniques allow detecting errors, thereby reducing the time execution during 
maintenance and their costs [1]. 
With regard to the indicators of the effectiveness of User Centred Design, the three 
most cited indicators are: the external satisfaction (customer/user), greater ease of use 
and impact on sales [31], [35]. After evaluation and distribution of Courseware Sere, 
identify ourselves with the first two indicators. However, by the end of the study and 
after four years of resource availability in the market, the impact of sales has not been 
evident. 

5 
Conclusions 

Although the methods’ choice depends mostly on the environment in which the 
project operates and also of a set of variables that are sometimes difficult to define, 
there are methods to help on software development, minimizing uncertainty, to allow 
obtaining the expected result in the most efficient way possible. As Toth [4] and 
Sommerville [1], we consider that the adoption of the same approach for all software 
development projects is unlikely to be a good choice. Mostly if we take into account 
the diversity of users, software purpose of use and constant changes in technology. 
Based on the work developed we agree with Abbas, Gravell & Wills [36], which 
describe software development as an unpredictable activity, that an adaptive method 
to control this unpredictability is required. Regarding the development of educational 
software, iterative and incremental processes, associated with prototyping procedures, 
including monitoring and evaluation tools in different phases, are an efficient way for 
a given process to be able to adapt itself to changing requirements and technology 
[37]. In parallel, we also agree with Abras, Maloney-Krichmar & Preece [18], that 
two of the disadvantages of UCD, are concerned with the projects requiring more 
time to be developed and thus become more expensive. However and according to 
Shneiderman & Plaisant [3], UCD methods allow the software to create fewer 
problems during development and thus reducing costs in the maintenance phase that 
is typically considered the most expensive on the software lifecycle [33]. 
Assuming that, in particular when developing educational software, all processes 
require practices that lead to continuous improvement, we conclude that the Hybrid 
Methodology for User-Centered Development is a very good solution for the 
development of educational software. The methodology was used to develop 
Courseware Sere whose quality has been recognized by end user, particularly as a 
finalist of a multimedia product competition and having succeeded in arousing the 
interest of a multinational company such as BP – British Petrol [37].