Protocol

Generating Intervention Concepts for Reducing Adolescent
Relationship Abuse Inequities Among Sexual and Gender Minority
Youth: Protocol for a Web-Based, Longitudinal, Human-Centered
Design Study

Robert W S Coulter1,2,3, PhD, MPH; Shannon Mitchell1, BS; Kelly Prangley1, BS; Seth Smallwood1; Leyna Bonanno1,
MS; Elizabeth N Foster1, MLiS; Abby Wilson4, JD, LLM; Elizabeth Miller2,3, MD, PhD; Carla D Chugani2,3, PhD,
LPC

1Department of Behavioral and Community Health Sciences, Graduate School of Public Health, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United States
2Department of Pediatrics, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA, United States
3Division of Adolescent and Young Adult Medicine, UPMC Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United States
4LUMA Institute, Pittsburgh, PA, United States

Robert W S Coulter, PhD, MPH
Department of Behavioral and Community Health Sciences
Graduate School of Public Health
University of Pittsburgh
130 DeSoto St
Pittsburgh, PA, 15261
United States
Phone: 1 4126240647

Abstract

Background: Sexual and gender minority youth (SGMY; eg, lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender youth) are at greater risk
than their cisgender heterosexual peers for adolescent relationship abuse (ARA; physical, sexual, or psychological abuse in a
romantic relationship). However, there is a dearth of efficacious interventions for reducing ARA among SGMY. To address this
intervention gap, we designed a novel web-based methodology leveraging the field of human-centered design to generate multiple
ARA intervention concepts with SGMY.
Objective: This paper aims to describe study procedures for a pilot study to rigorously test the feasibility, acceptability, and
appropriateness of using web-based human-centered design methods with SGMY to create novel, stakeholder-driven ARA
intervention concepts.
Methods: We are conducting a longitudinal, web-based human-centered design study with 45-60 SGMY (aged between 14 and
18 years) recruited via social media from across the United States. Using MURAL (a collaborative, visual web-based workspace)
and Zoom (a videoconferencing platform), the SGMY will participate in four group-based sessions (1.5 hours each). In session
1, the SGMY will use rose-thorn-bud to individually document their ideas about healthy and unhealthy relationship characteristics
and then use affinity clustering as a group to categorize their self-reported ideas based on similarities and differences. In session
2, the SGMY will use rose-thorn-bud to individually critique a universal evidence-based intervention to reduce ARA and affinity
clustering to aggregate their ideas as a group. In session 3, the SGMY will use a creative matrix to generate intervention ideas
for reducing ARA among them and force-rank the intervention ideas based on their potential ease of implementation and potential
impact using an importance-difficulty matrix. In session 4, the SGMY will generate and refine intervention concepts (from session
3 ideations) to reduce ARA using round robin (for rapid iteration) and concept poster (for fleshing out ideas more fully). We will
use content analyses to document the intervention concepts. In a follow-up survey, the SGMY will complete validated measures
about the feasibility, acceptability, and appropriateness of the web-based human-centered design methods (a priori benchmarks
for success: means >3.75 on each 5-point scale).
Results: This study was funded in February 2020. Data collection began in August 2020 and will be completed by April 2021.

JMIR Res Protoc 2021 | vol. 10 | iss. 4 | e26554 | p. 1

Conclusions: Through rigorous testing of the feasibility of our web-based human-centered design methodology, our study may
help demonstrate the use of human-centered design methods to engage harder-to-reach stakeholders and actively involve them
in the co-creation of relevant interventions. Successful completion of this project also has the potential to catalyze intervention
research to address ARA inequities for SGMY. Finally, our approach may be transferable to other populations and health topics,
thereby advancing prevention science and health equity.
International Registered Report Identifier (IRRID): DERR1-10.2196/26554

(JMIR Res Protoc 2021;10(4):e26554) doi: 10.2196/26554

KEYWORDS
sexual and gender minorities; adolescent; psychosocial intervention; internet-based intervention; intimate partner violence

Introduction

Background

Sexual and gender minority youth (SGMY; eg, lesbian, gay,
bisexual, and transgender youth) are at greater risk than their
cisgender heterosexual peers for experiencing adolescent
relationship abuse (ARA; ie, physical, sexual, or psychological
abuse in a romantic relationship) [1-4]. According to a recent
nationally representative sample of high school youth in the
United States, 13% of sexual minority youth and only 7% of
heterosexual youth reported physical ARA in the past year [5].
Even greater disparities are present for sexual ARA, with a
prevalence of 16% among sexual minority youth and only 7%
among heterosexual youth [5]. Gender minority youth are also
at greater risk for ARA than their cisgender peers [6]. SGMY
ARA inequities are problematic because ARA is associated
with many poor health outcomes later in life, such as mental
health disorders and HIV [7,8]. Thus, prevention efforts for
SGMY may mitigate health inequities more broadly.

Despite researchers and national agencies calling for
interventions to reduce ARA among SGMY [9-11], there exist
few evidence-based interventions addressing this public health
inequity [9,12]. While there are several efficacious interventions
for reducing ARA for the entire adolescent population [13], a
2019 systematic review revealed that there were no
evidence-based ARA interventions specifically for SGMY at
that time [12]. More recently, one study examined the efficacy
of a universal intervention for reducing ARA among sexual
minority youth; for sexual minority youth, this intervention
reduced stalking victimization but not sexual violence, sexual
harassment, and physical dating violence victimization [14].
More research is needed to address the lack of evidence-based
interventions to prevent and reduce ARA in SGMY.

One innovative method for stimulating new stakeholder-driven
intervention ideas to catalyze ARA research among SGMY is
to leverage the field of human-centered design [15].
Human-centered design is a discipline focused on improving
existing or developing new products, services, or experiences
by involving the perspectives of the target population at every
possible stage [16-27]. Human-centered design methods often
incorporate multiple ways of soliciting user and other
stakeholder input, including through observation and dialog,
cooperative design activities, and the shared creation of meaning
by collaboratively synthesizing, critiquing, and ranking
self-reported data and observations. In a practical sense, this

often means that individuals involved in human-centered design
processes create their own artifacts, including assembling,
disassembling, and reassembling qualitative data points written
on Post-it notes or a digital analog.

When bringing stakeholders together to design interventions,
human-centered design generally harnesses the strengths and
limits the weaknesses of more traditional approaches (eg, focus
groups). For example, focus groups traditionally use group-based
discussions and interviews generally work with participants
one-on-one. Human-centered design methods, however, often
combine tasks to be completed in groups with tasks to be
completed as individuals, thereby harnessing the strengths of
focus groups and interviews [28,29]. Focus groups are also
prone to groupthink (conformity of individuals working in
groups, despite their individual differences, which can lead to
inaccurate results or poor decision making [30]) that may
inadvertently reinforce social hierarchies that silence certain
people (eg, marginalized or shy people) [31-34]. In contrast,
many human-centered design techniques require each participant
to brainstorm independently and record all their ideas in written
format (before sharing output with other group participants),
making data collection more comprehensive and equitable
[28,35]. In addition, focus groups are prone to social desirability
bias because the moderator has an active role in guiding and
influencing the discussion [32-34,36]. In human-centered design,
facilitators have a less subjective role as they usually only lead
participants through task instructions without any probing [28].
Finally, conventional methods (eg, focus groups or expert
panels) for bringing stakeholders to translate research findings
into intervention concepts are often challenging and
time-intensive 
[37-41]. 
To 
overcome 
these 
barriers,
human-centered design uses structured activities that are
time-limited, engaging, and accessible to laypersons, including
youth [16-27]. Overall, human-centered design activities can
be applied as a novel form of stakeholder-engaged research to
rapidly generate and iterate intervention concepts to reduce
emergent public health problems.

To date, health research that uses human-centered design
methods has been predominantly conducted with stakeholders
in-person [42], but most in-person research activities have been
impeded by the COVID-19 pandemic. Although, the pandemic
has presented many barriers for safely conducting in-person
research, it has simultaneously catalyzed the use of web-based
technologies for interacting and collaborating. Young people
have especially become accustomed to using web-based
technologies (eg, Zoom, a videoconferencing platform) because

JMIR Res Protoc 2021 | vol. 10 | iss. 4 | e26554 | p. 2

many schools have transitioned to remote learning. Therefore,
youth are uniquely poised to use web-based human-centered
design methods. Previous research has shown that youth can
feasibly engage in web-based research as well as in-person
human-centered design activities [43-47]. However, to our
knowledge 
no 
study 
has 
explicitly 
tested 
whether
human-centered design methods are feasible, acceptable, and
appropriate for engaging with youth in a fully web-based
environment. A study that rigorously pilot tests such methods,
by setting a priori benchmarks, can help inform the public health
field about the utility of conducting these methods on the web
and further demonstrate and codify the use of web-based
human-centered design as a method for stakeholder-engaged
research.

Study Aims

This paper describes a protocol for conducting web-based
human-centered design sessions with SGMY to create novel
intervention ideas for addressing ARA. The specific aims of
this study are as follows:

1. Test the feasibility, acceptability, and appropriateness of
conducting web-based human-centered design sessions with
SGMY (primary study aim).

2. Elucidate the beliefs of SGMY about healthy and unhealthy
characteristics of intimate relationships.

3. Elicit feedback from SGMY about the School Health Center
Healthy Adolescent Relationships Program (SHARP), which
is a universal evidence-based intervention for reducing ARA

[48,49], and about adapted SHARP materials that are tailored
to SGMY [50,51].

4. Brainstorm intervention ideas for reducing ARA inequities
for SGMY and force-rank the intervention ideas based on their
potential ease of implementation and potential impact.

5. Generate, iterate, vote on, and refine the intervention concepts
to reduce ARA inequities for SGMY.

Methods

Overview

We followed both the Standards for Reporting Qualitative
Research [52] and the Strengthening the Reporting of
Observational Studies in Epidemiology statement [53] to craft
our study, present our methods, and report our results. We used
these two guidelines because there are no formal reporting
requirements for human-centered design studies.

Study Design

We are conducting a web-based, longitudinal human-centered
design study to engage with 45 to 60 SGMY participants in
small groups to generate intervention concepts for reducing
SGMY inequities in ARA. We conducted longitudinal sessions
in multiple cohorts of 8 to 15 participants each. Participants
completed a web-based screener, four web-based, group-based
human-centered design sessions, and a web-based follow-up
survey (Figure 1). This study is primarily funded by the National
Center for Advancing Translational Sciences at the National
Institutes of Health (UL1TR001857).

Figure 1. Study flow.

Study Population

We aim to enroll 45 to 60 sexual and gender minority high
school students recruited via social media advertisements.
Eligible youth are aged 14 years to 18 years, live in the United
States, identify as sexual and/or gender minorities, and have
internet, video camera, audio, and microphone access to attend
the virtual sessions.

Recruitment

Participants are conveniently sampled and recruited throughout
the United States using web-based advertisements posted on
two social media platforms, Facebook and Instagram, using an
approach similar to that in our previous research [54]. This
approach allows SGMY from multiple geographic locations
(eg, rural and urban areas and East and West) to enroll in the
study without overextending our resources. Facebook is an
appropriate recruitment platform because it is highly used by
adolescents, approximately 71% of teens use Facebook [55].

Similarly, Instagram is used by approximately 72% of teens in
the United States, with the majority using the site daily [56].
We created multiple photo and video advertisements for these
sites, including those depicting youth with diverse gender
expressions, race, and ethnicities.

Screener Survey

Upon clicking the advertisements, potential participants are
redirected to a brief web-based self-reported screener survey
administered via Research Electronic Data Capture (REDCap),
a free and secure Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act–compliant system for managing web-based
surveys and databases. Following a brief description of the
study, the screener included questions about potential
participants’ age, race, ethnicity, sexual identity, sex assigned
at birth, gender (including transgender status), high school name,
city and state of their high school, computer access, camera
access, audio access, microphone access, and contact

JMIR Res Protoc 2021 | vol. 10 | iss. 4 | e26554 | p. 3

information. All participants received the ARA and SGMY
resource lists after the screener.

Purposive Sampling

After potential participants completed the screener survey, a
research assistant will assess their eligibility. The research
assistant will send a sociodemographically diverse group of
eligible youth a web-based consent form, which must be
completed to participate.

Consent Process

Potential participants are sent a link to a web-based consent
form administered via DocuSign, a website that allows
participants to safely and securely use a virtual signature. Youth
in this study will consent for themselves because we obtained
a waiver of parental consent. Our study is no more than minimal
risk and requiring SGMY to obtain parental permission could
out them as SGMY to their parents or guardians, which may
put them at an increased risk of experiencing abuse. The consent
form described all essential components of the study, including
(but not limited to) the study purpose, the study background,
study risks and benefits, privacy and confidentiality, participant
payments, and voluntary nature of the study.

Once the consent form is virtually signed, the research assistant
receives a PDF version of the signed form and emails or texts
participants a link to the Zoom videoconference meeting, where
the web-based human-centered design sessions are conducted.
The message includes instructions on how to best prepare for
the session and how to access MURAL, the web-based
collaborative workspace used during our web-based sessions.
The participants are sent reminders 2-3 times before each
session.

In addition to the web-based consent form, participants provide
verbal consent at the beginning of each web-based

human-centered design session. A research assistant reads aloud
a verbal consent script, asks if there are any questions, and then
participants provide their consent by using Zoom’s thumbs up
or via Zoom’s chat feature. In addition, before completing the
follow-up survey, a brief consent script is provided to
participants and participants voluntarily consented to taking the
survey using a click-to-consent procedure.

Human-Centered Design Activities

We use MURAL and Zoom to conduct the web-based
human-centered design activities. With each cohort of SGMY,
we will conduct 4 sessions, each lasting 1.5 hours in length. All
the sessions will be conducted in English. We will audio-record
each session and take pictures of each session’s activity results.
We only record the participants’ voices and the resultant data
(not images of participants). The participants will receive a US
$25 incentive for each session. Participants do not have to attend
all sessions and can begin at any time, although we encourage
attendance at all sessions because output from some sessions
are then used as inputs in subsequent sessions.

Each session begins with an introduction to Zoom, an icebreaker,
and (in the first 2 sessions) a short lesson on the topic at hand
(ie, ARA in SGMY). Next, the participants are randomly
assigned to different Zoom breakout rooms, with each room
composed of 2 to 5 participants with 1 or 2 facilitators each. In
these small groups, the facilitators introduce participants to
MURAL and guide the participants through a series of
human-centered 
design 
activities. 
Each 
session’s
human-centered design activities are outlined and briefly
described in Table 1 and described in detail in the sections
below. At the end of each meeting, all participants are brought
back together and report on the ideas generated during the
human-centered design activities.

JMIR Res Protoc 2021 | vol. 10 | iss. 4 | e26554 | p. 4

Table 1. Human-centered design activities by session.

Purpose
Session and activity

Session 1

To have participants individually brainstorm healthy, unhealthy, and questionable aspects of intimate relationships

for SGMYa
Rose, thorn, bud

To have participants discuss all the healthy, unhealthy, and questionable aspects of intimate relationships they
generated, and to have participants group similar ideas together
Affinity clustering

Session 2

To have participants provide feedback on the original SHARPb materials or the adapted SGMY-specific SHARP
materials

Rose, thorn, bud

To have participants discuss all their feedback on the SHARP-related materials and to have participants group
similar ideas together
Affinity clustering

Session 3

To have participants brainstorm intervention ideas at each level of the social-ecological model for reducing SGMY
inequities in adolescent relationship abuse
Creative matrix

To have participants plot their self-generated intervention ideas based on their potential ease of implementation
and potential impact, thereby prioritizing the intervention ideas with the lowest potential resource expenditure and
greatest potential impact

Impact-difficulty matrix

Session 4

To have participants evolve their intervention ideas into fuller intervention concepts using quick drafting and iter-
ation via group authorship
Round robin

To quickly poll SGMY’s preferences and opinions about two of their favorite intervention concepts
Visualize the vote

To have participants work together to refine intervention concepts by illustrating and describing its essential elements
Concept poster

aSGMY: sexual and gender minority youth.
bSHARP: School Health Center Healthy Adolescent Relationships Program.

Session 1

The purpose of our first session is to elucidate what SGMY
believe are healthy and unhealthy characteristics of intimate

relationships (study aim 2). We will accomplish this by using
2 human-centered design techniques: rose-thorn-bud and affinity
clustering activities. Both activities are set up in a single
MURAL workspace (Figure 2).

JMIR Res Protoc 2021 | vol. 10 | iss. 4 | e26554 | p. 5

Figure 2. MURAL workspace setup for session 1.

Rose-thorn-bud is a technique in which participants identify
different aspects of a concept [20,21], in this case, healthy
intimate relationships. Each participant is assigned a virtual
desk (Figure 2) with 3 different colored sticky notes: pink, blue,
and green. The facilitator explains the color-coding system to
the participants. Participants are to type aspects of healthy
relationships on pink sticky notes (or roses); they are then
instructed to type components or aspects of unhealthy
relationships on blue sticky notes (or thorns); and green sticky
notes (or buds) are used to note aspects of relationships that are
uncertain qualities with potential to be healthy and/or unhealthy.
The facilitator shows participants how to create additional sticky
notes and instructs the participants to write one idea per sticky
note, generating as many sticky notes as possible. For 7 minutes,
participants work independently to complete their sticky notes.

Affinity clustering is used after completing the rose-thorn-bud
activity to sort sticky notes according to their similarities and
differences [20,21]. The facilitator asks a participant to read
and explain one of their sticky notes (of any color) and the

facilitator places it along the horizontal axis. The facilitator then
asks another participant to describe one of their sticky notes
and identify whether it is a similar or unique idea compared
with the previously placed sticky note. Once determined, the
facilitator then places this sticky note on the workspace below
the previous sticky note if similar, or next to the previous sticky
note if unique. This process is repeated until all sticky notes are
in the workspace and are grouped according to the participants’
satisfaction. It is important to note that during affinity clustering,
the facilitator encourages participants to align ideas based on
its content, as opposed to the color of the sticky note. This type
of clustering allows participants (as well as analysts who later
view or interpret the data) to obtain 2 layers of meaning: the
overall concepts of the groupings as well as what color sticky
notes comprise those groupings. Overall, session 1 yields a
visual representation of the SGMY’s mental models of intimate
relationships.

JMIR Res Protoc 2021 | vol. 10 | iss. 4 | e26554 | p. 6

Session 2

The purpose of session 2 is to acquire feedback from SGMY
about the SHARP intervention materials as well as the adapted
SGMY-specific SHARP materials (study aim 3) [48-51].
SHARP is a universal (not SGMY-specific) provider-based
intervention implemented in routine school-based health center
visits [48]. During clinic visits, SHARP providers introduce a
palm-size brochure that contains information about healthy
relationships and ARA resources, conduct ARA assessments,
make referrals to ARA services, if necessary, and discuss healthy
and unhealthy relationships with their patients. All SHARP
materials were developed with input from numerous
stakeholders, including clinicians, advocates, researchers, and
youth. Compared with usual care, SHARP improves adolescents’
recognition of ARA, knowledge of ARA resources, and

self-efficacy in using ARA harm reduction behaviors [48]. After
the universal SHARP materials were created, investigators and
stakeholders (including youth) generated SGMY-specific
brochure materials tailored to SGMY [50,51]. We selected the
SHARP intervention because (1) it is an illustrative example of
an efficacious ARA prevention intervention and study
participants may not be familiar with ARA interventions and
(2) SGMY can provide feedback about the evidence-based
intervention, which might confirm the applicability of the
materials to SGMY in 2020 or offer ways to improve the
brochure for current clinical practice or future research. We will
have SGMY critique the SHARP brochure materials using two
human-centered design techniques: rose-thorn-bud and affinity
clustering activities. Both of these are set up in a single MURAL
workspace (Figures 3 and 4).

Figure 3. MURAL Workspace Setup for Session 2 on Original School Health Center Healthy Adolescent Relationships Program (SHARP) Intervention.

JMIR Res Protoc 2021 | vol. 10 | iss. 4 | e26554 | p. 7

Figure 4. MURAL Workspace Setup for Session 2 on Adapted School Health Center Healthy Adolescent Relationships Program (SHARP) Materials
Tailored Specifically for Sexual Minority Youth.

Rose-thorn-bud is a technique for having participants
characterize different aspects of a concept (in this case, the
SHARP intervention) as good, problematic, or having potential
[20,21]. Each participant is assigned a virtual desk (Figures 3
and 4) with 3 different colored sticky notes: pink, blue, and
green. The facilitator explained the color-coding system to the
participants. Participants are asked to write the components and
aspects of what they like about the SGMY intervention on pink
sticky notes (or roses); they are then instructed to type
components they dislike on blue sticky notes (or thorns); and
green sticky notes (or buds) are used to note aspects that have
the potential to be inclusive but could be improved. The
facilitator shows participants how to create additional sticky
notes and instructs the participants to write one idea per sticky
note, generating as many sticky notes as possible. For 7 minutes,
participants work independently to complete their sticky notes.

Affinity clustering is used after completing the rose-thorn-bud
activity to sort items according to their similarities and
differences [20,21]. The facilitator asks one participant to read

and explain one of their sticky notes (of any color) and the
facilitator places it along the horizontal axis. The facilitator then
asks another participant to describe one of their sticky notes
and identify whether it is a similar or unique idea compared
with the previously placed sticky note. Once determined, the
facilitator then places this sticky note on the workspace below
the previous sticky note if similar, or next to the previous sticky
note if unique. This process is repeated until all sticky notes are
in the workspace and are grouped according to the participants’
satisfaction.

Session 3

The purpose of session 3 is to brainstorm novel intervention
components to reduce ARA inequities for SGMY and force-rank
the intervention components based on their potential ease of
implementation and potential impact (study aim 4). We
accomplish this by using 2 human-centered design strategies:
a creative matrix and an importance-difficulty matrix. All of
these are conducted in one MURAL workspace (Figure 5).

JMIR Res Protoc 2021 | vol. 10 | iss. 4 | e26554 | p. 8

Figure 5. MURAL workspace setup for session 3.

The creative matrix is used to brainstorm as many intervention
concepts for reducing ARA among SGMY as possible by
leveraging the power of constraints (column by column) and a
combination of goals (column headings) and enablers
(essentially 
categories 
of 
potential 
solutions)
[16,18,20,21,23,26,27]. As shown in Figure 5, the column
headers indicate different levels of the social-ecological model,
that is, individual, interpersonal, family and community,
structural, and organizational determinants, whereas the row

headings indicate the modalities: technology, events or
programs, physical environments, policies or procedures, games
or competitions, and wild card (ie, any other ideas that do not
fit with the labeled categories). By providing different levels
of the social-ecological model, SGMY are primed to think about
creating intervention components that address known risk factors
(eg, minority stressors [57]) and protective factors that contribute
to ARA inequities for SGMY [57-63]. The activity is completed
in 1 column at a time, with 4 minutes per column. Participants

JMIR Res Protoc 2021 | vol. 10 | iss. 4 | e26554 | p. 9

are asked to develop ideas (one idea per sticky note) for each
cell or box by working independently. Participants are working
individually at this time, reducing groupthink (eg, influence of
more vocal contributors). In this activity, participants are
encouraged to generate as many ideas as possible within a short
period. Emphasis is typically placed on quantity (over quality)
to eliminate barriers to contribution, get participants comfortable
with the activity, and give them the opportunity to share ideas
they may have already had before being prompted with the
matrix and create space for new ideas informed by exploration
of each row and column combination.

After completing the creative matrix, participants engage in a
structured activity to funnel the large number of ideas generated
in the creative matrix into a manageable number of ideas to
bring to the next activity. Facilitators ask participants to identify
4 sticky notes each: most important, most doable, their favorite,
and the most out-of-the-box. These 4 criteria for down-selection
were designed to ensure that ideas pursued in subsequent
activities are sufficiently diverse. Each participant works
independently for 3 minutes while they choose their ideas. The
participants cannot choose the same ideas.

An importance-difficulty matrix [20-22,26] is then used to
force-rank the ideas identified in the previous step. First,
participants are asked to collaboratively rank the ideas that they
chose on the level of importance along the x-axis. Importance
here is defined as how important or impactful the participants
think the idea is to reduce ARA for SGMY. Next, they are asked
to rank these ideas on the level of difficulty along the y-axis
while retaining the same ordered ranking of likely impact or
importance. The purpose of this activity is to identify the
intervention concepts that are the most important to the
participants and, given the inevitable resource constraints,
account for their potential difficulty to implement.

Session 4

The purpose of session 4 is to generate, iterate, vote on, and
refine intervention concepts to reduce ARA inequities for
SGMY (study aim 5). We accomplish this by using three
human-centered design strategies: round robin, visualize the
vote, and concept posters. All of these are set up in one MURAL
workspace (Figure 6).

JMIR Res Protoc 2021 | vol. 10 | iss. 4 | e26554 | p. 10

Figure 6. MURAL workspace setup for session 4.

In total, 5 of the potentially most impactful and easiest to design
and implement ideas generated from the importance-difficulty
matrix in session 3 are carried over to session 4 for the round
robin activity. Round robin is used to evolve ideas into fuller
intervention concepts using drafting and iteration among
participants [20,21,24,25]. Each desk has 4 sections: problem
statement (idea from previous session), proposed solution, why
the solution might fail, and the final concept. This structure was
developed by the LUMA Institute (see Figure 7 for a

reader-friendly version of the round robin structure) [20,21].
Each participant starts at their own desk (a specific rectangle
in the MURAL workspace) with the initial intervention concept.
For 3 minutes, participants are asked to propose a solution to
their intervention concept. Then, participants rotate workspaces
by moving to the space to their right (or, if at the last desk,
moving to the first desk). Then, participants are asked to provide
feedback on why the next intervention concept might fail for 5
minutes. Participants move to the desk to their right one final

JMIR Res Protoc 2021 | vol. 10 | iss. 4 | e26554 | p. 11

time and for 7 minutes generate a final concept based on the
feedback provided by the previous participants.

Figure 7. Example of one round robin setup in MURAL.

Visualizing the vote is an activity that allows the facilitator to
anonymously poll the participants and is a feature offered by
MURAL [20,21]. After reading through the final round robin
concepts, facilitators show participants where the voting ballots
are and ask participants to vote for their 2 favorite concepts.
Once this voting process is complete, 2 round robin concepts
with the most votes overall are carried over to the final activity,
the concept poster.

The concept poster is used to illustrate and present the main
points of the new intervention concepts [20,21]. The concept
poster format, developed by the LUMA Institute [20,21],

includes generating a creative title and identifying the following:
the target population, the problem it solves, the big idea, how
it works, why it might fail, what a prototype looks like, and how
to measure success (see Figure 8 for a reader-friendly version
of the concept poster activity). Facilitators first show the
participants an example of a completed concept poster to
illustrate the purpose of the concept poster. Participants are then
invited to collaboratively develop 2 concept posters (allowing
15 minutes per poster). During this activity, facilitators answer
participants’ questions and provide guidance on an as-needed
basis.

JMIR Res Protoc 2021 | vol. 10 | iss. 4 | e26554 | p. 12

Figure 8. Example of one concept poster setup in MURAL.

Follow-Up Survey Data Collection

After session 4, participants are asked to complete
self-administered follow-up surveys via REDCap. The follow-up
surveys assess participants’ perceptions about the feasibility,
appropriateness, 
and 
acceptability 
of 
the 
web-based
human-centered design session, as well as participants’
qualitative feedback on session logistics. The follow-up survey
is activated and sent within 1 week after session 4. Surveys
remain open for up to 2 weeks. The follow-up survey contains
3 pages, with a mean of 10 items per page (SD 6; range 6-17).
While completing each survey, participants were able to change
their answers by clicking a Back button. An incentive of US
$10 was given after completion of the follow-up survey.

Follow-Up Survey Measures

To accomplish aim 1, we assess participants’perceptions of the
feasibility, acceptability, and appropriateness of the web-based
human-centered design sessions.

Feasibility is defined as the perception among participants that
human-centered 
design 
sessions 
can 
be 
successfully

implemented or carried out on the web [64]. Feasibility is
measured using the Feasibility of Intervention Measure [64-66],
which is a valid and internally consistent scale based on 4
positively worded items (eg, “The online sessions for this project
were implementable”) that use a 5-point Likert scale ranging
from completely disagree (1) to completely agree (5). We will
create a mean across all items, with a higher mean score
indicating greater feasibility.

Acceptability is defined as the perception among stakeholders
that web-based human-centered design sessions are satisfactory
or agreeable [66]. Acceptability is measured using the
Acceptability of Intervention Measure [65-67], which is a valid
and internally consistent scale based on 4 positively worded
items (eg, “The online sessions for this project seemed doable”)
that use a 5-point Likert scale ranging from completely disagree
(1) to completely agree (5). We will create a mean across all
items, with a higher mean score indicating greater acceptability.

Appropriateness is defined as the perception among participants
that web-based human-centered design sessions are relevant,
compatible, and suitable to address a specific issue [66].

JMIR Res Protoc 2021 | vol. 10 | iss. 4 | e26554 | p. 13

Appropriateness 
is 
measured 
using 
the 
Intervention
Appropriateness Measure [65], which is a valid and internally
consistent scale based on 4 positively worded items (eg, “The
online sessions for this project seemed applicable”) that use a
5-point Likert scale ranging from completely disagree (1) to
completely agree (5). We will create a mean across all items,
with a higher mean score indicating greater appropriateness.

In addition to our standardized measures, we ask participants
exploratory open-ended questions including about what they
liked most and liked the least about the web-based suggestions
as well as ways to improve the sessions and retention. We also
asked closed-ended questions about their opinions about session
length and frequency.

Data Analyses

For quantitative data analysis, we will use StataSE version 15
(StataCorp). For qualitative data analysis, we will transcribe,
deidentify, and quality check all audio-recorded data from
sessions 1 to 4 [68-71]. We will also export all session data
from MURAL into text-based documents. We will then perform
qualitative coding in Dedoose software [72], cross-referencing
the audio transcriptions with PDF exports of the MURAL
workspaces.

Sample Characteristics

Using data from the web-based screener survey, we will use
frequencies and percentages to describe the demographics of
our study sample.

Analyses for Study Aim 1

To assess the feasibility, acceptability, and appropriateness of
conducting web-based human-centered design sessions with
SGMY, we will calculate the means and 95% CIs for our
primary outcome measures of feasibility, acceptability, and
appropriateness. Our a priori benchmark for the success of
meeting this hypothesis is obtaining a mean significantly higher
than 3.75 (out of 5.00).

Analyses for Study Aims 2 to 5

To elucidate what SGMY believe are healthy and unhealthy
characteristics of intimate relationships, we will use content
analyses [73]. Using data from each session separately, we will
code the artifact or audio-recording transcripts using an
open-coding approach (ie, we will not create an a priori
codebook, but will use in vivo coding instead) [68,69,74]. A
total of 2 qualitative coders will independently read data from
that session. Coders will convene to discuss preliminary findings
and develop a draft codebook using inductive coding, allowing
new codes to be included in the codebook as they emerge. Once
the coders agree that all the major codes are identified, we will
create a final codebook with definitions, rules, and examples
for each code [70,71]. The 2 coders will then recode all data
using the final codes. We will calculate the interrater reliability
(ie, Kappa statistic) to examine code application between coders
[75]. Coders will discuss any discrepancies until they reach an
agreement; any disagreements will be discussed and resolved
during research team meetings. We will use either a qualitative
descriptive coding approach [76] (wherein we describe and
count the number of code applications) or axial coding [77]

(wherein we combine inductive codes into broader categories
to define emerging patterns or themes). We will identify and
interpret patterns in the data using thematic analysis, as informed
by Braun and Clark [78].

Sample Size and Power Calculation

We calculate statistical power based on our primary outcomes
(study aim 1), per the best practices for feasibility studies
[64,79-84]. Given a conservative sample size of 45 participants
and 5% type I error rate, we have the ability to estimate a 95%
CI margin of error ≤0.43 for our primary outcomes, which we
derived from the largest upper 95% CI limit of the SD measures
in previous studies that used the same outcome measures
[16-27].

For our other study aims (study aims 2-5) about the outcomes
of our human-centered design methods, the purpose is idea
generation, not saturation [16-27]. Given our previous work
implementing similar activities, a sample of 45 to 60 participants
is sufficient to generate unique and useful ideas.

Researcher Characteristics and Reflexivity

Our team represents a wide range of sexual identities (ie, gay,
lesbian, queer, bisexual, and heterosexual) and gender identities
(ie, nonbinary, cisgender women, and cisgender men). We also
comprise a multidisciplinary multitiered team, representing the
fields of public health, counseling, human-centered design,
library science, medicine, medical anthropology, political
science, psychology, rehabilitation science, social work, and
many roles in academia, including undergraduate, masters,
research assistants, assistant professors, and full professors. Our
diverse representation of sexual and gender identities
complements our range of multidisciplinary expertise and
professional backgrounds in informing data collection and
analysis through lived experience.

We acknowledge that there are several ways in which our
backgrounds may have influenced our research. Primarily, our
facilitators for the human-centered design sessions were sexual
minorities and gender minorities. This could help put our SGMY
participants at ease, especially in rare instances when the
interviewer disclosed their sexual or gender minority identities
to participants. Furthermore, the diversity and range of
disciplines represented by our research team provide us with
the ability to interpret our findings.

Ethics Statement

All study procedures were approved by the Human Research
Protection Office of the University of Pittsburgh. To protect
participants from having to reveal their sexual or gender
minority identities to their caregivers, thereby potentially putting
them in harm’s way, we received a waiver of parental consent
[85]. This allowed the participants to provide consent for
themselves. To further protect participants, we asked SGMY
(before and during each session) to find a quiet and private space
where they could participate in activities with minimal
distraction and interruption. We also allowed participants to
use Zoom’s chat function if they are unable or feel
uncomfortable speaking out loud. This study was also protected
by a Certificate of Confidentiality from the National Institutes

JMIR Res Protoc 2021 | vol. 10 | iss. 4 | e26554 | p. 14

of Health. It is important to note that we never inquired about
participants’personal experiences with ARA. Nevertheless, we
provided all people who completed the screener with the ARA
and SGMY resource lists. In addition, the study participants
received resource lists after each session.

Results

This study was funded in February 2020. Data collection began
in August 2020 and will be completed in April 2021. From

August 2020 through December 2020, 778 individuals clicked
the link to the screening questionnaire (Figure 9). In total, 370
individuals completed the screening questionnaire, of which
274 individuals met all eligibility criteria. A total of 50
participants were invited to participate, and 22 consented to
participate. In total, 16 SGMY participated in at least one
human-centered design session. All data collection will be
completed by April 2021.

Figure 9. Flow diagram of the study as of December 2020.

Discussion

Impact

This study protocol has several methodological innovations that
can inform future public health research that aims to incorporate

methods from the field of human-centered design. First, our
method is an example of how human-centered design research
can be performed on the web. This is important because it is a
resource-friendly and accessible method for engaging diverse
stakeholders from a wide geographic region. Moreover, the

JMIR Res Protoc 2021 | vol. 10 | iss. 4 | e26554 | p. 15

COVID-19 pandemic hindered our ability to engage safely with
participants, and these web-based methods enable our research
to continue despite current limitations on in-person research
activities. Our study also demonstrates how to combine
human-centered design, which is often quite flexible, into
research processes, which tend to be much more structured. By
rigorously testing the feasibility of such an approach, our study
has the potential to demonstrate and codify the use of
human-centered design as a novel stakeholder-engaged research
method.

Our study has the potential to lead to many substantive
innovations in the field of ARA interventions among SGMY.
If successful, our study could yield several novel intervention
concepts. Importantly, these interventions are directly derived
from SGMY themselves, as opposed to researchers. By centering
youth voices and opinions in this manner, the generated
interventions may be highly acceptable and impactful, but that
cannot be determined until the interventions are tested further.
Nevertheless, given the great lack of interventions, our study
can help catalyze the field of SGMY ARA intervention research.

Limitations

Although there are many strengths to this study, it is not without
limitations. Although participants in our sample are

sociodemographically diverse, they are not necessarily
representative. For example, SGMY without internet access are
excluded from our study, and sessions were only conducted in
English. In addition to youth, the inclusion of other stakeholders
(eg, parents and school personnel) would likely have important
insights for intervention concepts, but they are not included in
this study. Despite our study yielding potentially new
intervention concepts, this study will not produce complete
interventions. Additional work from researchers, designers, and
stakeholders will be necessary to develop and test the derived
interventions. Finally, this is a pilot study testing the feasibility
of our methods. We are not testing the effectiveness of our
methods versus more traditional methods (eg, focus groups) for
producing intervention concepts, which can be executed in
future trials if our methodology proves to be feasible.

Conclusions

Interventions to reduce ARA among SGMY are lacking. To
address this gap, our study investigates the feasibility of a new
method for generating new intervention concepts. This work
has the potential to contribute to substantive health impacts as
well as immediate methodological impact by integrating
human-centered design methods into public health research.