User-centered design of multi-gene sequencing panel reports for 
clinicians

Elizabeth Cuttinga, Meghan Bancheroa, Amber L. Beitelsheesa, James J. Ciminob, 
Guilherme Del Fiolc, Ayse P. Gursesi,j,k, Mark A. Hoffmand,e, Linda Jo Bone Jenga,m, 
Kensaku Kawamotoc, Mark Kelemenf, Harold Alan Pincusg, Alan R. Shuldinera, Marc S. 
Williamsh, Toni I. Pollina, and Casey Lynnette Overbya,i,l,*

aProgram for Personalized and Genomic Medicine, University of Maryland School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD, United States

bInformatics Institute, School of Medicine, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, 
United States

cDepartment of Biomedical Informatics, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, United States

dUniversity of Missouri – Kansas City, Kansas City, MO, United States

eChildren's Mercy Hospital, Kansas City, MO, United States

fUniversity of Maryland Medical Center, Baltimore, MD, United States

gColumbia University and New York-Presbyterian Hospital, New York, NY, United States

hGenomic Medicine Institute, Geisinger Health System, Danville, PA, United States

iDivision of Health Sciences Informatics, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, United 
States

jArmstrong Institute for Patient Safety and Quality, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
United States

kAnesthesiology and Critical Care Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, United 
States

lDivision of General Internal Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, United 
States

mDepartments of Medicine, Pathology and Pediatrics, University of Maryland School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD, United States

Abstract

*Corresponding author at: Department of Medicine, Divisions of General Internal Medicine and Health Sciences Informatics, Johns 
Hopkins University School of Medicine, 2024 East Monument Street, Suite 1-200, Baltimore, MD 21205, United States. 
overby@jhu.edu (C.L. Overby). 

Appendices. Supplementary material: Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jbi.2016.07.014.

HHS Public Access
Author manuscript

Published in final edited form as:
J Biomed Inform. 2016 October ; 63: 1–10. doi:10.1016/j.jbi.2016.07.014.

The objective of this study was to develop a high-fidelity prototype for delivering multi-gene 
sequencing panel (GS) reports to clinicians that simulates the user experience of a final 
application. The delivery and use of GS reports can occur within complex and high-paced 
healthcare environments. We employ a user-centered software design approach in a focus group 
setting in order to facilitate gathering rich contextual information from a diverse group of 
stakeholders potentially impacted by the delivery of GS reports relevant to two precision medicine 
programs at the University of Maryland Medical Center. Responses from focus group sessions 
were transcribed, coded and analyzed by two team members. Notification mechanisms and 
information resources preferred by participants from our first phase of focus groups were 
incorporated into scenarios and the design of a software prototype for delivering GS reports. The 
goal of our second phase of focus group, to gain input on the prototype software design, was 
accomplished through conducting task walkthroughs with GS reporting scenarios. Preferences for 
notification, content and consultation from genetics specialists appeared to depend upon 
familiarity with scenarios for ordering and delivering GS reports. Despite familiarity with some 
aspects of the scenarios we proposed, many of our participants agreed that they would likely seek 
consultation from a genetics specialist after viewing the test reports. In addition, participants 
offered design and content recommendations. Findings illustrated a need to support customized 
notification approaches, user-specific information, and access to genetics specialists with GS 
reports. These design principles can be incorporated into software applications that deliver GS 
reports. Our user-centered approach to conduct this assessment and the specific input we received 
from clinicians may also be relevant to others working on similar projects.

Keywords

Genomic sequencing; Precision medicine; Genomic medicine; User experience research; Task 
walkthroughs

1. Introduction

Customizing healthcare based on each person's unique genetic makeup could enable an era 
of precision medicine that would improve prevention, diagnosis and treatment for many 
types of health conditions. Routine precision medicine is rapidly approaching due to 
increased use of whole genome, whole exome, and other types of multi-gene next generation 
sequencing panels, hereafter referred to as genomic sequencing (GS). Results from GS will 
be used more often as cost goes down and evidence of clinical utility increases [1,2]. With 
the overwhelming amounts of data that can be generated from GS, the laborious task of 
manually prioritizing clinically significant results often falls to clinical and laboratory 
geneticists [3]. With the anticipated increase in the use of GS, manual review of genetic data 
by clinicians, however, is not scalable. We believe that developing computerized tools to 
help non-genetics experts make sense of GS results will greatly increase the likelihood of 
achieving the vision of successful use of these data.

The healthcare environment in which such computerized tools might be deployed can be 
complex and high-paced. Thus, there is a need to use a design methodology that aims to 
support the current way of working. The primary objective of this study was to develop a 

Cutting et al.
Page 2

high-fidelity prototype for delivering GS reports to clinicians that simulates the user 
experience of a final application. Target stakeholders were clinicians involved in two 
University of Maryland Program for Personalized and Genomic Medicine (PPGM) 
initiatives that are exemplary use cases for precision medicine programs more broadly. 
These initiatives are the Translational Pharmacogenetics Program (TPP) and the 
Personalized Diabetes Medicine Program (PDMP). The TPP project aims to use a patient's 
CYP2C19 genotype results to tailor antiplatelet therapy after a cardiac stent has been placed 
[4]. The PDMP is designed to implement, disseminate and evaluate an approach to 
identifying and genomically diagnosing highly penetrant genetic forms of diabetes. The goal 
for PDMP is to enable personalized treatment for better and potentially less invasive glucose 
control, prognosis, and assessment of familial risk for patients [5,6].

We employed a user-centered software design approach in a focus group setting in order to 
facilitate gathering rich contextual information with a diverse group of stakeholders 
potentially impacted by the delivery of GS reports relevant to the TPP and PDMP projects. 
We completed two studies: The goal for the first study (phase 1) was to understand current 
genetic and laboratory testing processes for documenting results, notifying clinicians of 
those results, and viewing the results. Findings from the first study were used to propose the 
design of software, which we called the Genomic Medicine Assistant (GMA), for delivering 
GS reports to clinicians. In particular, we proposed a design that would potentially mitigate 
issues with the reporting and notification processes we identified in phase 1. The goal for the 
second study (phase 2) was to gather feedback on a proposed design of the GMA software 
including preferences for interactions with, content contained in and the perceived usability 
of the design.

2. Background

Much of the research surrounding the delivery of individual GS results to date has been 
regarding the ethical, legal and social implications for communicating findings to patients 
[7–9]. Indeed, GS technology is not mature and appropriate in all clinical scenarios and 
there is the potential for cascade effects (i.e., a chain of events initiated by an unexpected 
result leading to unnecessary additional testing or treatments) [10–13]. We are now seeing 
guidance for clinicians ordering, interpreting, and communicating GS with their patients 
[13,14], as well as clinical laboratories supporting the ordering of GS and delivery of reports 
that include results that are both clinically actionable and directly relevant to the patients' 
indication. While there are some studies exploring the potential for GS to replace traditional 
tests in terms of sensitivity, specificity and completeness [15], there are few studies to date 
investigating technologies for delivering GS reports under this new paradigm. One group has 
developed a web-based platform to automatically generate a clinical report, based on pre-
defined templates, from raw assay results or specified diplotypes [16]. Their framework has 
potential to help provide consistent and reproducible reporting while also saving time by 
calculating diplo-types and assembling report content. Our work adds to this emerging 
literature by taking a user-centered design approach to explore a range of scenarios for 
software generating reports from GS for use by clinicians.

Cutting et al.
Page 3

Related to our goal to investigate preferences for content contained in the proposed design of 
software are studies of the information needs of clinicians when interpreting GS. These 
studies serve as the groundwork to inform the design of software tools [17,18]. While most 
of these studies have focused on genetic counselors' information needs, some findings may 
be generalized to other clinicians. Genetic counselors have expertise when reviewing GS 
reports; therefore, information that they deem necessary should be emphasized when non-
genetic expert clinicians are reviewing GS reports. For example, a study surveying genetic 
counselors showed that there is a perceived lack of information on the classification system 
for variants of unknown significance (VUS) included in laboratory reports, highlighting a 
need for improved GS reports to provide transparency [18]. That study also found that 
genetic counselors wanted more information, such as patient information, in reports to help 
contextualize VUS results [18]. We believe this need for more information about the patient 
within laboratory reports can be generalized to other types of clinicians in order to make 
patient-specific recommendations. This belief is supported by findings of others indicating 
that clinicians desire information available to discuss with the patient [19]. Another study of 
interviews with genetic counselors identified specific information needs for risk 
communication [17]. Information needs described in that study include clinical patient 
characteristics, social and cognitive patient characteristics, and patient motivation and goals 
for the genetic counseling session. Those needs may also generalize to non-genetics experts 
communicating GS results to patients more broadly, and thus were considered with findings 
from phase 1 studies in our proposed software design.

While there exist tools and resources for clinical laboratory professionals interpreting and 
reporting genetic test results, the design and purpose of these tools varies. One web-based 
application, SeqReporter, has been developed for clinical molecular laboratory use for next-
generation sequencing data analysis [20]. That tool is an automated web-based application 
for GS result classification. While it was designed to optimize laboratory reporting, it did not 
support the anticipated information needs of non-genetics expert clinical end users. While 
the published information provides a starting point, our work gathers additional end-user 
input on preferences for interactions with, content contained in and the perceived usability of 
the software design by non-genetics clinician experts.

2.1. Methodological Background

In order to gather input on the proposed design of software, we used a task-centered system 
design (TCSD) protocol in a focus group setting. Other studies have used similar task-
centered approaches to investigate the usability of genetic data interpretation software. For 
example, Shyr et al. administered surveys, conducted interviews and performed cognitive 
task analyses to assess the usability of a clinical exome analysis software [21]. In another 
study a think-aloud, graded-task protocol was used to evaluate the GeneInsight Suite. That 
study highlighted a need to provide the most current genetic information [22]. The graded 
task protocol facilitated identifying design improvements that could be easily made and 
determining larger issues with how the interface was interpreted by end-users. While our 
goals to gather input on the design of software were similar, in our modified TCSD protocol, 
we did not have participants grade each task they completed. Rather, by conducting our 
study in a focus group setting, we allowed for open discussion about proposed software 

Cutting et al.
Page 4

design features in order to gather feedback on specific clinical contexts in which those 
features would be most useful.

In proposing software design characteristics, we explored the inclusion of features that 
might be supported by existing clinical system vendors. These included alert messages, and 
an HL7 standard, the “Infobutton Standard” [23,24]. The use of infobuttons in electronic 
health records (EHRs) is an important method for delivering the most current healthcare 
information to clinicians at the point-of-care. The technology lends itself to use with GS 
reports, as treatment guidelines and recommendations associated with genetic variation are 
ever-improving [25]. Linking to those resources from infobuttons could provide a 
mechanism to communicate genomic data and clinical decision support [26]. One study 
piloted a pharmacogenomic-based prescribing alert to examine the clinical impact of 
embedding infobuttons within an EHR alert [27]. That study offered improvements to make 
the infobutton content more useful and increase clinician trust in the alert. Findings from 
those studies reinforced our decision to include alert messages and infobuttons in the 
proposed design of software capable of providing clinicians with important, current 
information with GS results.

3. Materials and Methods

3.1. Recruitment Approach

Our two-phase study was conducted within a focus group setting. We sent emails to 
individuals influenced by the two precision medicine projects at the University of Maryland 
School of Medicine. These included 14 TPP/PDMP research team members (clinical 
research coordinators, genetic counselors, laboratory professionals), 17 PDMP clinicians 
(endocrinology fellows, nurse practitioners, diabetes educators), and 34 TPP clinicians 
(cardiology fellows, nurse practitioners, clinical pharmacists). The email was sent with an 
information sheet describing the goals of the project. Two weeks later, a second email was 
sent to the same pool of potential participants asking for their participation again. A third 
email was sent out to interested participants to schedule a focus group. Interested 
participants were contacted a fourth and final time to confirm the date and time of the focus 
group. A $100 gift card was given to participants. Participants in phase 2 were recruited in 
the same fashion and from the same pool of PDMP and TPP clinicians as in phase 1. Those 
who participated in phase 1 were allowed to participate in phase 2. This study was reviewed 
and judged by the University of Maryland Institutional Review board (IRB) as non-human 
subjects research (HP-00061346). At the start of each focus group, participants were given a 
participant information sheet. This sheet captured the participant's involvement in TPP and 
PDMP projects, years of experience in their profession, gender, and their choice to be 
contacted, or not, for future focus groups.

3.2. Phase 1 Data Collection and Analysis

In phase 1, three focus groups were conducted in order to examine existing and anticipated 
genetic testing processes among two precision medicine projects (TPP and PDMP). Our 
focus group protocol was organized into three topics about genetic test results: laboratory 
documentation of genetic test results, making genetic test results available to view in the 

Cutting et al.
Page 5

EHR, and notifying the clinician about genetic test results. For each topic, open-ended 
questions (e.g., “what is your overall opinion of how genetic test results should be 
documented by the testing lab?”) elicited general information followed by more specific 
questions and probes (e.g., “what kinds of information do you think should or shouldn't be in 
the report?” “when would you want to access information you just mentioned?”). A 
moderator and note taker were present at all focus groups, each of which lasted 90–120 min. 
Focus group discussions regarding PDMP were modified to cover laboratory test processes 
more generally given that data collection occurred prior to the start of genetic testing for that 
project. Sessions were audio recorded, transcribed, and analyzed with the aid of Dedoose, a 
qualitative research analysis software [28].

Two coders (EC, CO) mapped statements made by study participants to terminology 
common to user experience and design, and to organizational and business process modeling 
heuristics. Our assessment of user experience in phase 1 was focused on usability 
(effectiveness, efficiency and satisfaction) and design (missing functionality, problems and 
proposed solutions, and desired features). Similar to another study of the usability of clinical 
systems [29], we also captured ‘positive’ and ‘negative’ quotes. Positive quotes allowed us 
to identify features that satisfied the needs of clinicians and negative quotes allowed us to 
identify possible features to improve the use clinical systems for genetic testing processes. 
Mappings of statements to usability codes facilitated determining perceived issues with the 
use of current clinical systems for genetic testing processes and proposed solutions 
acceptable by a range of stakeholders to address those issues. Mappings of statements to 
organizational and business process modeling heuristics facilitated determining existing and 
anticipated genetic testing processes for documenting, viewing, and notifying individuals 
about genetic test results (Appendix B).

We completed two analyses of data collected in phase 1. First, we analyzed the data to 
understand genetic testing processes of TPP specifically. Findings from that analysis is 
described elsewhere [30] and is summarized in the following section. Second, we analyzed 
phase 1 data in order to define scenarios and GMA design requirements. Methods and 
results from that analysis are described in this manuscript.

3.2.1. Summary of Methods and Findings from Previous Work Analyzing 
Translational Pharmacogenetics Program Genetic Testing Processes—The 
coding team analyzed data from two focus groups (TPP/PDMP research team members and 
TPP-related clinicians) in order to document TPP genetic testing processes at the time, and 
to propose more streamlined processes enabled by technology. With information gained 
from focus groups, we documented TPP genetic testing processes using a Business Process 
Model and Notation (BPMN) model [30]. We also performed member checking to verify the 
accuracy of our model. In summary, findings indicated a reliance on TPP research team 
members to complete tasks that were labor-intensive and potentially error-prone. Findings 
also indicated insufficient support and resources to assist clinicians in treatment decisions 
with the lab report alone. At the time, important information for making treatment decisions 
were provided by the TPP research team in the form of a letter, separate from the lab report 
itself. Specific recommendations to enhance TPP genetic testing processes included 
reducing the reliance on the TPP research team by establishing a Laboratory Information 

Cutting et al.
Page 6

Management System (LIMS) for genetic test results that is capable of communicating with 
the EHR, and the implementation of clinical decision support (CDS). CDS implementation 
could also provide a mechanism to improve access to information for clinicians to make 
treatment decisions.

3.2.2. Assessing Desired Characteristics for Precision Medicine Scenarios 
and Genomic Medicine Assistant Design—We drew from data collected for two 
focus groups (TPP-related clinicians and PDMP-related clinicians) to provide evidence for 
scenario and software design choices. Scenarios were designed to be relevant to TPP and 
PDMP projects and validated with project advisory committee members. Committee 
members consisted of experts in clinical genomics, clinical vocabulary standards and clinical 
decision support implementation in commercial EHRs (Appendix A). After scenario 
validation, we designed project-specific “storybook packets” that included two scenarios, 
each of which had associated tasks for accessing GS reports, mockups of those reports and 
information resources viewed using GMA. Those notification methods found to be 
acceptable by phase 1 study participants were described in both storybook packets. One 
team member (EC) proposed initial GMA design mockups informed by participant 
recommendations from phase 1 focus groups, the literature describing laboratory report 
design principles [31], and model laboratory reports. The packets underwent multiple rounds 
revision based upon feedback from the project team prior to finalizing.

3.3. Phase 2 Data Collection and Analysis

In phase 2, a modified task-centered system design (TCSD) protocol was applied in a focus 
group setting in order to gather feedback from clinicians on a proposed design of the GMA 
software. Traditional TCSD involves four main phases: (a) identification of tasks, (b) user-
centered requirements analysis, (c) design through use of scenarios or storybooks, and (d) 
evaluation of design using walkthrough analyses [32]. In this study we leverage our 
understanding of preferences for genetic testing processes from phase 1 analyses in order to 
complete TCSD phases a–c. TPP and PDMP clinicians were each asked to complete task 
walkthroughs involving two clinical scenarios where GS was performed (see Appendix A 
for “Scenarios relevant to the Translational Pharmacogenomics Project” and for “Scenarios 
relevant to the Personalized Diabetes Medicine Program”).

3.3.1. Administering Storybook Packets for Task Walkthroughs With clinicians
—In phase 2, storybook packets were administered to study participants within a focus 
group setting. A moderator and note taker were present at both focus groups, each of which 
lasted 90– 120 min. Focus groups were split into two parts, with no discussion during the 
first part of the study. Participants were first asked to spend 15–20 min reviewing and 
writing down comments or questions about each task/screen presented in the storybook 
packet. For the second part, the moderator led a discussion of each task as a group. The 
moderator facilitated discussion through the use of probes (e.g., “Is this alert message 
informative?”) corresponding to each task (e.g., “Clinician views alert message”). Sessions 
were audio recorded, transcribed, and analyzed with the aid of Dedoose, qualitative research 
analysis software [28].

Cutting et al.
Page 7

3.3.2. Analysis of Clinician Perceptions of Tasks and Screen Mockups—Two 
coders (EC, MB) mapped statements made by study participants to terminology common to 
user experience and design, processes for viewing and using the GMA, characteristics of the 
GMA design (see Appendix C. Genomic Medicine Assistant Demo Multi-Gene Panel 
Laboratory Reports), and roles for different stakeholders (e.g., patient, lab professional, 
ordering physician, genetic counselor). Our assessment of user experience was broader in 
phase 1 than in phase 2 with the addition of codes for content and usefulness added to our 
codebook. Codes for usability and design remained. Codes for organizational and business 
processes from phase 1 were replaced by a single code to capture processes for viewing and 
using the GMA. Mappings of statements to codes facilitated identifying preferences for and 
issues with proposed design features and areas for which there was agreement or 
disagreement among focus group participants.

3.3.3. Analysis to Characterize Study Participant Views Using System 
Usability Scale Survey—In order to characterize the views of our study participants, we 
used the System Usability Scale (SUS) survey [33]. The SUS has become a standard of 
usability measurement [34]. While other usability evaluation surveys exist [35,36], the SUS 
is among the most broadly used and has a number of advantages including its ease of use 
with only 10 items rated on a 5-point scale; its comprehensibility given a resultant score 
ranging from 0 to 100; and it is “technology agnostic” [33,37]. Participants are asked to 
score each item on a scale of one to five that range from Strongly Disagree to Strongly 
Agree. Scores were interpreted and analyzed using Sauro's method (30). For each odd 
numbered item, one was subtracted from the user response. For each even numbered item, 
the user response was subtracted from five. Each user's responses were added up and 
multiplied by 2.5 to convert the range of values to 0–100. A score of 68 is an average 
usability score. A score above 68 would be considered above average, a score below 68 is 
considered below average. Scores were then converted to their percentile rank [33].

4. Results

4.1. Study Population

Phase 1 focus groups (three totals) were conducted between December 2014 and February 
2015. Phase 2 focus groups with clinicians (two totals) were conducted in May 2015 at 
UMMC. Each focus group had a total of four participants (Table 1). With the exception of 
one focus group conducted during phase 1 with TPP/PDMP research team members, all 
focus groups included 1–2 nurse practitioners and 1–3 physicians. 6 clinicians (nurse 
practitioners and physicians) participated in both phases 1 and 2.

4.2. Phase 1 Results: Validated Scenarios and Proposed Software Design

The phase 1 analysis uncovered several desired characteristics for scenarios and for the 
design of software to support processes for documenting, viewing, and being notified of 
genetic and laboratory test results.

4.2.1. Feedback From Clinicians Informing Genomic Medicine Assistant 
design—Preferences for documenting and viewing genetic test results informed the design 

Cutting et al.
Page 8

of the GMA software. Specific clinical preferences for report documentation included 
embedding recommendations for the course of treatment based on the patient's results. This 
design choice was based primarily upon discussions occurring in the TPP focus group 
session. The goal for this would be to reduce the number of steps required for clinicians to 
review recommendations for using test results. At the time, recommendations were provided 
to clinicians primarily within a letter sent by the study team.

TPP and PDMP clinicians had similar preferences for viewing test results. Given that 
multiple variants in a single gene or multiple genes may be presented in a single report, 
participants expressed a desire for data to be organized by degree of urgency and clinical 
significance. We proposed addressing this issue by proposing the use of a multiple tabs to 
separate essential and nonessential information in the proposed software design. We also 
incorporated a specific recommendation of the TPP clinicians to use to allow for quick 
review of the report (e.g., use of the color red to indicate high urgency).

Decisions regarding the organization of content were also informed by model laboratory 
reports and recommendations from the literature [31]. Many features are generalizable 
across scenarios and are described in Table 3. Potentially generalizable content and content 
sections are also illustrated in Fig. 1. Given differences in the availability of information 
resources, the inclusion or exclusion of infobuttons varied slightly between scenarios.

Focus group participants also reported need for sufficient information to help non-specialist 
clinicians explain test results to their patients. TPP clinicians expressed that the information 
in current reports was insufficient and that links to external information resources would be 
beneficial in their decision-making. PDMP clinicians liked the idea of providing ready 
access to electronic resources with GS reports, with a preference for familiar and trusted 
resources such as UpToDate® (www.uptodate.com). They made specific suggestions for 
access to general information about monogenic diabetes and the ability to print patient-
targeted information. These preferences were incorporated in our choice of information 
resources, organization of content, and incorporating support for print and email capabilities 
into a proposed software design. Other features incorporated into the GMA design included 
proposed access to web-based resources using infobuttons and an inbox of all reports 
available within the GMA.

4.2.2. Validated Scenarios and Proposed Tasks for Reviewing The genomic 
Medicine Assistant Design—Notification preferences informed the design of our 
scenarios. Study participants indicated a need for improved mechanisms of being notified of 
GS and laboratory results. Epic® Systems (Verona, WI) alert and reminder capabilities in 
particular were discussed during focus group sessions. Both TPP and PDMP recommended 
considering alert messages in the EHR as a preferred mechanism to notify and deliver GS 
reports. One suggestion brought up in the TPP focus group specifically was to consider Epic 
InBasket messaging. EHR alert and reminder mechanisms (Epic Best Practice Alert [BPA] 
and InBasket messages) were therefore incorporated into scenarios as two proposed 
mechanisms for notifying clinicians of GS reports. The BPA provides an interruptive form of 
clinical decision support notification, while the InBasket provides a more passive form of 

Cutting et al.
Page 9

notification where new messages are indicated on a sidebar as the number of new messages 
that have been received.

Scenarios are summarized in Table 2. Notification occurred when a clinician opened the 
patient chart and methods of notification included Epic BPA and InBasket messages. Both 
contained summary information about GS results and a link to view the report in the GMA. 
In order to assess both types of notification approaches, the first scenario presented to 
cardiology and endocrinology clinicians used BPAs, while the second scenario contained an 
InBasket message.

Tasks outlined for the scenarios involved a user viewing an EHR alert or reminder message, 
clicking on a link within that message to access the GMA software, then viewing the GMA 
inbox containing the status of all ordered GS tests and reports. The user opens the pre-
selected GS report and is brought to a lab report Results Tab that contains patient 
demographic data, the result, clinical significance, and recommendations. The Results Tab 
page also contains infobuttons that link to resources such as OMIM® [47], GeneReviews® 

[49], ClinVar [48], supporting literature, and a patient resource. The user then clicks the Test 
Information tab, which contains test limitations and other information. See Fig. 1 for an 
example of the Results Tab of the report.

4.3. Phase 2 Results: Clinician Perceptions of Tasks and Screen Mockups

Two main themes came out of the phase 2 focus group analysis. First, there were differing 
opinions about proposed notification methods. Second, there were user-specific needs for 
information and consultation (Table 4).

For both of the EHR alert and reminder notification methods we explored, participants 
expressed concerns about the frequency of being notified of GS reports (Table 4). For BPAs 
specifically, the potential for a high frequency of pop-up BPA alerts was a concern. 
Participants agreed that the way the GMA Genetic Test Report tab was structured to provide 
optional access to information resources along with concise information summaries could 
help to overcome issues with alert fatigue (or desensitization to frequent alerts) [38]. Which 
methods of notification were preferred also depended on the scenario. For example, TPP 
clinician participants preferred both methods of notification for the pharmacogenomic 
sequencing panel report SCN5A result scenario, where as they preferred only one method of 
notification for the CYP2C19 result scenario. Study participants also noted that the preferred 
method of notification might depend on familiarity with the scenario for using GS results.

User-specific needs for information and consultation became evident from comments about 
clinicians' familiarity with scenarios, comfort with using GS results and the GMA to make 
clinical decisions, and preferences for referral processes (Table 4). Participants explained 
that confidence with using the GMA to make clinical decisions and their preferred referral 
processes may differ for a non-specialized primary care provider (PCP) who may be 
unfamiliar with the GMA and/or GS results. Many participants agreed that they would seek 
consultation from a genetics or pharmacogenetics specialist after viewing the GS report.

Cutting et al.
Page 10

4.4. Phase 2 Results: Design Revision Recommendations and Perceptions of Usability

Study participants offered recommendations to improve the navigation of the software to be 
more intuitive and the content more easily and quickly understood (Table 5). These included 
specific content improvements such as more clearly defining certain phenotypes. One 
important recommendation was to add a resource to view evidence summaries regarding the 
clinical utility of the data such as supporting clinical trials. Participants also perceived the 
GMA design to be usable with scores ranging from 72.5 to 95 out of 100 on the SUS Survey. 
These scores representing the perceptions of our study participants, indicated an above 
average usability score of the GMA.

5. Discussion

We have proposed a design for the Genomic Medicine Assistant (GMA) software for 
generating a report from GS data and provide resources to orient clinicians when viewing 
and interpreting results. In phase 1 of our study, focus group participants offered insights 
into the complex reporting process of genetic test results within two precision medicine 
programs (TPP and PDMP). Key areas of improvement were identified and considered when 
defining scenarios and design features for the GMA. In phase 2 we assessed the GMA soft-
ware design by conducting focus groups and task walkthroughs with clinical end-users 
(physicians and nurse practitioners). Major findings we identified were the existence of (a) 
differing opinions regarding preferred methods of notification and (b) user-specific needs for 
information and consultation.

Familiarity with a technology can assist with its integration into everyday routines. To 
bolster clinician familiarity with information provided in the GMA, clinician training and 
educational programs may be effective. For example, one study piloted a “Genome Report” 
containing whole genome sequencing results with non-geneticist physicians. They found 
that users viewed the report initially as daunting, but noted that as they became more 
familiar with the report, they would be able to better manage subsequent reports [39]. In our 
study, while familiarity with genetic test results differed between clinicians involved in our 
two precision medicine programs, there were common preferences for information. For 
example, regardless of previous experience and education about GS described in our 
scenarios, many participants agreed that they would likely seek consultation from a genetics 
or pharmacogenetics specialist after viewing the test report.

In addition, participants made several recommendations to improve the proposed design of 
the GMA that can serve as design principles for other pursuing similar efforts. Focus group 
participants reported a desire for information to support more in depth understanding of GS 
results. Addressing this desire would need to be considered with care given findings from 
others that using too much bioinformatics or genetics jargon causes confusion [21]. In 
addition, while actual navigation of the GMA software interface could not be tested during 
our task walkthroughs, participants still proposed several areas to improve (Table 5).

Toward improving the likelihood of successful integration with busy healthcare 
environments, we employed user-centered design approaches to understand genetic testing 
workflow processes and design preferences in order to understand points where technology 

Cutting et al.
Page 11

could help support those processes (see “Summary of Findings from Analyzing 
Translational Pharmacogenetics Program Genetic Testing Processes” and [30]) and to 
provide evidence for scenario and software design choices. We found that the documentation 
of GS results by multiple individuals, at different points in the testing process, and into 
independent locations can potentially lead to the incorrect communication of a result. We 
therefore proposed mechanisms for clinical decision support notification in our scenarios 
and proposed design features for documenting and viewing GS reports with potential to 
mitigate some of those issues. Overall the proposed scenarios (Table 2) and GMA design 
features (Table 3) were well accepted by our study participants. Preferences for notification 
by EHR alerts or reminders, however, may depend in part on familiarity with GS results and 
urgency of the scenarios. For example, for GS results that cardiology participants' were less 
familiar with, they preferred both BPA and InBasket notifications. With CYP2C19 test 
results, for which they were more familiar, the cardiology participants' preferred InBasket 
notifications.

5.1. Limitations and Future Directions

We employed a user-centered design approach with the aim of designing software that fits 
within current ways of working (i.e., GS reporting processes that are similar to current 
laboratory test delivery processes). There are some processes for GS reporting, however, that 
are distinct from other types of laboratory tests such as the need to support mechanisms for 
continually updating and improving genetic information. Our proposed design feature to 
embed within GS reports links to external references and to continually updated genomic 
knowledge bases such as ClinVar [40] would partially supports such mechanisms. The 
scenarios we present in this work, however, were for the delivery of results at one point in 
time, and do not explore potential changes to interpretations over time. One technology 
exploring mechanisms to provide updated interpretations of GS results is GeneInsight, 
whose processes have been shown to greatly improve the probability that users receive 
updated variant information [41]. Complementing that work would be research to better 
understand approaches to notify clinicians of updates to GS findings and interpretations. 
There is potential to draw from approaches in human factors engineering to analyze complex 
work systems [42,43]. Approaches in contextual inquiry in particular may be used in order 
to design technology to support current work systems, or to design new ways of working 
that are well supported by technology [44].

Another area for further exploration is scenarios for the return of incidental findings 
unrelated to the indication for testing. This work explored a scenario related to TPP project 
for the return of a potential incidental finding upon ordering a pharmacogenomic sequencing 
panel test for another purpose. Of note is that the scenario was highly exploratory and not 
based on current standards of care. While others are exploring similar scenarios for returning 
GS results with healthy individuals [9], current practice recommendations do not support GS 
for that purpose [45].

Some challenges brought up in phase 1 focus groups could not be addressed directly in the 
design of the GMA. For example, a clear need identified by participants was to improve the 
communication between laboratory systems and the EHR. Focus group participants also 

Cutting et al.
Page 12

reported that some processes for notifying clinicians of genetic test results do not notify the 
correct members of the care team of an available test result in the TPP project [30]. In both 
instances, solutions for these needs were beyond the scope of this project. These are however 
broader implementation challenges that will be addressed in the respective TPP and PDMP 
projects.

While our prototype can provide a starting point for exploring scenarios for the reporting of 
multi-gene sequencing test results, further research is needed to determine applicability to 
other scenarios and healthcare organizations. Future studies would benefit from gathering 
feedback on multiple design concepts in order identify the best solution for different 
environments. In addition, usability studies where individuals are able to interact directly 
with a prototype system may help users' understanding of the GMA application.

Furthermore, mechanisms to improve the communication between laboratories and 
clinicians will be important. As we found in our assessment of TPP genetic testing 
processes, laboratory processes for preparing the report are vital for the delivery of results. 
The communication between clinicians and laboratories becomes increasingly complex 
when GS is involved. Multiple factors now play a part in this communication and should be 
considered when building such a connection. These include informed consent, quality of 
testing, regulations of the testing laboratory, and most importantly, interpretation of results 
[46]. While the GMA provides a framework for delivering reports to clinicians, laboratory 
and genetics professionals will continue to guide the development of content for inclusion of 
GS reports and the identification of appropriate timing for delivering reports to clinicians.

In addition to these findings, study participants perceived the GMA design to be usable and 
offered numerous design and content recommendations to further improve its look and feel 
(Table 5). Participant preferences for information resources and organization of content from 
the first phase of the study were incorporated in the prototype software design presented 
during the second phase. Above average perceptions of usability were therefore 
unsurprising. Overall design principles resulting from our study can be incorporated into 
software applications that support the delivery of GS reports.

6. Conclusion

We employed a user-centered software design approach in a focus group setting in order to 
facilitate gathering rich contextual information from a diverse group of stakeholders 
potentially impacted by the delivery of multi-gene sequencing panel (GS) reports relevant to 
two precision medicine programs at the University of Maryland Medical Center. Our 
evaluation of the genetic testing processes facilitated identifying preferred mechanisms for 
clinicians to be notified of results and preferred information resources to support interpreting 
results. Notification by EHR alerts and reminders were explored within scenarios for 
ordering and delivering GS reports. Preferences for notification, information and 
consultation from genetics specialists appeared to depend upon previous experience and 
education about the GS described in scenarios. Despite familiarity with some aspects of the 
scenarios, many of our participants agreed that they would likely seek consultation from a 
genetics specialist after viewing GS reports. Findings illustrate a need to support customized 

Cutting et al.
Page 13

notification approaches, user-specific information, and access to genetics specialists with GS 
reports. Design principles from this work can be incorporated into software applications that 
deliver GS reports. Our user-centered approach to conduct this assessment and the specific 
input we received from clinicians may also be relevant to others working on similar projects.