Available online 15 March 2024
1386-5056/© 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-
nc-nd/4.0/).

App-Mohedo®: A mobile app for the management of chronic pelvic pain. A 
design and development study 

Esther Díaz-Mohedo a, Antonio L. Carrillo-Le´on b,*, Andr´es Calvache-Mateo c, Magdalena Ptak d, 
Natalia Romero-Franco e,f, Juan Carlos-Fern´andez e,f 

a Department of Physiotherapy. University of M´alaga. Spain 
b Department of Languages and Computer Science. University of M´alaga. Spain 
c Department of Physiotherapy. University of Granada. Spain 
d Department of Medical Rehabilitation and Clinical Physiotherapy, Pomeranian Medical University in Szczecin, Poland 
e Department of Nursing and Physiotherapy. University of the Balearic Islands. Spain 
f Health Research Institute of the Balearic Islands (IdISBa), 07120 Palma de Mallorca, Spain  

A B S T R A C T   

Background: Chronic Pelvic Pain (CPP) has been described as a public health priority worldwide, and it is among the most prevalent and costly healthcare problems. 
Graded motor imagery (GMI) is a therapeutic tool that has been successfully used to improve pain in several chronic conditions. GMI therapy is divided into three 
stages: laterality training (LRJT, Left Right Judgement Task), imagined movements, and mirror therapy. No tool that allows working with LRJT in pelvic floor has 
been developed to date. 
Objective: This research aims to describe the process followed for the development of a highly usable, multi-language and multi-platform mobile application using 
GMI with LRJT to improve the treatment of patients with CPP. In addition, this will require achieving two other goals: firstly, to generate 550 pelvic floor images and, 
subsequently, to carry out an empirical study to objectively classify them into different difficulty levels of. This will allow the app to properly organize and plan the 
different therapy sessions to be followed by each patient. 
Methodology: For the design, evaluation and development of the app, an open methodology of user-centered design (MPIu + a) was applied. Furthermore, to classify 
and establish the pelvic floor images of the app in different difficulty levels, an observational, cross-sectional study was conducted with 132 volunteers through non- 
probabilistic sampling. 
Results: On one hand, applying MPIu+a, a total of 5 phases were required to generate an easy-to-use mobile application. On the other hand, the 550 pelvic floor 
images were classified into 3 difficulty levels (based on the percentage of correct answers and response time used by the participants in the classification process of 
each image): Level 1 (191 images with Accuracy = 100 % and RT = [0–2.5] seconds); Level 2 (208 images with Accuracy = 75–100 % and RT = [2.5–5] seconds); 
and Level 3 (151 images with Accuracy = 50–75 % and RT > 5 s). 
Conclusion: App-Mohedo® is the first multi-platform, multi-language and easy-to-use mobile application that, through GMI with LRJT, and with an adequate bank of 
images classified into three levels of difficulty, can be used as a complementary therapeutic tool in the treatment of patients with CPP. This work can also serve as an 
example, model or guide when applying a user-centered methodology, as MPIu + a, to the development of other apps, especially in the field of health.   

1. Introduction 

Chronic Pelvic Pain (CPP) has been described as a public health 
priority worldwide, and it is among the most prevalent and costly 
healthcare problems [1,2], associated with an important decrease of 
quality of life and with an increase of morbidity and mortality [3,4]. It is 
estimated that the increased incidence of non-communicable chronic 
diseases will cause an associated rise in the prevalence of disability, 

accounting for 75 % of all deaths by 2030, and thereby creating the most 
significant public health problem of the 21st century [5]. 
CPP is defined as the “chronic or persistent pain that is perceived in 
the structures related to the pelvis of men or women, unrelated to a clear 
pathology”. It often co-exists with symptoms that suggest a dysfunction 
of the lower urinary, sexual or intestinal tract, or a gynecological or 
pelvic floor dysfunction, and, when associated with negative cognitive, 
behavioral, sexual and emotional consequences, it is known as CPP 

Abbreviations: CP, Chronic Pain; CPP, Chronic Pelvic Pain; CNS, Central Nervous System; GMI, Graded Motor Imagery; iMI, Implicit Motor Imagery; LRJT, 
Left/Right Judgement Task; MPIuþa, Processing model of usability and accessibility engineering; RT, Response Time; UI, User Interface; UX, User 
Experience. 
* Corresponding author. 
E-mail address: alcarrillo@uma.es (A.L. Carrillo-Le´on).  

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 

International Journal of Medical Informatics 

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ijmedinf 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2024.105410 
Received 1 November 2023; Received in revised form 23 February 2024; Accepted 8 March 2024

2

syndrome [3]. 
Chronic Pain induces structural and functional changes in the motor 
cortex that could partly explain changes in motor control and affect 
muscle activation. Regarding the affective components, some studies 
have reported that patients with chronic pain show high levels of neural 
activation in the secondary somatosensory cortex, anterior cingulate 
cortex, insular cortex, and amygdala. These findings may reflect the 
altered peripheral sensory transmission of the modified afferent sensory 
stimuli and may be a result of the plasticity of the sensory representation 
of the body and perceptual changes [6–9]. 
Graded motor imagery (GMI), created by G. Lorimer Moseley and 
David S. Butler [10] during the first decade of the 21st century, is a 
therapeutic tool that, assuming the association between chronic pain 
and the interruption of the cortically-maintained body scheme, has been 
successfully used in some chronic conditions, such as complex regional 
pain syndrome [11], phantom limb syndrome [12] and chronic lumbar 
pain [13–15], indicating that it could be used as a complementary tool in 
CPP. 
The aim of GMI is to facilitate sensory and motor cortex reorgani­
zation, which can be altered in patients with CP. GMI therapy is divided 
into three stages: laterality training, imagined movements, and mirror 
therapy [6]. Initially, GMI uses Implicit Motor Imagery (iMI), where one 
of the procedures used is the laterality task or discrimination (LRJT, Left 
Right Judgement Task) [16]. This stage assesses the capacity of the in­
dividual to evaluate whether the body image observed belongs to the 
right or left side of the body. During this task, both accuracy (number of 
correct answers) and response time (time used to provide the right 
answer) are analyzed, since these two parameters are potentially altered 
in a large number of chronic conditions, both acute and chronic [17]. In 
a recent study, significant differences were found between PPC patients 
and healthy subjects: In the laterality task with pelvic floor images, the 
patients with CPP made more mistakes than the healthy individuals 
[18]. 
The increasing use of the internet and mobile devices has led to a 
growing interest in managing chronic pain through web-based (eHealth) 
and mobile applications [19,20]. Evidence indicates that apps have been 
successful in fostering self-management in other chronic conditions like 
diabetes [21], asthma [22], surgery [23], obesity [24], persistent pain 
[25], or colorectal [26], vascular [27] and urology management [28]. 
Pain apps have been generally classified to (1) provide general in­
formation on pain, including symptom identification and planning 
treatments, (2) track daily symptoms such as pain intensity, mood, daily 
activity, and medications, and (3) provide information on self- 
management strategies. To Chronic Pain, for example, there are some 
Apps (Curable, PainScale-Pain Diary and Coach, SuperBetter, Head­
space, etc.) [25,29] to foster self-management of pain, self-monitoring of 
symptoms and self-tailoring of strategies. 
However, only one application was developed, Recognise App [30], 
which, focusing on the first phase of GMI, accurately measures the speed 
and accuracy of making left/right discrimination judgements in painful 
conditions; this App is only available for the hand [31], foot [32], back 
[17], neck [30], shoulder [33] and knee [10], but not for the pelvic 
floor. Furthermore, to date, there is no application that uses and applies 
iMI and LRJT to the pelvic floor. 
Encouraged by the results obtained in the use of GMI and the 
mentioned app in other chronic diseases, and in view of the need to find 
complementary tools that improve the current therapeutic propositions 
in CPP, we proposed the initiative of creating a multi-platform tool (app) 
that allows working with GMI (specifically iMI with LRJT) in chronic 
diseases of the pelvic floor. 
The main goal of this work is to describe the iterative and user- 
centered process applied to the development of App-Mohedo®, a us­
able, multi-language and multi-platform app, which uses LRJT to 
improve the treatment of chronic pelvic pain conditions. This develop­
ment will also require, on the one hand, generating the 550 pelvic floor 
images that will initially make up the main content of the app, and, on 

the other, carrying out the empirical study that allows them to be 
objectively classified into different levels of difficulty. This will be 
necessary to be able to properly organize the therapy that each patient 
must carry out with the app. We also hope that our work serves as an 
example, model or guide when applying the MPIu + a user-centered 
design methodology to the development of other apps, especially in 
the field of health. 

2. Methods 

Rehabilitation researchers, the software development team, and stake­
holders (people with CPP) were involved in a collaborative, iterative and 
user-centered software development process. 
Specifically, it was decided to apply MPIu + a (processing model of 
usability and accessibility engineering) [34–36] (Fig. 1). This user- 
centered design methodology integrates and links the methodology and 
formalisms of software engineering with those of usability and accessi­
bility, and it is consistent with and follows the standards of User- 
Centered Design (ISO 9241–210) [37]. Moreover, this model does not 
have a linear or restrictive sense but promotes its free application. 
Therefore, the specific requirements of the system, the particularities of 
the users, and the results obtained in the prototyping process will 
determine the number of iterations to be performed and how they must 
be performed. These aspects are specified in a further section. 
The rehabilitation team included a group of 3 clinical researchers who 
provided expertise for individuals with pelvic floor disorders, specif­
ically in CPP, for the purposes of this project. These clinicians presented 
their idea and requirements to the computer technicians and users, 
exploring with them a design that responded to the real needs of 
everyone. The software development team was composed of 1 designer, 1 
software developer, and 2 usability experts. They provided information 
early on about the characteristics and development pipeline and phases 
of the methodology to follow. Three individuals with CPP were included 
as stakeholders and end users, and collaborated with the two teams 
throughout the process, mainly in prototyping and interface evaluation 
tasks. 
On the basis of the objectives outlined, prototypes were developed, 
which went through scoping iterations, with feedback from stakeholders 
and end users. We iteratively refined the app prototypes to meet the end 
user’s needs, while remaining true to the goals of the project. All team 
members contributed to the design ideas, explained which aspects of 
mobile interfaces, functions, and tasks they found important or 

Fig. 1. Process model of usability and accessibility engineering (MPIu + a), 
User-centered design methodology applied to the development of AppMohedo. 

3

necessary, and provided feedback regarding the interfaces. 

2.1. App prototyping (phases 1–3) 

Following the considerations of the model (MPIu + a), which pre­
sided the design of both the user interface (UI) and the user experience 
(UX), Fig. 2 summarizes the stages and steps carried out to, subse­
quently, develop them in further detail. 

2.1.1. Phase 1: Planning and requisites analysis 
The first step was to describe and specify the methodology to be 
applied to the development of the project, and then we identified and 
analyzed the main goals, requirements, and cases of use. 
Our primary objective was to develop a web-based app that would 
benefit both patients and clinicians. On the one hand, we aimed to 
provide patients with access to a trusted source of health information 
and a complementary rehabilitation strategy that they could use to 
optimize their pain. We also wanted patients to have a tool that would 
help them self-monitor their health. In addition, we needed to create a 
resource that rehabilitation clinicians could use in the management of 
their patients to better manage their chronic pelvic pain, as well as to 
access the data of their patients and have recorded variables that allow 
them to conduct future research work. 
In this phase, we established the main functions that the software 
should include, which are summarized in the cases of use diagram in 
Fig. 3: the registration of the user in the app, the access to the system 
(login), the gathering of information related to the theoretical founda­
tions that justify the use of the app, and, obviously, the realization of 
therapy sessions, along with the feedback or results that should be 
shown to the user once said session is over, in addition to the possibility 
(for both the patient and his/her therapist) of verifying the data of 
previous sessions. Given the specific orientation of the app in the field of 
health, and the pelvic-perineal specialty at which it is aimed, an open 
user profile is suggested, in terms of age and technological 
competencies. 

2.1.2. Phase 2: Low fidelity prototyping 
Once the previous phase is over, a Low Fidelity (low-fi) prototyping 
and evaluation process was carried out, highlighting the following steps: 

2.1.2.1. Sketching. Through drawing and sketch design, we captured 
the basic objectives and requirements that were described in the pre­
vious phase. We started by designing the sketches related to the main 
task: carrying out a therapy session through image laterality discrimi­
nation (Fig. 4). Then, we sketched the rest of the operations that the user 
could have to conduct before or after such main task. 
These low-fi prototypes, which are rapidly developed at a low cost, 
helped the entire team to identify requirements that had not been 
initially identified, as well as to evaluate several alternative design 
concepts and options. Furthermore, both the users and the rehabilitation 
team, since they were aware of how easily they could make changes, as 
well as of their low cost (paper sketches), felt more comfortable and 
freer to give their opinion and propose changes. 

2.1.2.2. Wireframing. After discussing the main ideas presented in 
paper in the previous step, and based on the sketches selected, the 
corresponding wireframes were carried out (Fig. 5). These two- 
dimensional illustrations of interface screens specifically focus on 
space allocation and prioritization of content, functionalities available, 
and intended behaviors, but without style, color, or graphics. 

2.1.2.3. Low-fi prototypes evaluation. In the next step, 2 usability experts 
performed a heuristic evaluation of the wireframes, with the aim of 
analyzing the conformity of the interface with some recognized rec­
ommendations and principles of usability (“heuristics”). Complemen­
tarily, a user testing process with 3 users was also carried out. The results, 
after being discussed and analyzed by the entire team, were considered 
for the following prototyping phase of higher fidelity. 

2.1.3. Phase 3: High fidelity prototyping 

2.1.3.1. Image generation. To advance in the prototyping process, we 
generated the main content of the system: the images of pelvic floor 
required to carry out the therapy sessions. To this end, and after the 
recruitment of volunteers through social networks, who signed an 
informed consent form and gave their image to the study, a total of 10 
volunteers (5 women and 5 men with different BMI) performed 10 
photoshoots with an image professional. A total of 550 images were 
obtained, which subsequently required 3 sessions of photo editing, in 
order to define the spatial laterality of the pelvic floor images as right or 
left. 

2.1.3.2. Interactive mockups design. After analyzing and evaluating the 
wireframes that correspond to the interface of the user, another step was 
made in the prototyping process, considering and incorporating total 
interactivity, visual aspects, colors, real content (the 550 images of 
pelvic floor for both sexes), etc. 
To develop this high fidelity software prototype (or interactive mockups), 
we used the prototyping tool of IONIC [38]. Since they have a simulated 
functionality and a visual appearance that is more defined than that of 
the wireframes, these prototypes are already adequate to evaluate the 
experience of the users when interacting with them, which was carried 
out through the empirical study conducted in the following step. 

2.1.3.3. User testing. This empirical study involved ten volunteer par­
ticipants (n = 10). There were 6 females and 4 males, with a mean age of 
49 years (SD=± 5). After signing the corresponding informed consent, 
all participants performed the same task, which involved registering 
oneself in the app, checking the fundamentals of the therapy, the real­
ization of at least 3 therapy sessions (in which they had to classify as 
“right” or “left” the pelvic floor images that appeared, based on whether 
Fig. 2. Main phases and steps of the App-Mohedo development, resulting in the 
application of the MPIu + a methodology. 

4

they corresponded to the right or left side of the body, respectively), and, 
lastly, checking the results. 
The Thinking Aloud technique was applied, asking the users to tell the 
member of the team about their thoughts, feelings, and opinions, both 
negative and positive, regarding the interface and its use, gathering such 
information. 
The results of this user testing were considered for the final devel­
opment of the app and, although they are detailed in the corresponding 
results section, it is necessary to point out that one of the common as­
pects in this stage was the one related to the content of the therapy. In 
this regard, it was observed that the user required an excessive amount 
of time to identify certain images, which made us consider the need to 
classify such content by difficulty levels and, therefore, to include an 
intermediate study in the development process, which is detailed below. 

2.2. App content development: Images classification results (phase 4) 

Based on the results of the previous evaluation process, it was 
necessary to establish difficulty levels that would allow the patient (end 
user) to progress in the training of the laterality task, understanding 
from the beginning that those images showing a part of the lower limb 
(widely represented in the cortex) could make the task easier compared 

to those images that showed only genitalia (represented in the cortex, 
although in lower proportion). 
We needed to establish some reference or normative values in 
healthy population that would allow us to classify such images into 
different difficulty levels, for App-Mohedo®, based on the analysis of the 
percentage of correct-wrong answers and the time required to complete 
the task, through their visualization (and classification) by healthy 
subjects. 
To this end, we partially developed the app (a simplified web 
version) and used it to such end. The frontend was programmed using 
IONIC, and the backend or engine of the web application was pro­
grammed with Laravel [39], which was complemented with Angular JS 
(JavaScript). Once deployed and put in production in an Internet server 
(in web mode only), we had the necessary functionalities to use it in the 
present study. 
Then, an observational, cross-sectional study with non-probabilistic 
sampling was conducted to assess the ability to identify and discrimi­
nate pelvic floor images among university students. The design followed 
the international recommendations for Strengthening the Reporting of 
Observational Studies in Epidemiology [40]. The data were collected 
between March and April 2022. Written informed consent forms were 
obtained from all the participants before their inclusion. All the 

Fig. 3. Main cases of use of App-Mohedo.  

Fig. 4. Some sketches resulting from the initial phase of low-fi paper prototyping.  

5

participants received an explanation of the study procedures, which 
were planned according to the ethical standards of the Declaration of 
Helsinki. Ethics approval was received from the Bioethics Committee of 
the Medical University of M´alaga (17–2022-H). 

2.2.1. Participants 
A total of 132 volunteer university students from Engineering, Ed­
ucation, Psychology, and Industrial Organization Engineering were 
recruited through their professors by non-probabilistic convenience 
sampling. 
The inclusion criteria were as follows: (a) Spanish-speaking men and 
women, (b) of legal age. The exclusion criteria were: (a) being diagnosed 
with dyslexia and/or chronic pain (CP), (b) having previously under­
gone MI training, (c) studying a degree related to Health Sciences and 
(d) completing the task unsuccessfully (exceeding the time, leaving the 
task incomplete, etc.). 

2.2.2. Outcome measures 
Left/Right judgment task (LRJT) Accuracy: The number of correct re­
sponses was expressed as a percentage of the total number of pictures 
displayed. 
Response time (RT): The mean RT for responses was called response 
time, and it was expressed in minutes and seconds. 
All variables were collected through an electronic link. 

2.2.3. Procedure 
Control task: left/right judgements of photographs of the abdomino- 
pelvi-perineal area. 
The participants undertook the left/right abdomino-pelvi-perineal 
area judgment task using the established protocol. Five hundred and 
fifty photographs of the right and left side of the body, in various posi­
tions and divided by sexes, were employed in random order using one 
part of the App-Mohedo® software. A total of 40 images were shown to 
each participant. The participants responded by pressing one button on 
their mobile if the photograph showed a left abdomino-pelvi-perineal 
area, and a different button if it showed a right abdomino-pelvi- 
perineal area. Emphasis was placed on the speed and accuracy of the 
responses. That is, the participants were instructed to make accurate 
responses as quickly as possible. A single trial constituted the task. 

2.2.4. Protocol 
A member of the research team was present in the class; the partic­
ipants were asked to make themselves comfortable to take the test. Then, 
they were given the electronic link, which gave them access to the 
completion of the basic information, as well as to the realization of the 
visual iMI test. Prior to the imagery test, they visualized a short 
explanatory video about the task. Once this video was visualized, the 
researcher asked the participants if they were ready and requested them 
to place their thumbs on the appropriate response keys for left and right 
answers. Then, the participants performed the left/right-abdomino- 
pelvi-perineal area judgement task. Until the end of the task, the 
researcher accompanied the participants to ensure that they did not 
receive any help, got distracted or performed the task the wrong way. 

2.2.5. Data analysis 
All statistical analyses were performed using The Jamovi (2021) [41] 
and R Core Team (2022) [42]. Background variables are presented as 
means and standard deviations (SD), or as frequencies and percentages. 
We used Student’s T-tests to analyze differences according to sex, and 
Pearson’s linear correlation to analyze the linear association between the 
percentage of correct answers and the response time. The results of the 
study for the classification of the images are detailed and analyzed in the 
following section. 

2.3. The final implementation of AppMohedo (phase 5) 

Considering the results of the evaluations conducted in the previous 
2 phases, and after ordering the content of the therapy in difficulty 
levels, we developed the final app and translated it from Spanish to 4 
languages (English, French, Italian and German). 
The frontend was programmed using also IONIC, and the backend or 
engine of the application was programmed using Laravel, com­
plemented with Angular JS (JavaScript). 
Once deployed and put in production in an Internet server, the 
application can be used as an app for Smartphone and Tablet (through 
markets), and as a website. 

Fig. 5. Some wireframes resulting from the phase of low-fi prototyping.  

6

3. Results 

3.1. App prototyping (phases 1 to 3) 

As a result of the continuous prototyping and evaluation process 
conducted in the first 2 phases and, especially, in phase 3 (HiFi software 
prototype user testing), and considering the problems detected and the 
suggestions of the users, it was necessary to make the changes that are 
summarized in Table 1. 

3.2. App content development: Images classification results (phase 4) 

Fig. 6 shows the flowchart of the sample of participants (initial 
sample n = 132 individuals; n final = 70 individuals). 

Table 2 presents the demographic characteristics of the participants 
who were ultimately included in the study. There were no significant 
differences between groups as a function of age. 
After grouping the data by images and limiting them to 10 s (which 
we estimated to be a reasonable response time to include them in the 
study), the results are distributed as is shown in Fig. 7, i.e., most of the 
images present a mean RT of 1–2.5 s. 
Firstly, we analyzed the behavior of the data considering the answers 
of the participants. When the data were clustered at the individual level, 
no significant relationship was found (r = 0.03) between the response 
time and the number of correct answers. 
Secondly, we analyzed the data considering the results of RT and 
Accuracy for each image (disregarding the individuals). It was observed 
that those images with which the participants took less time to respond 
had a greater percentage of correct answers (r = -0.23, p < 0.001), as can 
be observed in Fig. 8. 
For the final classification of the 550 images, LRJT-Accuracy and 
mean-RT were taken into account. Table 3 shows the results of the 
variable LRJT-Accuracy for all participants, as well as LRJT-Accuracy for 
each sex. Table 4 shows the results of the variable mean-RT (measured in 
seconds), both for the total sample and for each sex. 

Setting levels 
As was indicated above, the two analyzed variables, i.e., (1) LRJT- 
Accuracy and (2) mean-RT, of each image are the ones that were 
considered to categorize the images by difficulty levels. Therefore, LRJT- 
Accuracy was established as the first criterion, and mean-RT was estab­
lished as the second criterion. Thus, the images with 100 % LRJT-Ac­
curacy and a mean-RT of 0–2.5 s were assigned to level 1. The images 
with 75–99 % LRJT-Accuracy and a mean-RT of 2.5–5 were assigned to 
level 2. Lastly, the images with 50–75 % LRJT-Accuracy and a mean-RT 
of over 5 s were assigned to level 3 (Fig. 9). 
Regarding the characteristics of the images in each level, there is a 
common characteristic in all levels: the number of black-white images in 
each level is similar, which indicates that color does not hinder the 
identification of the image. 
However, the position of the image seems to have an impact on the 
results: in level 1, most of the images belong to the posterior part of the 
body; level 2 is predominated by lateral images of the body; and, in level 
3, most images show the anterior part of the body and/or genitalia 
(Fig. 10). 
Therefore, we can conclude that the direct relationship between the 
images of the same level is based on body position and the presence or 
absence of genitalia, regardless of whether the image is colored or black 
and white. 

3.3. The final implementation of AppMohedo (phase 5) 

Once the last improvements were applied, as a result of phases 4 and 
5, we will specify the final result of the development of the app, as well 
as the options it offers and how to use it.  

• After installing the app, the first step for all users is to register, which 
is completed by completing the following 3 steps (Fig. 11):  
1. Specification of user and password. If the user-patient is referred to the 
use of the app by a healthcare professional (who will previously have 
a code assigned), he/she must indicate this in the corresponding box 

Table 1 
Problems detected and aspects to improve as a result of the evaluation of the 
interface performed in phases 2 and 3.  

Phase 
Where is the 
change applied? 
Description 

Phase 2.3a: 
LowFi 
Heuristic 
evaluation 

General 
Always place the “back to main menu” 
(or previous screen) icon at the upper 
left corner, and the “exit” icon at the 
upper right corner (it is adopted by 
convention, and by coherence and 
consistency with the interface).  
General 
Modify the size of some controls, and 
further separate them from each other 
and from the borders of the screen.  
Results of one session 
Initially, the sessions were labelled as 
“today@hhmm”. Now we propose 
using a more friendly and natural 
language (for instance: Today, at hh: 
mm). The same goes for the days (we 
change from 20/10 to 20oct).  
Theoretical 
fundamentals of the 
app: 

Include a FAQ and help section. 

Phase 2.3b: 
LowFi User 
Testing 

Theoretical 
fundamentals of the 
app 

Rename this section.  

Graph of results 
Change the vertical bar graph (which 
was initially used to show the results of 
correct answers) for another graph of 3 
superimposed lines (one for correct 
answers, another one for time, and the 
third one for the degree of pain). 
Phase 3: 
HiFi User 
Testing 

Indicator of the 
degree of pain 
Modify the spinner (which is used to 
indicate the current degree of pain at 
the beginning of each session) so that it 
does not have graded scales or words 
that may posed doubts (only the bar, 
without values)  
Theoretical 
fundamentals of the 
app 

Include an entry in the FAQ section 
about what the user will obtain at the 
end of the session (information and 
encouragement to go on, since the aim 
is not to finish as soon as possible, but 
to judge laterality the best they can)   
Include an explanatory video showing 
the use of the app (before, it was only 
available once the “begin session” 
option was selected). In the tests, 
different users stated that, after 
watching the video (in some cases they 
went straight to it), they had a clearer 
idea of what they were going to do.   
Incorporate a message related to the 
essence of the exercise: the good 
evaluation of laterality versus speed.  
Table of results of 
one session 
Highlight in red the incorrect answers.  

Graph of results 
Although the vertical bar graph 
(initially used to show the results) had 
been replaced with another graph with 
3 lines, it is now necessary to offer the 
possibility of hiding/showing each of 
them individually.   
Include a very clear caption describing 
the previous function.   
Refine the colors of the three lines of 
the graph, increasing their contrast, 
and giving them the names of the 
parameters they represent (correct 
answers, time and pain).  

7

of the registration if he/she allows such professional to access his/ 
her information and evolution.  
2. User sex selection. This will influence the obtained data and the 
subsequent therapy, as the latter will be adapted to the sex selected.  
3. Personal-clinical profile: in addition to age, weight, and height, it is 
important to introduce questions that help to discriminate whether 
the user is a CPP patient or not, since, apart from a professional who 
has made the clinical diagnosis, the app can be accessed by other 
users. In this regard, we included questions from the validated 
questionnaire CPP-Mohedo [43]. Similarly, and in order to objectify 
the efficacy of the therapy, a visual analogical scale was also 
included, through which the user, via slider, must indicate her/his 

level of pain in the last week. Both questions allow discriminating 
whether the user is or is not a CPP patient, thus concluding the 
“registration” process. 

Once registered, the user can use the app, with the possibility of 
choosing one of the following options: (a) modifying his/her registration 
data, (b) obtaining information about the scientific foundation of the iMI 
therapy, (c) performing a therapy session, or (d) checking the results of 
previous therapy sessions. These options are always available in the 
menu of the app. Next, we describe options (c) and (d).  

• When the user is registered, he/she can initiate a therapy session of 
image laterality discrimination, by activating the “start” command in 
the main menu. From this moment, he/she will receive a total of 15 
random images from the corresponding difficulty level and will have 
to classify them as “right” or “left”. 
After completing the task, the user will receive a message indi­
cating that the session is over, along with a report of her/his results, 
and she/he will not be allowed to perform another session in the next 
4 h. The transition from one difficulty level to the other was 

Fig. 6. Flowchart of the sample.  

Table 2 
Descriptive statistics of demographic variables.   

Mean (SD) 
Range 
p value 

Age (n = 70) 
22.4 ± 4.3 
18.3 – 46.9 
0.579a 

Age by sex    
Woman (n = 37) 
22.7 ± 5.6 
18.3 – 46.9  
Man (n = 33) 
22.1 ± 2 
18.4 – 26.5  
Degree 
Percentage   
Degree of Industrial Technology 
Engineering 
15.71 %   

Psychology 
21.43 %   
Primary Education 
35.71 %   
Industrial Organization Engineering 
27.14 %   
a Linear Model ANOVA     

Fig. 7. By relating RT to the number of visualizations of the images, and 
limiting the data to 10 s, a more homogeneous distribution of the data 
is observed. 

Fig. 8. Results grouped by images. RT is positively related to the percentage of 
correct answers (Accuracy). Moreover, some data generate heterogeneity. 

Table 3 
Statistics of the variable percentage of correct answers.   

Mean (SD) 
Range 
p value 

Percentage of correct answers (n = 70) 
82.9 ±
18.1 
10.0–––100.00 
0.091a 

Percentage of correct answers by 
sex    
Woman (n = 37) 
79.4 ±
16.6 
47.5–100.0  

Man (n = 33) 
86.7 ±
19.2 
10.0– 100.0   

a Linear Model ANOVA. 

Table 4 
Statistics of the variable mean Response Time (measured in seconds).   

Mean (SD) 
Range 
p value 

Mean response time (n = 70) 
2.0 ± 0.5 
1.3 – 3.3 
0.463a 

Mean response time by sex    
Woman (n = 37) 
2.0 ± 0.6 
1.3 – 3.3  
Man (n = 33) 
1.9 ± 0.4 
1.3– 2.8   

a Linear Model ANOVA. 

8

programmed to occur when the user completes 3 sessions with over 
80 % accuracy. 
• The user’s need for feedback, which is important for the appropria­

tion of the app (i.e., making it one’s own) and, therefore, for the 
reliability of its correct use, is materialized in the system of levels 

Fig. 9. Classification of images by difficulty level according to accuracy and response time.  

Fig. 10. Distribution of each type of image by levels.  

9

that are passed (advance) and in the table of results shown (Fig. 12). 
This information is expanded, being also offered for other time 
ranges (day, week, or month) and graphically, using a format of lines 
that represent the values (as %) that correspond to the number of 
correct answers, time used, and the level of pain stated (Fig. 12). 

4. Discussion 

The use of GMI and, specifically, LRJT proved to be a reliable, non- 
intrusive method with no adverse effects, which make it an evaluation 
technique to complement the therapeutic treatment of any chronic pain, 
including CPP. 
This is the first work to describe the development of an app to 

Fig. 11. Screens of user registration in App-Mohedo®.  

Fig. 12. Results screens: (a) after completing a therapy session and (b) after selecting the visualization of the graph that corresponds to the last month.  

10

complement the management of people with chronic pelvic pain. Spe­
cifically, App-Mohedo® is a multi-platform tool designed for mobile 
devices that, after organizing and classifying its images in difficulty 
levels, allows evaluating, training, and improving the capacity of the 
individual to assess whether the observed image of the abdomino-pelvi- 
perineal area belongs to the left or right side of the body. During this 
task, both accuracy (number of correct answers) and RT (response time) 
are analyzed, since these parameters are correlated with pain and 
potentially altered in pain conditions such as CPP. 

4.1. Concerning the design and development of the app 

The development of this tool, following a collaborative, user- 
centered methodology, was aimed at meeting quick prototyping and 
evaluation objectives, in order to obtain, from the very beginning, 
feedback from the users, who also participated throughout the entire 
design process. 
An easy-to-use app was obtained, which can be adapted to different 
devices, with a friendly and clear design, based on light colors and clear 
fonts, prioritizing, and optimizing the image visualization space. The 
elements of the user interface (buttons, sliders, etc.) were designed with 
standard format and comfortable size for all types of users. 
It is important to point out that the user is actively always helped, 
with contextual information and tips. Moreover, for the discrimination 
task, an explanatory video is available for visualization. 
One of the most relevant aspects of the tests conducted with the users 
is that an irregular understanding of the multivalued bar graphs 
(included in the first prototypes) was detected, thus we decided to 
switch to the superimposed lines format, with one line per datum, which 
can be shown/hidden by pressing some controls. This enables individual 
reading and its superimposed visualization, at will, and it turned out to 
be more useful and clearer for the users (Fig. 12). 
Furthermore, multiplatform development tools were used, where 
codification is performed only once for the different types of mobile 
devices. This allows making quick changes in the design and behavior of 
the application. This tool does not require intense data processing, but 
rather a clean and understandable interface. Platform native code 
development would have been a costly and unnecessary delay in this 
work. 

4.2. Concerning the content: The images and their classification in 
difficulty levels 

A small number of the images generated and analyzed did not meet 
the two criteria of a certain level; that is, by LFJT Accuracy they belong 
to one level, and by mean RT they belong to the other. After conducting 
a subsequent study of the characteristics of the images of each level, the 
researchers decided, after some consensual rounds and based on the 
peculiar characteristics of the image (position of the subject, rotational 
component, presence or absence of genitalia, etc.) their ultimate allo­
cation to their corresponding level. The future analysis of such images 
with the tools offered by artificial intelligence may shed light on this 
matter, considering and creating more objective variables for this 
purpose. 
The information obtained from the observation of the images of each 
level indicates the difficulty of recognizing the frontal pelvic zone, 
especially the genital area, in both healthy men and women, which we 
discuss below. 
Until recently, there has been a lack of research on the representation 
of the genitalia in the cerebral cortex. Since the publication of the well- 
known somato sensory homunculus (1950), which represents the func­
tional somatotopic organization of the primary sensory cortex, 
numerous studies have added new information to what is known about 
the somatosensory cortical representation of the human body. The study 
conducted by Cazala F. in 2015 tentatively suggests that there are two 
distinct representations of genital sensations in primary somatosensory 

cortex (SI)[44]. 
In addition, the cortical representation of male and female genitals, 
unlike that of the rest of the body, undergoes late expansion during 
puberty and is modulated by sexual experience [45]. Genital self-image 
is an emerging aspect of body image relevant to sexual functioning and 
sexual satisfaction [46]. These contributions to the field of body image 
and sexual experience are important, since it is demonstrated that 
genital self-image, over and above general feelings about one’s body, 
can influence sexual satisfaction and the experience of sexual problems 
and, therefore, result in greater knowledge about the genital area [46]. 
Alternatively, negative social attitudes towards adolescent sexuality 
suggest that specific dimensions of sexual self-concept could decline 
throughout adolescence, or in earlier stages and increase later. These 
findings could indicate that an accumulation of experiences generally 
bolsters confidence and reduces negativity about sexual matters, or that 
young women without intercourse experience begin to view sex in more 
positive terms as they gain confidence in pre-intercourse activities or 
anticipate their first sexual encounter. However, it should be noted that 
both women and men report negative genital self-image [45]. 
On the other hand, it is known that positive genital self-image is 
positively related to sexual desire and positive body perception. 
In addition to the sensitive part that comprises the genital area, it is 
known that there is poor proprioception of the pelvic muscles, which can 
be attributed to the lack of visual stimuli and the scarce joint movement 
during contraction. This proprioceptive deficit is combined with a lack 
of knowledge about one’s own pelvic and genital area [47]. 
It is clear that the LD task of GMI with the images presented to our 
sample required the activation of brain areas, although we cannot 
confirm the influence of a proprioceptive deficit, poor self-image or bad 
sexual experiences. We can only assert that our participants found it 
more difficult to plan, adjust, automatize, and voluntarily execute pos­
tures and/or movements shown in the images of genitalia. It would be 
interesting for future studies to gather these variables and estimate their 
relationship with our results. 
Although the majority of studies that use LRJT have not controlled 
for iMI ability and cognitive factors such as concentration/attention 
[46], the present results suggest that such control is necessary when 
attempting to understand the different processes involved in LRJT per­
formance. Therefore, this study excluded those individuals who took 
over 10 s to identify an image, considering it a lack of concentration in 
the assigned task. 

4.3. Conclusion 

This paper describes the iterative and user-centered process applied 
to the development of the App-Mohedo®, which was created to be used 
as a complementary therapeutic tool in the management of CPP patients, 
through iMI and laterality judgement training. We also intend our work 
to serve as an example, model or guide when applying the MPIu + a user 
centered methodology to the development of new apps in the field of 
health (and even in other fields). Our work also includes the generation 
of the main content of the app, 550 pelvic floor images, as well as the 
subsequent empirical study that allowed us to classify them into 3 dif­
ficulty levels, which is fundamental to be able to organize and plan the 
patients’ therapy sessions with the app properly. 
The app has the potential to both reinforce information provided 
during a rehabilitation intervention and provide complementary reha­
bilitation strategies to users who can engage in self-management inde­
pendently. It may strengthen the patient’s relationship with the 
therapist, increase engagement, and enable the patient to proactively 
address concerns related to their rehabilitation. 
The next step is to test the app as a therapeutic tool (by means of a 
Randomized Clinical Trial) to verify whether training with such images 
really helps to modulate pain intensity and to improve the quality of life 
of these patients, which is the end goal that motivates the creation and 
development of this app. 

11

Summary table. 
What was already known on the topic?  

• Chronic Pelvic Pain (CPP) is among the most prevalent and costly 
healthcare problems.  
• Graded motor imagery (GMI) is a therapeutic tool that has been 
successfully used to improve pain in several chronic conditions, 
especially using Implicit Motor Imagery (iMI) and Left Right 
Judgement Task (LRJT). 
• To date, only one application using iMI with LRJT has been devel­

oped to improve the treatment of other chronic pain conditions (in 
hands, feet, back, neck, shoulders and knees), but not for the pelvic 
floor.  
• To date, there is no app that uses and applies iMI with LRJT to 
improve the CPP. 

What this study added to our knowledge?  

• App-Mohedo® is the first multi-platform, multi-language, and easy- 
to-use mobile application that, through iMI with LRJT, and with an 
adequate bank of images classified into three levels of difficulty, can 
be used as a complementary therapeutic tool in the treatment of 
patients with CPP.  
• The process follows for the development of this App can also serve as 
an example, model or guide when applying a user-centered meth­
odology, as MPIu + a, to the development of other apps, especially in 
the field of health. 

CRediT authorship contribution statement 

Esther Díaz-Mohedo: Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Investi­
gation, Methodology, Supervision, Validation, Writing – original draft, 
Writing – review & editing. Antonio L. Carrillo-Le´on: Conceptualiza­
tion, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Software, Supervi­
sion, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. Andr´es 
Calvache-Mateo: Conceptualization, Investigation, Validation, Writing 
– review & editing. Magdalena Ptak: Conceptualization, Investigation, 
Validation, Writing – review & editing. Natalia Romero-Franco: 
Conceptualization, Investigation, Validation, Writing – review & edit­
ing. Juan Carlos-Fern´andez: Conceptualization, Investigation, Vali­
dation, Writing – review & editing.