01

Promoting informed decision 
making about maternal pertussis 
vaccination: the systematic 
development of an online tailored 
decision aid and a 
centering-based group antenatal 
care intervention

Charlotte Anraad 1,2*, Pepijn van Empelen 2, Robert A. C. Ruiter 1, 
Marlies Rijnders 2, Katja van Groessen 3 and Hilde M. van Keulen 2

1 Department of Work and Social Psychology, Faculty of Psychology and Neuroscience, Maastricht 
University, Maastricht, Netherlands, 2 TNO Child Health, Netherlands Organization for Applied 
Scientific Research, Leiden, Netherlands, 3 Stichting CenteringHealthcare Nederland, Zutphen, 
Netherlands

Materials and methods: The 6-step Intervention Mapping (IM) protocol was 
used for the development of an online tailored decision aid and Centering 
Pregnancy-based Group Antenatal Care (CP) intervention. A needs assessment 
was done using empirical literature and conducting a survey and focus groups 
(1), intervention objectives were formulated at the behavior and determinants 
levels (2), theoretical methods of behavior change were selected and translated 
into practical applications (3), which were further developed into the two 
interventions using user-centered design (4). Finally, plans were developed for 
implementation (5), and evaluation (6) of the interventions.

Results: The needs assessment showed that pregnant women often based their 
decision about MPV on information sourced online and conversations with their 
partners, obstetric care providers, and peers. Responding to these findings, 
we  systematically developed two interactive, theory-based interventions. 
We  created an online tailored decision aid, subjecting it to four iterations of 
testing among pregnant women, including those with low literacy levels. 
Participants evaluated prototypes of the intervention positively on relevance 
and usability. In addition, a CP intervention was developed with midwives.

Conclusion: Using IM resulted in the creation of an online decision aid and 
CP intervention to promote informed decision making regarding MPV. This 
description of the systematic development of the interventions not only serves 
to illustrate design rationales, it will also aid the interpretation of the evaluation of 

02

Materials and methods

IM is an approach designed for the systematic development of 
health promotion and behavior change programs. It offers a 
framework that facilitates the design, planning, implementation, and 
evaluation of health promotion interventions.

IM consists of six steps. Step 1 entails constructing a logic model 
of the problem. In this step, we  identify the behavioral and 
environmental causes of the problem, and the underlying determinants 
reflected as cognitions, beliefs, and feelings of members of the at-risk 
population and environmental decision-makers. To accomplish this, 
we reviewed literature, conducted a survey study [n = 611, described 
at (6, 15)] and a focus-group study. We conducted four focus-group 
interviews involving a total of 19 pregnant women who were aged 
25–37, and recruited at midwife clinics. In the Netherlands, midwifery 
practices are the standard care option for prenatal care. In case of a 
complicated pregnancy, pregnant individuals go to a gynecologist 
instead. As 90% of pregnant individuals start their prenatal care at a 
midwifery clinic (16), recruitment at a midwifery clinic includes a 
wide range of members of the target group. Among the 19 participants, 
four already had a child. Nine were college or university-level 
educated, ten had a vocational or practical education. Four had 
already received the vaccination, and seven already had the intention 
to get the vaccination prior to the interview. The 1.5-h focus-groups 
were semi-structured and focused on factors associated with the 
decision to accept or refuse MPV, how pregnant individuals perceive 
the decision-making process, and their evaluation of sample 
information about MPV. The focus-groups were transcribed and 
analyzed using thematic coding.

In Step 2 of the IM protocol, performance objectives (POs) are 
formulated. These POs represent the (sub)behaviors that must 
be performed by the target group in order to reach the intervention 
goal. Also, for each PO and its determinants, change objectives are 
formulated. This results in a matrix outlining pathways for change in 
informed decision making and acceptance of MPV, serving as the core

03

rationale for the intervention design. Step 3 concerns the design of the 
intervention program and its themes, components, scope, and 
sequence. This step includes the selection of theory-based intervention 
methods and the translation of these methods into practical 
applications, taking into account the parameters for the effectiveness 
of these methods. In Step 4, the methods and practical applications are 
being creatively translated into a cohesive intervention during the 
production phase, including pretesting of prototypes. In Step 5, the 
use of the intervention in real-life settings is carefully planned to 
ensure that the intervention will be adopted by the intended users and 
implemented according to the protocol to ensure sustained, long-term 
use of the intervention. The work done to ensure implementation does 
not take place after the development of the interventions, but takes 
place in parallel with the other steps. Finally, Step 6 concerns the 
planning of the process and effect evaluation of the intervention to 
measure program implementation and outcomes (11). Although the 
steps are presented as a linear process and outcomes of earlier steps 
inform later ones, it is important to note that IM is completed in an 
iterative way.

Results

IM step 1—needs assessment/logic model 
of the problem

Aims of the needs assessment

The needs assessment aimed to identify factors associated with the 
intention to accept MPV, and questions and information needs of 
pregnant individuals. This was examined with a qualitative study, 
conducting focus-group interviews with pregnant women (n = 19), a 
survey study (n = 611), and by reviewing literature (cited below).

Factors associated with the intention to accept 
MPV

The participants of the focus-group study indicated that reasons 
for accepting MPV included protection of their child, vaccine safety 
in the short and long term, recommendation from their GP or 
obstetric care provider, and the child being able to skip their first 
vaccination at 6 weeks of age. Additionally, they indicated that support 
from their partners and experiences from other women in their circles 
were important for their decision; some experienced social pressure 
when someone important to them opposed their decision. Conversely, 
reasons for refusing MPV were doubt, religious beliefs, a lack of trust 
in the NIP and feeling overwhelmed with the high amount of 
preventive or care interventions during pregnancy. These results were 
also found in the Dutch context in our previous survey study, where 
we studied determinants of the intention to accept MPV within the 
framework of the Theory of Planned Behavior and the Health Belief 
Model (6, 15, 17). Beliefs that the vaccine might cause harm was 
associated with a low vaccination intention, while beliefs that the 
vaccine was effective, safe, and beneficial for both mother and child 
were factors associated with a higher vaccination intention and 
uptake. Additionally, perceived susceptibility to infection and 
perceived severity of infection were related to a higher vaccination 
intention and uptake. Social norms, anticipated regret of accepting the 
vaccine, fear of the vaccine and of whooping cough, and decisional 
certainty were found to influence MPV intention. Under low levels of 

decisional certainty, intention to accept MPV was low, indicating that 
an ambivalent attitude about the vaccine leads to a lower uptake. 
Instead, promoting a robust, informed decision is likely to lead to a 
higher uptake of MPV (6). Our results are in line with findings from 
a systematic review by Kilich et  al. (18). From this review, 
recommendation from a health-care professional to get vaccinated 
was also found to be of importance (13). Additionally, knowledge is 
considered a prerequisite for making an informed decision (8), and 
perceived control is thought to be of influence based on the theory of 
planned behavior (19). Finally, affect, in addition to cognitive factors, 
is thought to be of influence on vaccine-decision making (20). The 
factors listed about are also covered in models that specifically 
describe vaccine hesitancy. For example in the 3C model of vaccine 
hesitancy by the SAGE working group on vaccine hesitancy, in which 
determinants are categorized into confidence, complacency, and 
constraints (21).

Information needs

Participants in our focus-group study frequently sought online 
information about pregnancy and health, primarily on websites and 
social media. Another important source of information was other 
(previously) pregnant women. When presented with examples of 
information about MPV targeted at pregnant women, participants 
positively evaluated materials with a clean layout, a moderate amount 
of text with clear sub-headings, a reliable source, personal experiences 
of other women, and relevant images and explanatory videos. 
Conversely, information that was perceived as patronizing or 
condescending was evaluated negatively.

Among pregnant participants in our survey study (n = 202) (15), 
55% a desire for assistance in making a decision about MPV (15). Of 
this group, 60% preferred a conversation with a healthcare 
professional, and 42% wanted to use an online decision aid. Most 
participants preferred to be informed by their obstetric caregiver. 
Information was desired about risks of side-effects in the mother and 
the baby, of the baby getting whooping cough, about the effectiveness 
of the vaccine, the symptoms of whooping cough, and possible 
alternatives for the vaccine. Information was preferably received 
through a brochure or letter (70%) or a website (49%).

IM step 2—program outcomes and 
objectives—logic model of change

Program outcomes and objectives

Building on the identified problem and needs we formulated the 
following primary program outcome: pregnant women make an 
informed decision about MPV-uptake, and act upon that decision. 
The associated behavioral outcome is as follows: pregnant women 
make an informed decision about MPV-uptake and experience low or 
no decisional conflict. To achieve these outcomes, we have formulated 
the following performance objectives: (PO1) the pregnant women 
make an informed decision about the MPV, (PO2) make an 
appointment to get MPV, (PO3) ask questions about MPV if one has 
any, and (PO4) go to the Youth Health Centre to get MPV.

Behavioral determinants

Next, we  identified the behavioral determinants that could 
potentially mediate a change in the specified performance objective,

04

based on a review of existing literature (18) and our survey study (6). 
We selected all determinants deemed important based on the needs 
assessment and then selected those that were changeable. For example, 
for PO1 (making an informed decision), the selected determinants 
are: knowledge, attitude toward MPV, beliefs about safety, decisional 
certainty, injunctive norm, anticipated regret of vaccinating, beliefs 
about the effectiveness of MPV, negative and positive outcome 
expectancies of accepting MPV, social pressure, perceived control, 
positive and negative affect, risk perceptions and trust in the (provider 
of the) NIP (6, 18). For PO2, regarding making an appointment to get 
MPV, the selected determinants are knowledge, attitude, and perceived 
control about making the appointment. For PO3, regarding asking 
questions about MPV, the selected determinants are perceived control 
and trust in the (provider of) the NIP. For PO4, going to the Youth 
Health Centre to get the vaccine, selected determinants were 
knowledge, attitude, and perceived control. Supplementary Table S1 
shows a complete overview of the performance objectives and the 
determinants targeted.

Change objectives

Change Objectives (COs) were subsequently formulated based on 
the intersecting of determinants with the performance objectives. 
Change objectives specify what the target audience should learn in 
relation to a determinant to fulfill the performance objective. Table 1 
shows a sample of change objectives (for a complete overview, see 
Supplementary Table S1).

IM step 3—program design

This step describes the rationale of the intervention types chosen, 
based on the needs assessment and proximal program outcomes 
(change objectives). The selection of theoretical methods and their 
applications is based on the identified determinants and 
change objectives.

Because in the needs assessment pregnant women indicated 
searching for information online, and 42% in the survey indicated 
wanting to use an online decision aid, we decided to develop an 
online, tailored decision aid. Online interventions have the potential 

to reach large audiences at a low cost. Online tailoring is “a 
combination of strategies and information intended to reach one 
specific person based on characteristics that are unique to that person, 
related to the outcome of interest, and derived from an individual 
assessment” (22). Online tailored interventions have demonstrated 
great effectiveness to change health behavior than generic 
interventions (23).

However, even though online interventions can be effective, the 
reach of at-risk populations (i.e., those with low (health) literacy and 
socio-economic status) is more challenging (23, 24). Therefore, aside 
from making the online intervention as easily accessible as possible, 
we additionally developed an intervention based on the Centering 
methodology, a method that has become more common in the context 
of pregnancy (Centering Pregnancy; CP). CP is group-based prenatal 
care where individual consultations are replaced with group sessions, 
led by a midwife or other obstetric-care provider (25). Additionally, 
healthcare professionals play a potentially pivotal role in the decision 
making about vaccinations, and therefore an intervention where they 
are closely involved may have the potential to be  effective (13). 
Because the group sessions are much longer (90–120 min) compared 
to individual sessions, there is more time for education, self-
management, skills building, and building trust between caregiver and 
clients (26–28).

CP is associated with better pregnancy outcomes and an increase 
the initiation of breastfeeding compared to individual care. Pregnant 
women felt more empowered to voice opinions about care and 
indicated that they were more likely to feel that their wishes were 
listened to by care providers (29). Currently, CP has been adopted in 
approximately 35% of midwifery clinics in the Netherlands and has 
proven to be an effective strategy for reaching at-risk populations 
(29–31).

Theoretical methods and practical applications

For each determinant, we identified theory-based methods of 
change with the help of the taxonomy of behavior change methods of 
Kok et al. (32).

Knowledge and outcome expectancies were targeted using 
consciousness-raising (17, 33) about the MPV and pertussis in 
babies. Active learning (34, 35), feedback (36), and belief selection 

TABLE 1  Examples of change objectives, grouped per determinant.

A complete overview can be found in Supplementary Table S1.

05

(19) were used to enhance the processing of information by 
participants. They answered questions about their beliefs before 
being given tailored feedback. Chunking (37) was applied to avoid 
information overload. In the CP intervention facilitative discussion 
were applied, encouraging participants to deliberate on the 
information, and encourage active participation, asking questions, 
in order to get to the issues that were most relevant for participants. 
Within CP, questions and concerns of pregnant women are leading 
for the conversation. Learning from other pregnant women by 
sharing and discussing experiences and considerations is 
encouraged (25).

To target attitude, we applied “feedback on benefits and barriers” 
(38) to help participants draw up a balance of their considerations. 
Furthermore in CP, arguments for and against MPV were discussed. 
For example, this was done by letting participants formulate questions 
and facilitating the group to find the answers.

Risk perception was targeted using scenario-based risk 
information (39). Risk information was presented using natural 
frequencies (e.g., 1 out of 100) to enhance the understandability of 
probabilities (40).

To target perceived control, injunctive norm, and social pressure, 
we  used the methods “resistance to social pressure” (19) and 
“information about others approval” (41, 42). Participants were 
facilitated to prepare conversations and questions about MPV for 
important others or healthcare providers. Furthermore, we  used 
modeling (36, 43), allowing participants to read about or talk about 
other’s experiences about how to deal with making the decision.

Details about how the methods and applications were used in the 
interventions are described in IM step 4. Supplementary Table S2 
specifies which methods were used in each component of both 
interventions. Supplementary Table S3 provides a comprehensive 
overview of the theories selected for each determinant and their 
practical applications.

IM step 4—program production

Theme, components, scope, and sequence

The online tailored decision aid and CP intervention were created 
in parallel. Both interventions can be used separately or combined. 
This section outlines the operationalization of the methods in 
both interventions.

The online decision aid

The online decision aid was created mobile-first in the form of a 
progressive web app because participants in the qualitative study (IM 
step 1) indicated a preference for using their mobile telephones most 
to search for pregnancy-related information online. During the 
development process, we aimed to meet the International Patient 
Decision Aid Standards (IPDAS) criteria for decision aids (44).

The online decision aid consisted of three main components: (1) 
information tiles, (2) a module called “my choice,” and (3) a “make an 
appointment” module. Figure 1 presents screenshots of selected pages 
in the different components of the intervention. Participants were 
directed or “tunneled” from one page to the next, encouraging them 
to explore more components. They could also use the menu for 
navigation (45). Participants could visit the intervention as many 
times as they wished.

Participants were led, if they chose to follow the offered sequence, 
to the information component first (see Figure  1A). Because 
information is evaluated as more comprehensive when offered in the 
preferred mode (46), participants could choose if they preferred to 
watch a video, read text, or have the text read aloud. The text was 
chunked into basic information, automatically displayed, and “more 
information,” to prevent information overload (37). Sources of 
information were also provided, in line with the International Patient 
Decision Aid Standards (47). Videos showed a dialog between a 
pregnant woman and a midwife, along with visual organizers to 
explain concepts such as “how does the vaccine work?” and the 
rationale for administering MPV during pregnancy. The information 
pages stimulated active learning by providing “test your knowledge” 
questions. Participants could answer questions with true or false, and 
immediate feedback was provided (34–36, 48). The information 
provided on the information pages was checked for quality by a 
medical advisor of the National Institute for Public Health and the 
Environment, the RIVM.

The “my choice” component was divided into three submodules. 
The first, “test your knowledge” (Figure 1B), uses active learning and 
feedback to provide the most basic and relevant information about 
the vaccine (34–36, 48). The second, “weighing pros and cons” 
(Figure  1C), was aimed at improving decisional certainty by 
providing a tailored overview of the participants’ considerations 
about the MPV using a decisional balance (49). This exercise allows 
listing potential worries and feelings about MPV. Participants were 
presented with possible pros and cons of MPV and could indicate 
the extent to which these applied to them. Subsequently, participants 
were shown a customized overview of their results, without imposing 
a final judgment or recommendation. We did not include such a 
recommendation because some focus-group participants (IM step 1) 
negatively assessed materials that pressured them or directed them 
toward a specific choice. The third exercise was called “prepare a 
conversation about the vaccine” (Figure  1D). In this chat-like 
conversational module participants prepared for a conversation with 
a significant other, indicating what they wanted to gain from a 
conversation with an important social referent or health care 
provider, and what their feelings, needs, and questions were with 
regard to MPV. The module targeted dealing with social pressure 
and injunctive norm with regard to MPV by applying resistance to 
social pressure (19) and using non-violent communication (50). 
Participants received a customized overview of their responses that 
could be  used in a conversation with an important other or 
healthcare provider.

The third component of the intervention was the “make an 
appointment” feature (Figure 1E). We included this to simplify the 
process of scheduling an MPV appointment, aiming to lower barriers 
for those who had decided in favor of the vaccine. We provided a 
postcode-based location finder where participants could make 
an appointment.

The DA meets the six qualifying criteria as defined by the IPDASi 
v4.0 guidelines (44). Aside from qualifying criteria, the IPDAS 
guidelines also contain certification criteria, quality criteria and 
evaluation criteria. The DA complies with five out of six certification 
criteria (four additional criteria that are only applicable to DAs about 
screening tests are not relevant for our DA). The certification criterion 
that our DA does not comply with, is the inclusion of author 
information and credentials in the DA. Out of 23 quality criteria

06

(excluding the criteria for screening test DAs), the DA meets 18. A 
criterion that was not met was “The patient DA (or associated 
documentation) describes the quality of the research evidence used.” 
We did not do this in order not to overwhelm participants with 
information, especially since we aimed to make the DA inclusive for 
low-literate users. We did include references to the research evidence 
used. Another unmet criterion was “The patient DA includes 
authors’/developers’ credentials or qualifications.” The DA did include 
organizational credentials, but not that of the authors themselves. In 
addition, the DA did not report readability levels, but was instead 
tested with low-literate users to ensure readability. We also included 
a read-aloud option to improve readability. Whether the DA meets 
the evaluation quality criteria is assessed in the evaluation study. All 
other criteria with regard to development (the inclusion of users and 
professionals in the development process), evidence, guidance, 
values, probabilities and (balance of) information were met (44).

The centering pregnancy MPV information and 
decision making module

Within CP sessions participants are gathered in a circle. There are 
10 sessions in total. Each session has an overall plan, but emphases 
may differ based on the group’s needs. Because of the long sessions 
(90 min) and the opportunity to socialize, group cohesion takes shape 
in which women feel supported and safe. The leadership of the 
midwife is transparent and facilitative. Women are empowered by 
being involved in check-ups and self-care activities, so they learn to 
understand how their body is changing during pregnancy. These 
principles of CP are founded by the Midwifery Model of Care, and 
derived from social-cognitive theory, targeting social support and self-
efficacy enhancement (51). During each session, issues are discussed 
in an interactive way.

Within existing CP groups, the possibility to get the MPV is 
discussed during the second CP meeting, around 16 or 20 weeks 
of pregnancy. First, the midwife identifies the group needs, by 
asking participants about what they already know and 
think of MPV.

Second, the midwife decides which CP method to apply in order 
to convey information about MPV. Examples of CP methods, 
incorporating active learning, included quizzes that required 
participants to determine the accuracy of statements about MPV, 
followed by immediate feedback. Another method involved 
participants formulating questions and encouraging group 
discussions, all in line with principles that centered on questioning, 
reflection, and autonomy. Participants were facilitated to arrive to 
their own answers, a process during which the midwife guides the 
conversation and summarizes learning points by asking questions and 
encouraging participants to draw conclusions, based on the facts that 
were provided. Depending on the input of the participants, specific 
topics were further explored. The consequences of vaccinating versus 
not vaccinating are discussed, incorrect beliefs about safety and 
effectiveness of MPV are deconstructed, and correct beliefs about 
safety and effectiveness are strengthened, confirmed, or if needed, 
introduced.

Third, upon having discussed some of the facts around MPV, 
participants are encouraged to actively think about what the 
information they received means for their decision about MPV, and 
share this with the group if they wish to. Participants are further 
encouraged to voice any potential concerns and considerations. A 
method used to do this is to collectively make a list of pros and cons 
of getting the MPV and to individually write down those that are 
evaluated as most personally relevant. Participants share their 
thoughts on the MPV, and learn how to address these through 
discussing the MPV and voicing their concerns and beliefs, and seeing 
other participants do this.

Fourth, participants who are still in doubt about MPV are 
encouraged to contemplate, express, and pursue what they need to 
make a decision that they felt comfortable with. This might involve 
seeking individual consultation with the doctor providing the vaccine, 
or a conversation with the partner or other important person. 
Participants are then provided with practical information about how 
to get the vaccine, to make it as easy as possible to get MPV if they 
chose to do so.

07

Pre-testing intervention prototypes

We used user-centered design to create the online decision aid, 
aiming to meet the needs and user preferences of the target group. 
We involved the target group in four iterations during the development 
process. In all pre-tests, we involved pregnant women of diverse ages 
and backgrounds. The aim of the pre-tests was to get participants’ 
feedback on the intervention’s clarity, relevance, usability, and 
overall structure.

In the initial pre-test, a focus group consisting of six pregnant 
women was presented with a static intervention prototype. The 
prototype featured a feedback system where participants were first to 
answer a question before receiving tailored feedback. However, 
participants expressed a preference for immediate access to the 
information without the initial question. They also preferred not 
having to indicate in which form they wanted to see information: 
video or text, but to have both options directly available. Participants 
further wanted to have more control over the information 
they received.

In the second iteration, five pregnant women individually used an 
interactive prototype of the intervention during think-aloud sessions. 
Participants generally evaluated the intervention positively and found 
it relevant. Based on their feedback, we made several improvements, 
including shortening and chunking the texts, refining sub-topic 
divisions, incorporating more sub-headings, and consulting a text-
writer specialized in writing health-information texts suitable for both 
low-literate and high-literate users.

The third iteration featured a full, interactive version of the 
intervention, with six pregnant women individually using the 
intervention individually during a think-aloud session. 
Participants indicated wanting to have more explanatory and 
guiding text in the intervention. We incorporated this feedback 
and included an introduction video on the homepage that explains 
the purpose of the web app. Participants further indicated a 
preference for direct feedback during the knowledge quiz, which 
we implemented. To improve usability, alterations in wording and 
placement of buttons were made based on the evaluation of 
the participants.

The fourth iteration was a usability test with four low-literate users 
in individual think-aloud sessions. These participants were not 
pregnant. The aim of the test was to evaluate the usability of the 
intervention for low-literate users, whether the intervention was easy 
to understand and navigate for them, and whether the core message 
of the intervention was understood. Participants indicated that they 
were still interested to learn more about the vaccination, but were 
discouraged to pursue this on the web app because of the amount of 
text. Therefore, we included the option to have the text read aloud 
using Readspeaker®. Additionally, we made several adjustments to 
icons and images used based on participants’ feedback to 
increase understanding.

After the final iteration, the intervention was tested further by 
members of the project group on various devices to ensure usability.

The CP intervention was developed by and in collaboration with 
midwives with extensive experience in applying CP methods and 
discussing vaccination in CP groups. The training was piloted with 
midwives trained to deliver CP. This process was embedded in a 
training for midwives that is part of the implementation and is 
described under IM step 5.

IM step 5—program implementation plan

Implementation of a program happens at the end of the 
development process. However, planning for the implementation 
happens throughout the entire development. This paragraph describes 
the steps we took to plan the implementation, and make sure that the 
inventions aligned with the needs of potential implementation partners.

To implement the CP intervention, midwives already practicing 
CP are trained to deliver the CP-MPV intervention. During a 3-h 
training in groups of 12 midwives, the following steps are taken. First, 
midwives are invited to complete a self-evaluation form, to foster 
awareness about their own opinions about the MPV. Second, to start 
a conversation about vaccinations, an “across the line” exercise is done, 
where everyone indicates for example whether they ever had doubts 
about getting a vaccine, followed by a short discussion. Third, 
midwives are invited to adapt an interactive CP method for the context 
of MPV. The aim is to educate pregnant women about the immune 
system and the MPV, where to find and how to judge information 
about vaccines, and how to make the decision about MPV. Fourth, 
executing this was practiced in the plenary group, with participating 
midwives assuming roles with varying perspectives on MPV. This 
helps to enhance awareness of the perspectives of participants in CP 
groups. Furthermore, creating a safe environment to discussing the 
MPV, sources of information for midwives, and logistical matters such 
as the timing of the session are discussed.

The training was tested with a group of midwives (n = 12), after 
which the training was made more interactive, and exercises were 
included where midwives could apply their preferred CP-method on 
MPV, and practice this. After the first full training, participating 
midwives were consulted for feedback, and small adjustments were 
made to the training information materials, and timing of the 
exercises. After each subsequent training, feedback from participating 
midwives was gathered and where needed, adjustments were made.

To further optimize the implementation of the interventions upon 
evaluation, we formed a linkage group with stakeholders at the start 
of the project. This group included representatives from the National 
Institute for Public Health and the Environment, RIVM (the provider 
of the National Immunization Program), the Royal Dutch 
Organisation of Midwives (KNOV), the organization training for 
Centering based CP (CenteringZorg) the overarching organization of 
direct providers of the MPV to pregnant women (Dutch Youth Health 
Centre, NCJ), Radboud University, physicians from preventive Youth 
Health Care responsible for administering child and maternal 
vaccinations, and the Netherlands Patients Federation. Representatives 
of these institutions and groups advised on the qualitative study in the 
needs assessment, theme and scope of the interventions during the 
development, the interactive elements, the practicability, usability, 
flexibility of the interventions, the planned effect-evaluation, and the 
implementation plans. They were consulted at every step of the 
process, and provided, e.g., suggestions for which information 
examples to test in the focus-groups, which topics to prioritize in the 
interventions, etc. During the needs-assessment, this was done with a 
group meeting. For the other steps in the development, individual 
meetings were held between each advisor and one of the authors (CA), 
during which work was presented and feedback was collected. 
Feedback from the advisors was then discussed within the author 
team and integrated in the intervention.

08

The RIVM will get full control and management over the online 
decision aid if it turns out to be effective. They have been involved in 
the development phase to ensure a successful implementation. The CP 
intervention is owned and managed by CenteringZorg, who are also 
a member of the project team. The CP intervention is in line with 
existing CP care, also to ensure a successful implementation.

IM step 6—evaluation plan

We planned to test the interventions in a semi-randomized 
controlled trial in order to assess their effects on informed decision-
making, determinants of MPV uptake, and to check whether they 
influenced MPV uptake. In addition, we aimed to assess participants’ 
subjective evaluations of the interventions. The outcomes of the trial 
will be published separately. The study has been approved by the TNO 
Institutional Review Board (2018-050). The trial registration is 
available at https://www.onderzoekmetmensen.nl/en/trial/25018. This 
trial registration describes the initial trial design.

We planned to use a semi-randomized design because 
participating midwifery clinics could not be randomly assigned to the 
CP or control condition, as CP care is only offered in a limited number 
of clinics. However, due to the COVID-19 pandemic and the 
associated social-distancing measured in place at the time of the data 
collection, CP group-care could not safely take place and could 
therefore not be included in the large-scale trial. We then used a 
randomized controlled design for the evaluation of the online decision 
aid. We recruited pregnant individuals in the Netherlands through 
midwifery clinics and social media. Baseline measurements were 
conducted via questionnaires upon enrolment in the study (before or 
at 16 weeks of pregnancy). The intervention group was granted access 
to the decision aid in addition to standard information between 16 
and 20 weeks of pregnancy, while the control group received only 
standard information. At 20 to 22 weeks of pregnancy, a follow-up 
questionnaire was conducted, including measures of informed 
decision making, decisional certainty, and acceptance and usability of 
the intervention. Vaccination status was derived from Praeventis, the 
National Immunization Register. Data were analyzed using an 
intention-to-treat approach, using mixed regression models for 
longitudinal data and logistic regression for vaccination uptake data.

When it became possible to resume CP group-care, we conducted 
a small-scale study to evaluate the feasibility and acceptability of the 
CP intervention. We interviewed midwives and participants who were 
involved in a CP session about MPV, and additionally administered 
questionnaires offered to all participants who participated in the 
sessions about MPV.

Discussion

In this article, we have provided a detailed description of the 
systematic development of two complementary interventions 
promoting informed decision making about MPV during pregnancy. 
We created an online tailored decision aid for MPV decision-making. 
This included the provision of information using tailored feedback to 
existing beliefs, weighing pros and cons about the MPV, and a module 
to prepare a conversation about the MPV. Additionally, a CP session 
was developed that can be implemented in existing CP care settings. 

We applied a user-centered, iterative design to meet the needs of the 
target group, and participants evaluated the intervention positively. 
Although the interventions are designed to complement each other, 
especially to ensure targeting all sub-groups of the population of 
pregnant women, the interventions can easily be used independently 
and are not reliant on each other.

Vaccination programs still have lower uptake among lower-
educated compared to higher-educated people (52, 53), and many 
(online) health interventions do not sufficiently reach at-risk 
populations such as those with low socioeconomic status (SES) and 
low literacy (24, 54, 55). We aimed to make the interventions suitable 
for those with low (health) literacy by involving low-literate users in 
the development of the online tailored decision aid, and by using a CP 
approach that has proven to be suitable for these populations.

Midwives play an important role as facilitators in the CP 
intervention. Therefore, it is important to note that their personal 
attitudes toward vaccination may impact the potential effectiveness of 
the intervention. Although we  are not aware of studies in the 
Netherlands on attitudes about vaccination among midwives, a 2018 
review of global literature on the topic shows that the majority of 
midwives supports vaccinations (56). However, there is a spectrum of 
beliefs present among midwives. The training that we have developed 
may help to deconstruct incorrect beliefs, but midwives who are 
critical of vaccination may be less inclined to follow the training. It is 
important that this is taken into account in the evaluation of the study.

We used IM to systematically develop the interventions, offering 
insight in the underlying rationales, and behavioral theories that 
informed their design. The IM intervention blueprint described in this 
article provides insight into the theories used in the different 
intervention components, helping to interpret the results of our 
evaluation study, aiming to identify causal mechanisms that contribute 
to intervention effects. Furthermore, this blueprint provides the 
opportunity to compare the interventions to other interventions on a 
theoretical level, for example in reviews or replication of studies in 
different contexts (12, 57). IM is a time-consuming process. But the 
blueprint created for the interventions can also advise the development 
of similar interventions for other vaccines or behaviors.

Limitations

The small sample sizes in this study do not serve to evaluate the 
effectiveness of the intervention. They merely served to improve the 
intervention during the development process. We aimed to include a 
diverse group of pregnant individuals in terms of educational and 
cultural background. However, it is difficult to comment on 
generalizability of such a small sample. The larger evaluation study 
that was described under IM step 6 will provide statistically more 
robust data on use, acceptance and effectiveness of the interventions.

During the development of the interventions, we chose to target 
informed decision making rather than vaccination uptake. In addition, 
we aimed to reduce barriers to vaccination uptake once a decision had 
been made, and had the indirect aim to enhance vaccination uptake. 
This could be interpreted as conflicting with the decisional autonomy 
that a DA should respect and facilitate. The user-tests enabled us to 
guard a suitable balance of two-sided information for informed 
decision making. User input helped us redress the balance when a 
prototype of the DA was too favorable toward one decisional outcome.

09

Conclusion

We developed two interventions aiming to promote informed 
decision making and to decrease decisional conflict about MPV. These 
interventions were developed using the IM framework, incorporating 
behavioral change methods from various theories. This systematic 
approach to intervention development will aid the interpretation of 
the process and effect evaluations of the interventions.