A Mobile, Electronic Health Record-Connected
Application for Managing Team Workﬂows in
Inpatient Care

Jacqueline M. Soegaard Ballester1
Geoffrey D. Bass2
Richard Urbani3
Glenn Fala3
Rutvij Patel3

Damien Leri4
Jackson M. Steinkamp5
Joshua L. Denson6
Roy Rosin4,7
Srinath Adusumalli8

Clarence William Hanson9,10
Ross Koppel7,11,12,13
Subha Airan-Javia14,15

Methods

Setting
We developed our application at Penn Medicine, a quaterna-
ry academic health system, as a collaboration between our
Ofﬁce of the Chief Medical Information Ofﬁcer, Information
Systems Department, and Center for Healthcare Innovation.

health care institution’s information systems. Implementation and iterative improve-
ments spanned January to July 2016. We assessed acceptance via usage metrics, user
observations, time–motion studies, and user surveys.
Results
By July 2016, Carelign was implemented on 152 of 169 total inpatient
services across three hospitals stafﬁng 1,616 hospital beds. Acceptance was near-
immediate: in July 2016, 3,275 average unique weekly users generated 26,981 average
weekly access sessions; these metrics remained steady over the following 4 years. In
2016 and 2018 surveys, users positively rated Carelign’s workﬂow integration, support
of clinical activities, and overall impact on work life.
Conclusion
User-focused design, multidisciplinary development teams, and rapid
iteration enabled creation, adoption, and sustained use of a patient-centered digital
workﬂow tool that supports diverse users’ and teams’ evolving care plan organization
needs.

1121

It was implemented at our three downtown Philadelphia
hospitals. In ﬁscal year 2016, clinicians at these three hos-
pitals cared for 71,633 adult admissions across 1,659 li-
censed
beds.
When
implemented
(2016),
Sunrise
(Allscripts Healthcare Solutions Inc., Chicago, Illinois, United
States) was the inpatient EHR, and Epic (Epic Systems
Corporation, Verona, Wisconsin, United States) was the
outpatient EHR. Within a year of implementation, we tran-
sitioned to using Epic as the integrated inpatient and outpa-
tient EHR.

Development Methodology
Our design process involved clinicians from multiple special-
ties and clinical application engineers from our Information
Services Department. We employed user-centered design
and Agile development methodologies,42 eschewing pre-
existing design assumptions to work instead from user input
to optimize utility, usability, and satisfaction.43 We incorpo-
rated team science and handoff best practices.44,45

We ﬁrst created mockups of user interfaces with focus
groups from different disciplines and training levels (9 physi-
cians, 2 medical students, 1 nurse, 1 social worker, and 1 user
experience designer). Initial front-end prototypes were ad-
justed iteratively using a staging database to input testing
data. Once the interface achieved high levels of intuitiveness
and usability based on qualitative feedback from further
focus group sessions with >60 clinicians, we built the back-
end database and the application services layer that connects
the two. Because our application would introduce modiﬁed
or novel workﬂows, we focused on initially releasing a
clinically suitable minimal viable product. This approach
maximized our ability to gather early user feedback to guide
the evolution of future versions and feature enhancements.43

Development of these iterative improvements continued
well past implementation.

Application Description
We designed our application, Carelign, to have two main
feature sets: an integrated clinical data visualization dash-
board and a collaborative care planning workspace that
supports task management and transitions in care. It was
built as a responsive web application with an Angular front-
end user interface and a Microsoft SQL server cluster
database. The user interface connects to its database and
to our organization’s many other clinical information sys-
tems using application program interfaces, HL7 messages,
direct database queries, and web services (►Supplementary
Appendix S1, available in the online version).38 Our decision
to build the application alongside (rather than within) the
main EHR was largely motivated by our requirement of
supporting a mobile, paperless handoff and rounding work-
ﬂow. This was not possible within our EHR at the time
(Allscripts) nor within the EHR our health system planned
to implement shortly thereafter (Epic). Moreover, our team
needed a platform that enabled rapid development with
frequent iterations, which is often not feasible in a large,
foundational application such as the EHR of a large health
system.

Interoperable Data Visualization
We created Carelign as an interoperable, EHR-agnostic ap-
plication. Prior to Carelign, our health system’s providers
used multiple software interfaces, including a homegrown
web portal, to access clinical information on a single patient.
In Carelign, EHR-generated discrete data along with user-
generated, semi-structured textual information are repre-
sented in one mobile-optimized display, with elements that
can be collapsed, tagged, reorganized, and otherwise manip-
ulated for operational efﬁciency (►Fig. 1). By providing
clinicians with access to this information in real time at
the point of care, we aimed to obviate the need to print static
rounding lists and transcribe data onto them. However, given
the diverse preferences and workﬂows of different provider
groups, we preserved the ability to generate patient list
printouts.

Dynamic, Collaborative Care Plan
Carelign addresses the duplicative processes of writing and
updating daily progress notes, rounding lists, handoffs, and
discharge documentation, by providing a dynamic, problem-
based care plan that can be applied to all four activities.
Instead of boxes for free-text narrative information, Carelign
utilizes semi-structured elements for user-generated prob-
lems with their associated plan and task items. These ele-
ments can be tagged and reorganized into different views to
ﬁt different workﬂows (►Fig. 2). Active plan and task
elements can be exported from the care plan into the
progress note. Older information or completed tasks can be
archived for future reference. This enables streamlining the
handoff and daily progress note without having to delete and
lose this information.
Additionally, plan elements can be tagged in other ways:
as anticipatory guidance for covering providers, as related to
discharge for interdisciplinary planning, or simply as “im-
portant.” They can also be reorganized into different views at
the patient level for speciﬁc workﬂows, including rounding,
cross-covering, and discharge planning. Carelign provides
extensive functionality for list-based management of patient
and team tasks with views supporting daily task manage-
ment of the primary team, the cross-covering team, consult-
ing teams, and discharge planners.

Additional Features and Speciﬁcations

Mobile-Friendly Web Application
To best support clinical workﬂows, users require access to
the application from any platform and location—hospital
computers, workstations on wheels, personal laptops, smart-
phones, or tablets. We therefore developed Carelign as a
responsive web application (can be accessed via any web
browser) rather than a native application (must be down-
loaded from mobile application stores). The responsive web
format allowed us to keep the development process device-
and operating system-agnostic. It also enabled us to push
feature updates without relying on users to download them.
This was important given our frequent version updates
incorporating user feedback.

1122

Security and Authentication
Carelign’s program architecture complies with health sys-
tem, state, and national security statutes regardless of plat-
form used or site of access. To access Carelign, authorized
users must use existing institutional login credentials and
permissions on devices connected to our health system’s
secure network—on-site via the hospitals’ Wi-Fi network or
remotely via a virtual private network. Carelign also times
out after a period of user inactivity. Finally, no patient data
are cached or saved locally on user devices to safeguard
against data breaches resulting from lost, stolen, or shared
devices.

Implementation
We developed Carelign in two phases. We ﬁrst built the data
integration portion of the application with a read-only view
of the EHR’s handoff documents in 2014, and later replaced
that prior handoff with Carelign’s collaborative care plan and
task management platform in 2015. After prototype revi-
sions based on initial user feedback, we implemented the full
version over 6 months in 2016.
The implementation team consisted of two to three part-
time clinical members for training and support and two to
four part-time developers for building new features, address-
ing bugs and issues, and technical support. We identiﬁed
superusers and clinical users, transferred data from the
previous handoff to Carelign, and assisted with workﬂow

optimization. Users were trained via informational ﬂyers and
videos sent prior to transitioning as well as shoulder-to-
shoulder support from Carelign team members on the day of
transition.
To provide ongoing user support, our user-interface de-
sign included a prominent in-application feedback button
that enabled users to submit issue reports, provide feedback,
or request new features. This generated an email with user
comments, contact information, and supplemental metadata
sent to development and clinical implementation team
members. After implementation, we transitioned applica-
tion support to our health system’s general information
services help desk, with supplementary email feedback
also sent to Carelign clinical champions.

Usage Measurements and User Perceptions
Automated in-application audit logs tracked usage data,
generating anonymized weekly and monthly reports on
user access and intra-application actions.46 Using time–
motion observations during our initial phase of implemen-
tation (2014), we measured the impact of Carelign on team
behavior during rounds as compared with teams not yet
using the application. We observed how often real-time data
were accessed when discussing patients. Additionally, using
stopwatches, we measured login times for Carelign as com-
pared with the EHR on different devices including smart-
phones (Carelign only), desktops, and mobile workstations.

Fig. 1 Optimized for mobile and desktop viewing. Carelign adapts to device form-factor while maintaining intuitive displays of data and care
plan information.

1123

We conducted two user surveys in September 2016 and
April 2018 to understand users’ perceptions of the application
and its impact on clinical care (►Supplementary Appendix S2,
available in the online version). These surveys were conducted
using Qualtrics software (Qualtrics, Provo, Utah) and were each
open to responses for 4 weeks. The ﬁrst was distributed via
institutional email to all hospital clinical staff, while the second
was shared with users via a survey link on the application login
page. This project was reviewed and categorized as quality
improvement by the University of Pennsylvania’s Institutional
Review Board and was therefore exempt from approval.

Results

Adoption and Usage
By July 2016, Carelign was fully implemented as the health
system’s standardized handoff and digital workﬂow tool on

152 of 169 possible primary inpatient services at the three
hospitals. Nonadopting services either preferred to use a
formatted word document or very rarely had inpatients. By
July 2020, seven of the remaining services independently
adopted the tool. Since then, clinician adoption has contin-
ued to grow, with a 41% increase in average weekly login
sessions by 2020 (►Table 1 and ►Fig. 3). Adoption was noted
both among users who directly relied on the application for
their daily workﬂows (e.g., physician trainees and advanced
practice providers [APPs]) and those for whom use of the
application was supplemental (e.g., attending physicians,
nurses, pharmacists, etc.). In July 2020, 52% of 3,738 unique
users were nurses, 11% were APPs, 20% were physician
trainees, 6% were attending physicians, and 11% were other
clinical users (e.g., pharmacists, therapists, and social work-
ers). Similar ratios were previously observed in 2016
(►Table 1 and ►Fig. 3). In contrast, mode of access—via

Fig. 2 The Carelign care plan. Carelign utilizes modular, semi-structured elements for user-generated problems and the plan elements and tasks
contained within them.

1124

the EHR, desktop browser, or mobile device—shifted be-
tween 2016 and 2020, with users increasingly accessing
the application from within the EHR (►Table 1 and ►Fig. 4).
Through the in-application feedback mechanism, users
generated over 1,150 feedback communications during the
ﬁrst 10 months after implementation. Users described this
feature as an easy avenue for addressing concerns that
helped
them
feel
supported
during
and
after
implementation.

Functions and Efﬁciencies

Functions Used and Frequencies
As evidenced by observations of teams rounding and by in-
application usage patterns, clinicians incorporated real-time
clinical data access via Carelign into their clinical workﬂows.
Users accessed objective clinical data (e.g., vitals, laborato-
ries, medications, imaging studies, and encounters) an aver-
age of 116,223 times per week (July 2016). The most
frequently viewed data sections were vitals and laboratory
results. In-application audit logs demonstrated that users
frequently interacted with the problem lists by adding,
changing, deleting, reordering, and viewing problems. Task
items within problems were viewed, edited, created, com-
pleted, or deleted on average 302,678 times per week
(July 2016) (►Table 1 and ►Fig. 5). Carelign imports care

team assignments and contact information, facilitating com-
munication between clinicians. Weekly average counts of
instances of contact information viewed or calls generated
from within Carelign were 8,648 in July 2016 (►Table 1
and ►Fig. 5).

Efﬁciencies
During the 2014 initial implementation, time–motion obser-
vations of teams using Carelign (n ¼ 14) versus those not yet
using it (n ¼ 10) demonstrated that teams using Carelign on
rounds accessed real-time data on average 50% more often
(168 vs. 79 times, respectively, with 12.0 vs. 7.9 times per
team per rounds, respectively). Although they searched for
data more often, Carelign users spent 25% less overall time
logging into devices (41.11 total minutes/2.94 minutes per
rounds vs. 39.55 total minutes/3.9 minutes per rounds, re-
spectively). This was supported by tests showing that logging
into and accessing Carelign on a mobile device was 22 times
faster than logging into the EHR on a desktop computer (on
average, 2.4 and 52.8 seconds, respectively, across n ¼ 39
observations).

Acceptance and Satisfaction
In September 2016, 760 Carelign users from multiple dis-
ciplines and specialties replied to our user experience survey
(►Table 2). Their responses indicated that Carelign was used

Table 1 Carelign usage data

Abbreviation: EHR, electronic health record.
Note: Physician trainees had the most average login weekly sessions (16,818), followed by nurses and advanced practice providers (combined totals
14,617). These numbers increased from 2016 to 2020 (►Fig. 3).

1125

in various clinical settings and during various clinical activi-
ties. Physician trainees, APPs, and nurses all reported using it
to support transitions in care more than 50% of the time;
notably, 97% of ﬁrst-year residents used it at these times.
When asked how long it took to learn to use the application
well enough to accomplish typical daily work, 28% of users
took less than 1 day, 41% took 2 to 3 days, 21% took 4 to 7 days,

and 10% took longer. Most respondents rated Carelign as
having a favorable impact on clinical care (►Fig. 6).
In April 2018, we conducted a second survey of Carelign
users with three questions about efﬁciency and efﬁcacy. Of
226 respondents, 81% said it would take them more time to
perform their clinical duties without Carelign, 75% felt that it
had helped them prevent a medical error, and 80% felt that

Fig. 3 Usage over time. Panel (A) shows total unique weekly users over time and panel (B) shows total unique weekly sessions over time, both
broken down by user discipline. Note that users and sessions decreased each year in December, likely due to reduced elective admissions around
United States holidays. Likewise, users and sessions decreased from March to May 2020 given efforts to decrease nonessential inpatient
admissions during the COVID-19 pandemic. Note: Due to an error in data collection, login sessions for the following date range were omitted from
panel (B): 11/19/2017–1/20/2018.

1126

they would like to have it available as a tool if they moved to a
different institution.

Discussion

To address this need, we built and implemented a novel
clinical workﬂow application to improve data visualization
and facilitate clinical workﬂow. Following a user-centered
design strategy, our data demonstrate rapid adoption and
sustained usage following implementation within a large
academic hospital system. Users report they were able to
quickly learn to use the application, that it increased
the safety and quality of their handoffs, and that it improved
their
work experience. Having mobile access to data
increased the frequency with which teams accessed data
on rounds, while requiring less login time. Our evaluation
ﬁnds that intuitively designed mobile tools—built with best
principles of Agile methodology and a user-centered, prob-
lem-focused approach—can be successfully incorporated
into clinicians’ daily workﬂow with rapid adoption and,
importantly, user satisfaction.39

While our initial aim was to create a tool that supported
transitions of care, our contextual inquiry led us to more
broadly redesign and rethink communication workﬂows. We
therefore shifted our objective to providing a work- and
think-space that enables teams to cohesively create and
manage care plans in ways similar to project management
software. Carelign now serves as a collaborative and unifying
platform with shared information and task lists for all
clinicians caring for the patient, beyond just the primary
team. Its value is supported by the over 285,000 task man-
agement actions performed weekly within Carelign in 2020.
Use of Carelign increased over the course of our study, even
after the health system’s implementation of a system-wide
integrated EHR. Clinical groups quickly began to envision
new uses and even structure quality improvement projects
around the application.47,48

Most modern EHRs fail to provide functionalities for
collaborative, continuous plan updates and task manage-
ment. Consequently, much of clinicians’ minute-to-minute
notations are performed outside of the EHR, often lost on
paper.3,25 Rather than mirroring pre-existing static paper
workﬂows in a digital format, our challenge was to create a
system that leveraged the full capabilities of digital tech-
nology and mobile devices. We attempted to match physi-
cians’ mental models more closely by designing Carelign to
support updating the care plan more easily and frequently
than is currently practical with daily progress notes. Doing
so then helps the care plan record keep pace with patients’
evolving conditions. This centralized care plan information
can then serve multiple purposes across intersecting
communication and documentation workﬂows. It can
populate rounding lists and handoffs, generate progress
notes, and ultimately become a draft for the discharge
summary.

Fig. 4
Access method over time. Most users access Carelign by launching it from within the electronic health record.

1127

We did encounter challenges to implementing our appli-
cation, including availability of mobile devices for users and
mobile device battery depletion. While Wi-Fi and cellular
network coverage within clinical areas was adequate, the use
of Carelign on mobile devices while en route to see patients
revealed uneven coverage in nonclinical areas (e.g., hallways,
staircases, and elevators). This recognition prompted efforts

to improve network coverage to support such ambulatory
use. Replacing paper lists with a mobile tool in some cases led
to a workﬂow mismatch when users needed to reference
their lists on their mobile device during a simultaneous
phone call. This was not an issue when using Carelign with
a desktop workstation or workstation on wheels. However,
when relying only on a mobile device, this occasionally

Fig. 5
Communication and task management. Panel (A) shows the number of times per week that users used Carelign to view care team
information or generate phone calls from within Carelign. This decreased since the implementation of EpicCare Inpatient in 2017 but has
remained steady since. Panel (B) shows the number of times per week that users added or edited tasks within Carelign. These numbers have
remained steady since implementation (except for the months corresponding to the ﬁrst Spring 2020 surge of the COVID-19 pandemic). Note:
Due to errors in data collection, login sessions for the following date range were omitted from panel (A) (05/24/2016–06/04/2016, 09/10/2017–11/04/
2017, 12/17/2017–12/23/2017, and 01/13/2019–04/13/2019) and panel (B) (05/24/2016–06/04/2016, 12/17/2017–12/23/2017, and 01/13/2019–
04/13/2019).

1128

required a workaround such as using a landline or head-
phones for the phone call, or alternatively keeping a list
printout as a backup reference. Indeed, while some services
have eliminated printed lists from their workﬂow (e.g., most
medicine resident services), others continue to carry list
printouts that they rely on to varying degrees (e.g., attending,
APP, and surgical resident services).
Finally, the design and evolution of our application
beneﬁted greatly from constant user feedback. During pilot
phases, application feedback was provided via an external
electronic survey. This was poorly utilized and posed

Table 2 Responses to 2016 user experience survey

(Continued)

Note: Out of 760 total survey respondents, the number of respondents
to each individual question is listed.
aReﬂects the number of respondents selecting each answer option.
bDenotes the percent of total respondents selecting each option. In the
case of “select all that apply” questions, the aggregate number of
responses may exceed the number of respondents.

1129

challenges to timely responses for our development team.
We therefore transitioned to an in-application feedback
mechanism. This proved a more streamlined method for
users to contact our team and was highly utilized. Key factors
for success of this feedback mechanism were: (1) easy access
for users within the application, (2) inclusion of user contact
information and application metadata, (3) timely responses
to user issues and suggestions (within 24 hours if not sooner
for urgent issues), and (4) incorporation of ideas into the
application when appropriate.

Conclusion

Employing user-centered design and Agile development
methodologies, we created an application to facilitate clini-
cal users’ evolving needs and workﬂows. We demonstrate
that an EHR-connected data visualization and handoff tool
that supports team-based care planning can be readily
adopted and incorporated into clinical processes. Clinicians
reported that accessing integrated patient information using
Carelign led to improvements in their workﬂows and expe-
rience. An intuitive interface enabled implementation with
minimal support and training—a departure from many
health information technology implementations. Continued
studies of EHR-connected applications are needed to en-
hance clinician workﬂow and improve interactions and
experience with EHRs.

Clinical Relevance Statement

Clinical teams require adequate support for their care coor-
dination and organization workﬂows. Focusing on user
needs, we designed an EHR-connected data visualization
and handoff tool to provide an integrated work- and think-
space for providers. Ongoing use and activity in the applica-
tion highlight how Carelign offers necessary and desired
support for clinical workﬂows in ways otherwise unmet
despite a fully integrated EHR.