2. Materials and Methods

This study was considered exempt by the Mayo Clinic Institutional Review Board and was
conducted between November 2018 and October 2019.

2.1. Participants and Recruitment

The target sample size for the qualitative interviews and usability testing was ~8–10 participants
based on evidence from usability studies, which indicates that up to 80–85% of usability issues can
be identiﬁed by the ﬁrst eight participants [23,24]. To achieve the target sample size, we conducted
purposive sampling with the following inclusion criteria: (i) staﬀphysicians at the Mayo Clinic campus
in Rochester, Minnesota; (ii) from primary care including the departments of family medicine and
community internal medicine as well as specialty ﬁelds such as cardiology and vascular medicine;
and (iii) with previous experience using institutional CDS tools. Physicians were contacted by templated
emails that contained invitations to participate in the interviews and to avoid potential coercion; they
were not contacted by a supervisor.

2.2. Physician Interviews and Usability Testing

Interviews with physicians were conducted from November 2018 to February 2019.
Qualitative methodologies and a user-centered design process were applied within a type 1
eﬀectiveness-implementation hybrid framework [24–29].
Semi-structured qualitative interviews
and usability testing sessions were conducted to obtain physician perspectives on two EHR-based CDS
prototypes. The ﬁrst prototype was a best practice alert (BPA)—A clinical reminder with evidence-based
management guidelines that would passively display to providers (requiring them to click on the alert

to open it) at the point-of-care. The second prototype was an asynchronous in-basket alert—A type of
inbox message that contained patient laboratory data and would be visible to providers upon logging
into the EHR. Both CDS formats (BPA and in-basket) were linked to an automated detection algorithm
in the EHR that identiﬁed individuals as ‘possible FH’ cases, deﬁned as LDL-C ≥190 mg/dL in the
absence of secondary causes of hypercholesterolemia. Both CDS formats were presented during each
interview and the “Think Aloud” usability technique was applied; physicians were asked to talk out
loud and verbalize their thoughts while interacting with the CDS prototypes [30–32]. Four rounds of
physician interviews and usability testing were conducted—new physicians, without prior exposure
to the CDS tool, participated in each round and their feedback informed CDS prototyping and iterative
reﬁnements in subsequent rounds.
Interviews and usability testing were conducted by research study team members, including a
physician, a qualitative researcher, a user experience/user interface expert and a research program
coordinator. Each interview lasted one hour, was audio recorded and transcribed. Participants were
given lunch during the interview and received a USD 100 honorarium. A semi-structured interview
guide was developed and tested in a ‘mock’ interview to ensure that the questions were comprehensive
(see Supplementary ﬁle Methods S1). The results from the mock interview were not included in the
thematic analysis.

2.3. Implementation Survey

Following each interview, physicians were asked to complete a twenty ﬁve-question
implementation survey to elicit multi-level contextual factors that could inﬂuence CDS implementation
in clinical practice (see Supplementary ﬁle Methods S2). Modiﬁed from Weiner et al., twelve survey
questions assessed three implementation outcome measures: Acceptability of Intervention Measure
(AIM), Intervention Appropriateness Measure (IAM) and Feasibility of Intervention Measure (FAM) [33].
The remaining thirteen survey questions were modiﬁed from the Consolidated Framework for
Implementation Research (CFIR) [34,35].

2.4. Deployment of CDS in Silent Mode

Both the BPA and in-basket CDS formats were deployed in ‘silent mode’ across all Mayo Clinic
sites, including the Mayo Clinic Health System (MCHS) for a three-month period (July 2019 to October
2019). The silent mode setting would trigger the CDS alert in the EHR for providers in primary care,
general internal medicine and cardiovascular medicine; however the alert was set to not display for
providers, triggering only in the EHR background. The goal of deploying in silent mode was to gather
initial metrics on the triggering of CDS at diﬀerent sites and use these metrics as a measure of the
burden of ‘possible FH’. Each alert was cued by a diﬀerent action; the BPA ﬁred when a patient’s EHR
was opened, while the in-basket ﬁred when results of a newly ordered lipid were placed in the EHR.

2.5. Data Analysis

The Framework Method was applied to transcript coding [36,37]. An inductive approach was
used to generate themes from the transcribed data through open coding of transcripts. An initial
codebook was developed by two qualitative researchers (HB and LP) who independently coded
two transcripts line-by-line and then read each transcript in a group setting to reach a consensus on
applied codes and ensure inter-rater reliability. After the codebook was established, the remaining
transcripts were coded independently by two research team members and any inconsistencies in
assigned codes were resolved through group discussion at bi-weekly meetings. All transcribed
data were imported into ‘Reframer’—A qualitative research software tool (Optimal Workshop 2015,
Wellington, New Zealand)—And each code was built into the tool as a ‘tag’ that could be applied
to multiple observations. Survey responses of primary care physicians (PCPs) and specialists were
compared using Wilcoxon rank-sum test to identify the median score, interquartile range (IQR) and any

statistically signiﬁcant (p < 0.05) diﬀerences in the responses between PCPs and specialists. Descriptive
data, including frequency of responses, were also noted.

3. Results

Thirteen physicians from primary care and cardiovascular medicine were recruited to the study and
gave informed consent prior to participation in the qualitative interviews and usability testing—seven
were primary care physicians (PCPs) and six were specialist physicians.
Participants included
physicians in leadership roles and those serving on institutional committees. Participant demographic
characteristics are summarized in Table 1.

3.1. Physician Interview Findings

Analysis of the physician interview transcripts identiﬁed ﬁve key themes and eleven subthemes
along with representative quotes (Table 2).

3.1.1. Understanding and Awareness of FH

This theme encompassed physicians’ current awareness and knowledge of FH and their perceived
role in the detection and management of FH patients.

1.
Subtheme: Physicians awareness of FH Amongst both PCPs and specialists, there was a lack of
FH awareness—physicians did not always distinguish between hypercholesterolemia of a genetic
etiology versus hypercholesterolemia due to other causes. In some instances, both were perceived
as being similar and requiring similar management.

2.
Subtheme: Physicians perceived scope of work PCPs and specialists agreed that all physicians
were responsible for diagnosing FH; however, they diﬀered in their views on who was responsible
for the management of FH patients. Some physicians preferred to manage FH patients themselves,
while others preferred referral to a specialist.

3.1.2. Clinical Workﬂow

Clinical workflow aimed to understand physician workflows in primary care and specialty settings
and gain insights into the next steps physicians were likely to take after a patient had been diagnosed
with FH.

1.
Subtheme: Diagnosis in workﬂow Determining how physicians established a diagnosis in
workﬂow centered on understanding when tasks such as ordering laboratory tests and reviewing
results were performed. Physicians identiﬁed CDS alert relevance as being based on both
encounter type and patient type. PCPs with high patient volumes were likely to have limited
time to review alerts.

2.
Subtheme: Next steps for physicians For a patient with suspected FH, the next steps for physicians
included prescribing medication, counseling on lifestyle changes, ordering tests and ruling out
secondary causes of hypercholesterolemia. Most physicians were willing to refer patients to the
institutional FH Clinic if this was the appropriate next step in management.

3.1.3. Physician Preferences and Value of CDS Tools

This theme encompassed physician perspectives on CDS tools and whether these tools impacted
provider cognitive burden and time. Physicians also gave insights into their perceived value of the
institutional FH Clinic.

1.
Subtheme: CDS tool preferences Most physicians had previously used one or more CDS tools
and viewed them positively. However, a physician’s personal style or prior knowledge of a
patient was likely to inﬂuence their decision on whether or not to use a speciﬁc CDS tool. With
a relatively recent transition to a new EHR system at the time of interviews, some physicians
continued to face challenges in interacting with the new EHR and highlighted the need to ﬁnd
more eﬃcient ways to carry out routine tasks.

2.
Subtheme: Cognitive load A common feedback from all physicians was that the increasing
number of CDS alerts and in-basket messages were contributing to rising levels of alert fatigue
and information overload, subsequently resulting in CDS alerts being ignored or bypassed.

3.
Subtheme: Value of FH Clinic referral to physicians Physicians agreed that having the option
to refer patients with ‘possible FH’ to the institutional FH Clinic was likely going to reduce
their cognitive burden and would be useful for complex cases such as those where: (a) goal
LDL-cholesterol was not being attained on maximum statin therapy; (b) a patient had statin
intolerance or (c) cases where genetic testing was warranted.

3.1.4. Perspectives on Patient Needs and Values

Physicians highlighted the importance of engaging with patients through digital tools and also
shared their insights on the value of the institutional FH Clinic to both patients and their at-risk
family members.

1.
Subtheme: Patient engagement through the use of digital tools Physicians indicated that there
was a need for patient education materials that could be printed and attached to messages
as well as videos that could be shared directly through the institutional patient portal. Most
physicians agreed that there was value in shared decision-making tools such as patient decision
aids, especially if these were available on the internet and easily accessible. Physicians also
highlighted the importance of being able to share the computer screen displaying the decision aid
with patients, so as to engage them during clinical encounters.

2.
Subtheme: Value of FH Clinic referral to patients Physicians highlighted that the value of a referral
to the institutional FH Clinic for patients and their family members centered on: (a) obtaining

access to resources available speciﬁcally in the FH Clinic; (b) cascade testing of family members;
(c) receiving access to new medications such as PCSK9 inhibitors and (d) facilitating appointment
scheduling for genetic testing.

3.1.5. Dissemination and Implementation

This theme encompassed multi-level barriers and facilitators that could potentially impact the
adoption of CDS in clinical practice.

1.
Subtheme:
Facilitators to Dissemination and Implementation Physicians suggested that
departmental meetings, conferences, grand rounds as well as newsletters could be used to
promote awareness of the CDS tool and facilitate its uptake in practice. They also highlighted the
need to obtain support from institutional champions, opinion leaders, early adopters and others
likely to inﬂuence the attitudes and behaviors of providers.

2.
Subtheme: Barriers to Dissemination and Implementation The main barriers identiﬁed by
physicians that were likely going to impact utilization of the CDS tool in practice included
use of pre-existing CDS tools that may prevent adoption of new tools, limited time in patient
encounters to view and act upon CDS alerts and lack of institutional guidance and education on
new CDS availability.

3.2. Usability Recommendations

The usability testing of both CDS prototypes led to physician feedback that broadly fell into one
of four recommendation categories summarized in Table 3.

3.3. Implementation Survey Results

The majority of PCPs and specialists responded positively to questions that assessed
implementation outcome measures; 84.6% (n = 11) of physicians indicated that they liked the tool and
it seemed easy to use (Table 4). Similarly, positive responses were noted for questions pertaining to
the CFIR constructs; 84.6% (n = 11) of physicians indicated that the CDS tool would improve early
diagnosis of patients with FH, while 92.3% (n = 12) of physicians agreed that the CDS tool would
help them identify, refer or manage FH patients. However, in response to the statement ‘this tool
will not increase the time needed with a patient’, 69.2% (n = 9) of physicians were either neutral
or negative in their response. Overall, there was agreement in responses between both PCPs and
specialists (see Supplementary Table S1).

3.4. Silent Mode Metrics

The rapid prototyping of the BPA and in-basket continued until no new physician feedback was
obtained from three consecutive interviews and thematic saturation was attained. The ﬁnal BPA and
in-basket were then deployed in the EHR in ‘silent mode’ for gathering initial metrics (Figure 1). During
a three-month period, the BPA triggered 5415 times for 1440 unique patients, while the in-basket
triggered 953 times for 924 unique patients at the three major Mayo Clinic sites and the MCHS.

4. Discussion

The dearth of usable and relevant digital tools is a major hurdle to the implementation of genomic
medicine [7,38]. In this report, we describe the creation of a genomic CDS tool for FH, using an
implementation science framework aimed at evaluating CDS eﬀectiveness and gaining early insights
into clinical implementation through physician feedback. The relatively high prevalence but yet low
awareness and detection of FH motivated the development of a CDS tool for FH. The work described
herein could inform the creation of CDS tools for other genomic disorders in diverse settings.
The introduction of EHRs has been associated with increased provider cognitive load, reduced
professional satisfaction and increased rates of burnout [39,40]. To address these concerns, the Oﬃce of
the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology (HIT) proposed aligning EHRs and tools
with clinical workﬂows, improving user interfaces to increase eﬃciency and implementing health IT
based on stakeholder engagement [41]. This includes the creation of well-designed, usable CDS tools
that can ﬁll gaps in knowledge and provide guideline-based recommendations at the point-of-care.
We conducted qualitative interviews and usability testing with both PCPs and specialists; PCPs
are often the ﬁrst line of contact for most patients in the community setting, especially for needs such
as the evaluation of lipids. They are also more likely to treat multiple family members and thus can
play a pivotal role in increasing FH detection and screening within a community. However, physicians
identiﬁed a number of barriers that were likely to reduce CDS utilization in clinical practice—the
most common barrier being the increasing cognitive burden on providers due to EHR complexity
and limited time during clinical encounters. These ﬁndings are supported by previous studies that
examined barriers to CDS implementation [9,42,43].
To promote CDS adoption in clinical practice, physician feedback emphasized the need to deploy
passive alerts that would be less disruptive to workﬂows. They also highlighted that in-basket message
alerts should be linked to new lipid panel reports to simplify workﬂows. Physicians recommended
shortening and reorganizing the alert content for clarity and embedding a link to an order set speciﬁc
for FH so as to reduce the number of clicks. Physicians also recommended including a link to
AskMayoExpert, a Mayo Clinic knowledge resource with a topic module dedicated to FH that provides
information on clinical presentation, diagnostic criteria and management [44]. AskMayoExpert also
has links to additional knowledge modules, thereby enabling providers to access a number of relevant
topics without workﬂow disruption [45].
Another important insight was that concurrent to the development of a CDS tool, an attempt
should be made to increase awareness of the tool, provide education on how to use it and obtain
support from institutional leadership. This feedback led to eﬀorts to increase FH awareness amongst
providers and highlight the CDS tool for FH at the Mayo Clinic Rochester campus. Rapid review
pocket cards, which gave an overview of FH, were developed and distributed to PCPs and specialists.
Several grand rounds were conducted across the institution by FH physician experts to disseminate
knowledge and highlight the available CDS tool.
The implementation survey provided physician perspectives on contextual variables that were
likely to inﬂuence CDS adoption in clinical practice. Most physicians indicated a receptive attitude
towards CDS integration. The only survey item where the majority of the physicians gave either a
neutral response or disagreed was regarding the CDS tool ‘not’ increasing time spent with a patient.
This response reiterated the need for CDS to be designed to increase eﬃciency and not add to
provider burden.
A relatively large number of both BPA and in-basket alerts ﬁred during silent-mode deployment,
indicating a high burden of ‘possible FH’. This suggests a potentially large impact of CDS deployment
on health outcomes. Currently, both alerts remain deployed in silent mode and will be further
evaluated in a clinical trial to assess the eﬀect of the CDS on outcomes such as changes in patient
management post-deployment.
A limitation of our study is that interviews were limited to physicians; the input of nurse
practitioners, physician assistants, and residents in training may have relevance for clinical
implementation of CDS tools in diﬀering clinical workﬂows. Additionally, inherent EHR limitations
prevented some physician feedback from being implemented in the ﬁnal CDS tools that were deployed
in the EHR. The number of physicians recruited for the study was modest; however, evidence from
usability studies indicates that such a number is adequate for developing and establishing the tool and
to initiate the application of the tool in clinical practice [23,24]. After initial implementation of the CDS
tool, metrics for its use, including the utilization of the FH order set and AskMayoExpert knowledge
resource will be evaluated to determine need for reﬁnements and modiﬁcations. Such modiﬁcations,
based on the pilot implementation, could further improve the FH CDS tool for use at the point-of-care.

5. Conclusions

Employing an implementation science framework with qualitative interviews and usability testing,
physician feedback was obtained to guide the development of a CDS tool for FH and integrate it with
the EHR for providers in primary care and cardiovascular medicine. A relatively large number of
alerts ﬁred during CDS deployment in silent mode, indicating a high burden of ‘possible FH’ and the
potential for CDS to increase the point-of-care detection of FH. The process described here, along with
the physician feedback obtained, can inform the creation of CDS tools for genomic disorders at other
institutions and health systems.