Barwick et al. 
Implementation Science Communications            (2023) 4:21  
https://doi.org/10.1186/s43058-023-00402-w

STUDY PROTOCOL

The Implementation Playbook: study 
protocol for the development and feasibility 
evaluation of a digital tool for effective 
implementation of evidence‑based innovations

Melanie Barwick1,2,3,4*   , Jacquie Brown5, Kadia Petricca1, Bonnie Stevens1,6, Byron J. Powell7,8,9, 
Alexia Jaouich10, Jill Shakespeare11 and Emily Seto3,12 

Methods
Design and objectives
The study integrates implementation science, digital 
design and development, and health services research 
and employs a theory-driven multiple case study design 
[65] with convergent, explanatory mixed methods [66]. 
Quantitative data on the use of the tool will be integrated 
with qualitative data on how it was experienced, its use-
fulness, barriers and facilitators to its use, and desired 
features and functions for the next iteration. User-cen-
tred design principles (i.e. design that is concise, clear, 
and consistent and provides the user with autonomy) will 
guide the design and development of the digital tool [67]. 
We will then explore the tool’s feasibility for supporting 
EBI implementation in six organizations.
Development of the Playbook will occur in two phases: 
Phase 1: design, user testing, and development of an 
MVP, and Phase 2: feasibility testing of the MVP in six 
healthcare organizations (Table 1). We describe the spe-
cific objectives associated with each phase below.

Phase 1: Development and usability testing of the Playbook

Objective 1: MVP co‑design and development  Successful 
digital tool design requires a user-centred process from 
concept through to design, development, quality testing, 
implementation, and adoption, and frequently fails when 

established practices are not used [68]. eHealth technolo-
gies designed and developed based on assumptions about 
end-user motivations, goals and needs are often less 
effective than those that engage end-users throughout 
the process [68]. To optimize the relevance of the Play-
book, we will employ a ‘user-centric’ approach in which 
end-users are central to the design process at each design 
phase and will allow for iterative modifications on con-
tent and functionality that meet user needs best. A ‘user-
centric’ approach is paramount for user engagement with 
the tool and its effectiveness [68]. Collaborators, Pivot 
Design Group, were selected from three vendor bids to 
lead the design and development work.

The design phase will use discovery phase outputs on 
personas to sketch, ideate, visualize, and prototype the 
concept into life. First, we will outline the information 
architecture and sitemap from user personas, beginning 
with a series of task flows. Each task flow, or user flow, 
will be refined to outline the basic user experience and 
further flesh out the interaction design, from sketches 
through to wireframes, that outline the priority of infor-
mation, content hierarchy and key content formats. 
Wireframes strategically filter the content in a format 
that considers how users interact with the content on 
the screen (no visual design, only black and white “blue-
prints” at this point). Next, we will create a mood board 
that captures the overall look and feel of the visual user 
interface and iterate through graphic layouts to come to 
a design that suits users’ priorities and contexts. All team 
members and collaborators will be involved and influ-
ence this process through discussion meetings guided by 
Pivot Design Group, which will seek end-user input on 
tool functionality, task flows, and visual display.

Objective 2: Usability testing  We will develop a click-
through static prototype for one round of controlled 
usability testing to validate certain functions and task 
flows before designing the entire visual user interface; 
Pivot Design Group will lead this work. We will recruit 
8–10 participants with varied gender perspectives and 

Table 1  Organization sampling characteristics

Site
Organization type
Innovation delivery mode
Type of implementation support

1
Community Child & Youth Mental Health
In-person
Playbook alone

2
Adult Mental Health & Addictions
In-person
Playbook alone

3
Child, Youth and Adult Mental Health & Addictions
In-person
Playbook + facilitation

4
Health/Quaternary Care Hospital
In-person
Playbook alone

5
Health/Centre for Digital Therapeutics
eHealth technology
Playbook alone

6
Community Child & Youth Mental Health
eHealth technology
Playbook + facilitation

implementation experience to undergo a 45–60-min 
guided user testing process to test key features of the 
Playbook, including navigation and flow, functionalities 
(i.e. adding an activity or task), readability and accessibil-
ity. This number of participants allows for the saturation 
of trends across users with varied implementation experi-
ences. We will recruit usability participants from our net-
work via email, and their participation will be consented 
by Pivot Design Group, who will conduct the testing. 
Data will be collected for development purposes only and 
shared with the research team in aggregate. Questions 
asked will centre on accessibility and usability using a 
Think Aloud technique, where the participant verbalizes 
their thoughts and asks questions while they review the 
MVP [69]. Pivot Design Group will incorporate usability 
test results into a final round of wireframes and develop 
the final MVP for feasibility testing in Phase 2.

Phase 2: Feasibility testing of the Playbook

Sampling  The unit of analysis is the implementing 
organization. We sent an email invitation to six organi-
zations in our network to test the feasibility of the Play-
book by using it to implement an EBI of their choice from 
the start of implementation (see Table 1). Six organiza-
tions provide a suitable sample for achieving saturation 
in the check-in meetings [70]. We used maximum vari-
ation purposive sampling [71, 72], widely used in quali-
tative implementation research, to identify information-
rich cases based on organization type (i.e. health, mental 
health, child/youth, adult) and two additional character-
istics for context variability: EBI delivery mode (i.e. the 
EBI is delivered in-person or via eHealth technology); 
and type of implementation support (i.e. Playbook only, 
Playbook + purveyor or intermediary support). The type 
of implementation facilitation is an important context 
to test because it is a form of support used in practice. 
We imagine the Playbook could enhance how purveyors 
and intermediary organizations provide facilitation and 
create efficiencies for optimal implementation. We then 
solicited interest and participation from organizations 
that met these criteria within our network. The organiza-
tions we approached were known to the research team. 
The implementing organizations will form implemen-
tation teams to include ~3-5 staff with requisite skills 
to inform the implementation of the target EBI in their 
setting (e.g. knowledge of the EBI to be implemented, 
organizational workflows and clinical processes, and 
implementation process) [73]. We expect to engage with 
approximately 18–30 individuals in total.

Objective 1: Exploring current approaches to imple‑
mentation  A baseline implementation survey will be 
shared for completion by the implementation team lead 
at each of the six implementing organizations to cap-
ture current approaches to implementation. In addition, 
a demographic survey administered to all participating 
implementation team members will collect demographic 
information on gender, age, implementation experience, 
and employment history. We will use REDCap electronic 
data capture tools hosted at Yale University [74, 75] to 
administer all measures and present data descriptively to 
depict team demographics and established implementa-
tion procedures across organizations.

Objective 2: Feasibility testing of the Playbook  Target 
EBIs. Before the Playbook launch, participating organi-
zations will identify the EBI they have chosen to imple-
ment. The two intermediary organizations will identify 
the organizations and EBIs they will support and will be 
at liberty to support them as needed. We will intention-
ally provide minimal direction regarding the nature of 
the target EBIs since it is not yet known for what types of 
innovations it will be useful. We suspect that, at a mini-
mum, EBIs must be complex enough (i.e. include mul-
tiple core components, not plug-and-play) to require a 
detailed implementation process. Multiple core compo-
nents require explicit exploration of how they align with 
the implementing organization’s functions and struc-
tures. The target EBI must be supported by evidence and 
ready for implementation, and could be a practice, pro-
gram, intervention, or initiative; delivered in person or 
via eHealth technology and targeted to adults or children.

Access to the Playbook. The implementation team lead 
at each of the six implementing organizations will be 
invited by email to access and register their project with 
the tool housed on a protected cloud-based server. All 
Playbook users will also receive a short (2-min) promo-
tional video to engage, motivate and highlight Playbook 
functionalities and relative advantage. The video is not 
for training purposes since our premise is that built-in 
facilitation will be sufficient to enable self-directed use of 
the tool. All implementation leads will invite their team 
members to join their registered project space (e.g. cre-
ate a login to interact with their team members on the 
tool). Two organizations in the Playbook + facilitation 
condition will share Playbook access with the intermedi-
ary or purveyor organization providing implementation 
support. Four sites in the Playbook-only condition will 
proceed without external implementation facilitation. 
All organizations can request technological assistance, 
and any requests for implementation facilitation from the 
Playbook-only sites will be addressed and documented in

logged field notes. We will redirect technical issues and 
bugs to Pivot Design Group.

Data collection. Implementation is a varied and dynamic 
process, and measuring user experience in the moment 
is important. We selected 3-month check-in intervals 
to allow organizations to advance through implemen-
tation activities while balancing our need to monitor 
how the implementation is proceeding and minimize 
meeting burden. We will use the Microsoft Teams vide-
oconference platform for check-in meetings with each 
implementation team, lasting approximately 60 min 
and conducted by MB and KP, both female investigators 
with doctoral training in psychology and health services 
research. Field notes captured in real-time using Micro-
soft Teams transcription and audio recording features 
will support rigour. This rapid analysis method is effective 
[76] and does not require costly and timely transcription. 
Once participant consents are secured, we will distribute 
the baseline implementation process survey for com-
pletion by the team lead in advance of the first check-in 
meeting. We will also distribute the demographic surveys 
for completion by each team member. These data will 
capture each organization’s prior implementation expe-
rience and approach. In addition, an adapted Organiza-
tional Readiness for Implementing Change questionnaire 
(ORIC) [77] will be administered to all implementation 
team members via REDCap during the baseline meeting 
to assess readiness to use the Playbook tool.

We will elicit how users are progressing with their imple-
mentation using the Playbook, which features are helpful, 
and any implementation needs not adequately addressed 
by the tool at quarterly check-in meetings. Probes [78] 
will identify usability issues in using the Playbook, 
including (1) description of the issue (i.e. how it fell short 
of meeting user needs and the consequences); (2) severity 
(i.e. how problematic the issue was ranging from 0 [“cata-
strophic or dangerous”] to 4 [“subtle problem”], adapted 
from Lyon et  al. [79] and Dumas and Redish [80]; (3) 
scope (i.e. # of tasks affected by the issue); and (4) level 
of complexity (i.e. how simple the issue was to address 
[low, medium, high]). We will allow time at each check-
in meeting for organizations to raise issues, ask ques-
tions and share comments. For the two organizations in 
the Playbook + facilitation condition, we will probe how 
they used support from the intermediary or purveyor 
organization. We will track emergent problems or que-
ries with the tool via a built-in feedback button and ana-
lyse issue type, severity, and scope. Technical bugs will 
be addressed immediately by Pivot Design Group. Meet-
ing transcripts will be shared with each implementation 

team and with intermediary organizations for comment 
or correction.

Implementation team members will also individually 
complete an adapted System Usability Scale question-
naire (SUS) [81] at each check-in meeting via REDCap. 
The SUS provides a reliable tool for measuring usabil-
ity and consists of a 10-item questionnaire with five 
response options, from strongly agree to strongly disa-
gree. SUS has become an industry standard because it 
is a straightforward scale to administer to participants, 
can be used on small sample sizes with reliable results, is 
valid and can effectively differentiate between usable and 
unusable systems [82, 83].

Quarterly meetings will also be held with the two imple-
mentation support organizations to learn how they 
integrate the tool into their facilitation process. Data 
captured in MS Team transcription will be coded for pro-
cedural changes, barriers and facilitators, and tool advan-
tages and disadvantages.

Metrics from the Playbook content management software 
and Google Analytics will capture how users progressed 
through the tool’s steps and activities and how long they 
took to do so (time/efficiency). Metrics will include (1) 
Duration—time taken for completion of implementation 
phases (efficiency); (2) Adherence to the implementation 
steps and activities over time (i.e. did they complete Play-
book activities and follow steps as intended as evidenced 
by user inputs within the tool); and (3) Final Stage—the 
furthest phase achieved in the implementation process. 
In addition, key implementation activities built into each 
implementation phase will provide milestone anchors 
for tracking user progression through implementation. 
Implementation cost-tracking will be added as a function 
in the following tool iteration (version 2.0).

The final month-24 check-in (or earlier, if implementa-
tion is attained) will involve two one-hour meetings per 
organization, scheduled within a month of each other. 
One meeting will follow the usual check-in protocol, and 
a second meeting will explore determinant factors that 
hindered or facilitated Playbook use; this will occur via 
team interviews informed by the updated Consolidated 
Framework for Implementation Research (CFIR2.0) [42, 
84]. CFIR provides a taxonomy of operationally defined 
constructs associated with effective implementation, 
empirically derived from 19 theoretical frameworks, and 
organized into five domains: characteristics of the inter-
vention (the Playbook), the inner setting, the outer set-
ting, characteristics of individuals, and the process. The 
tool is adaptable for qualitative data collection (CFIRg​

uide.​com), and we will include all domains and factors. 
We will follow a modified rapid analysis (RA) approach 
that combines data collection and coding. The RA 
approach is an alternative to in-depth analysis of inter-
view data that yields valid findings consistent with in-
depth analysis, with the added advantage of being less 
resource-intensive and faster [76].

CFIR interviews will be conducted by two CFIR-trained 
research analysts with each implementation team using 
MS Teams’ transcription and audio-recording features. 
We will interview each organization’s implementa-
tion team as a group unless individual interviews are 
requested; this may occur if implementation teams 
include members with a varying role hierarchy, which 
may influence one’s intention to speak freely without fear 
of repercussion. Organizations will be reminded that the 
study focus is on the Playbook tool and its usefulness and 
feasibility rather than on their implementation perfor-
mance. One analyst will facilitate the interview while a 
second analyst captures field notes directly onto a tem-
plated form that maps to CFIR domains and factors in the 
order presented in the interview protocol. CFIR has been 
extensively studied in various contexts [85–88], including 
the study of eHealth technology implementation [89]. In 
our experience, interviews with all 39 constructs can be 
conducted in 60 min [86–88]. Given limited evidence of 
constructs that may be more salient across contexts, we 
will include them all.

A final check-in meeting will also be conducted with the 
intermediary organizations to assess their overall experi-
ences providing implementation facilitation alongside the 
Playbook. We intend to learn how the Playbook may be 
used as an adjunct tool to streamline their workflows and 
processes.

User input will include free-form content entered into 
the digital tool by the users as they work through the 
activities. For example, users are asked to discuss and 
describe how well the EBI fits with their current services, 
priorities, workflows, supports, community, and organi-
zational values. User input at registration (first use) will 
include descriptive project details (i.e. target EBI, imple-
mentation timeline, funding, and team members). Links 
to resources and tools accessed by users will be tracked 
throughout. Back-end data will capture timestamped 
milestones and pathway progression as users work 
through the implementation phases and tasks.

Analysis  With a convergent design, we can integrate 
qualitative data (check-in notes, CFIR interviews, free-
form user input) with quantitative data (tool metrics on 

use, ORIC, SUS) to develop a picture of the tool’s fea-
sibility within different contexts. Both data types will 
be collected concurrently, apart from CFIR interviews, 
which we will administer at the end of implementation 
or 24 months. We will use visual joint display methods 
to depict user implementation experience with the tool 
[90]. Data integration will create a solid foundation for 
drawing conclusions about the tool’s usability, feasibility, 
and usefulness. In addition, this integration will lead to 
recommendations for improving the tool’s acceptability, 
feasibility, and effectiveness. Qualitative data analysis will 
allow us to explore user experience and tool functionality, 
how users progressed, implementation needs not ade-
quately addressed, and barriers and facilitators to its use, 
which can inform subsequent revisions and user support 
before further testing. Reporting of qualitative results 
will follow the COREQ criteria [91].

Qualitative. Two research trainees will verify the field-
notes from the ~48 check-in meetings (~8 per site over 
24 months) collected in the MS Teams meeting tran-
scripts and import data into MAXQDA 2022 [92]. The 
number and type of usability issues identified will be 
reported by organization and time point. The type of 
usability issue will be coded using a consensus coding 
approach and framework adapted by Lyon et al. [79] from 
cognitive walkthrough methods [93]. We will code issues 
associated with the user (i.e. the user has insufficient 
information to complete a task); hidden information (i.e. 
the user has insufficient information about what to do); 
sequencing or timing (i.e. difficulty with sequencing or 
time); feedback (i.e. unclear indications about what user 
is doing/needs to do); and cognitive or social (i.e. exces-
sive demands placed on user’s cognitive resources or 
social interactions). Usability issue classification is criti-
cal because it facilitates data interpretation and provides 
more direct links between usability problems and Play-
book redesign solutions.

Analysis of CFIR group interviews (n=8) will follow the 
modified RA approach [76]. Data captured on a tem-
plated summary table will be synthesized into summary 
memos by organization, including for the two intermedi-
ary organizations. Valence and strength will then be rated 
for each factor. The valence component of a rating (+/−) 
is determined by the influence the factor has on the pro-
cess of using the tool to implement the innovation. The 
level of agreement among participants, the language, and 
the use of concrete examples determines rating strength 
(0, 1, 2). Two analysts are required for data collection 
and analysis: one conducts the interview, and the second 
takes notes in the CFIR data table during the interview. 
The interviewer reviews the coded template against the

audiotape to ensure accuracy; they do not code indepen-
dently of one another, but both analysts provide an inde-
pendent valence rating and discuss differences to arrive 
at a consensus.

User free-form input will be captured per organization 
from the tool back-end and entered into MAXQDA soft-
ware [92]. Two analysts will code these data indepen-
dently with a coding tree aligned with the core elements 
(factors, strategies, process, equity considerations) and 
activities. Coding of emergent usability issues from these 
data will occur as above. Target EBI, initiating implemen-
tation context, team member demographics, and baseline 
implementation survey will be reported descriptively and 
inform data interpretation.

Quantitative. Ratings for both ORIC and SUS question-
naires use a 5-point Likert-type scale (1 = extremely 
disagree, 5 = extremely agree). They will be reported 
descriptively (range, mean, SD) by organization and 
usability issues (QUAL), adherence to core elements 
(QUANT), and final phase achieved (QUANT). SUS rat-
ings will be analysed within organizations for changes 
across time intervals. Tool metrics will capture activ-
ity duration (dates of first and last activities completed 
within each phase to ascertain the number of implemen-
tation days), adherence (# and order of activities com-
pleted within a phase), and final phase achieved for each 
organization. These data will be explored against quali-
tative usability data between and within sites using joint 
display methods.

Gender-based analysis. Gender is important in decision-
making, stakeholder engagement, communication, and 
preferences for EBI adoption [94]. Implementation may 
operate differently within and across genders under vari-
ous circumstances [95] and requires decision-making 
that may shape what is implemented, how, and why. For 
example, leadership traits among leaders of different 
genders can influence the outcome of decision-making 
processes that are key to implementation. Gender may 
also affect how individuals use digital tools and eHealth 
innovations [96]. We will attempt to balance gender in 
the composition of our knowledge user group involved 
in tool development among usability testing participants 
and implementation teams. The analysis will be guided 
by a realist approach to discover what works, for whom, 
in what circumstances, and why. While we cannot con-
trol the gender composition within organization imple-
mentation teams, we will explore differences in our data.

Limitations. The Implementation Playbook has tre-
mendous potential for impact due to its disruptive [97] 

capability (i.e. creating a resource or market where none 
existed), generic applicability and scalability. No existing 
technology does what the Playbook is designed to do.

Nevertheless, disruptive technologies bring inherent 
risks because they involve a new way of doing things. 
There is a risk that new technology can take years or fail 
to be adopted. Users of the Playbook may need help to 
follow all the steps and work through the activities, or 
they might prefer to implement with in-person external 
facilitation. Some organizations are more risk-averse and 
adopt an innovation only after seeing how it performs 
for others. Over time, we can leverage early adopters by 
highlighting the Playbook’s usability, feasibility, relative 
advantage, positive peer pressure and tension for change 
and by showcasing the experiences of champion users.

Discussion
Poor implementation, regardless of intervention effec-
tiveness, is costly and wasteful. To this end, we aim to 
produce a pragmatic solution that challenges the status 
quo in how organizations use or fail to use implementa-
tion science to inform their EBI implementation. This 
paper describes the protocol for a multi-phased research 
study to develop and test a digital tool to support the 
effective implementation of evidence-based innovations 
in various healthcare organizations and for various EBIs. 
We will produce a first-in-kind tool and learn whether it 
can feasibly be used to support implementation. We will 
identify what revisions may be needed and whether the 
tool can be used autonomously (without external facili-
tation), in different healthcare contexts, as an adjunct to 
external facilitation and with different EBIs. This work 
will inform the next iteration of the tool and preparation 
for an effectiveness study.
We hope to demonstrate that the Playbook enables 
self-directed implementation independent of costly 
external facilitation. We also intend for the tool to be 
universally useful in any healthcare context and for any 
type of EBI due to the universality of core elements 
from implementation science (i.e. implementation 
team, process, factors, strategies, and outcomes). The 
universality of these core implementation elements is 
analogous to the Plan Do Study Act model that guides 
quality improvement across contexts. The core ele-
ments stem from published work about process [98], 
determinant factors [42], strategies [44], implemen-
tation outcomes [45], and equity considerations [99] 
These core elements have guided our facilitation work 
in varying contexts (i.e. MB and JB have used the core 
components to guide implementation for >50 teams 
in international implementation initiatives). Tailoring

these core elements to organizational context occurs in 
how users apply them in their planning and execution. 
The proposed tool is innovative and potentially disrup-
tive; to our knowledge, there is no existing tool that 
integrates multiple implementation core components 
to facilitate EBI implementation across organizations 
and types of innovation.