Research and Applications

Designing a medication timeline for patients and
physicians

Jeffery L Belden,1,2 Pete Wegier,1,3,4,5 Jennifer Patel,6 Andrew Hutson,7

Catherine Plaisant,8 Joi L Moore,2,9 Nathan J Lowrance,9 Suzanne A Boren,2,10

and Richelle J Koopman1

1Department of Family and Community Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri, USA, 2MU Infor-
matics Institute, University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri, USA, 3Temmy Latner Centre for Palliative Care, Sinai Health System,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 4Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Sinai Health System, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 5Department
of Family & Community Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 6GoInvo, Boston, Massachusetts, USA, 7De-
partment of Health Sciences, School of Health Professions, University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri, USA, 8Human Computer
Interaction Laboratory, Institute for Advanced Computer Studies, University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland, USA, 9The
School of Information Science and Learning Technologies, College of Education, University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri, USA,
and 10Department of Health Management and Informatics, School of Medicine, University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri, USA

(beldenj@health.missouri.edu)

Received 18 April 2018; Revised 14 September 2018; Editorial Decision 14 October 2018; Accepted 17 October 2018

ITERATIVE DESIGN PROCESS

Materials and methods
Our overall approach to participatory design was inspired by the de-
sign study methodology described by Sedlmair:12 “We define a de-
sign study as a project in which visualization researchers analyze a
specific real-world problem faced by domain experts, design a visu-
alization system that supports solving this problem, validate the de-
sign,
and
reflect
about
lessons
learned
in
order
to
refine
visualization design guidelines.” We identified physician and pa-
tient/caregiver information needs for comprehending historical med-
ication use patterns (“What happened before?”) while managing
chronic disease in the ambulatory setting for an individual patient
with multiple morbidities and multiple medications. Common infor-
mation needs include needing to know all medications used cur-
rently, when and why dose changes occurred, and how changes
related to one another (eg, starting one drug because another was
stopped). There is also a need to make cross-categorical compari-
sons with other health data, including blood pressure, weight, and
pertinent lab results. A timeline visualization is not suitable for all
clinical tasks, and completely different tasks performed by physician
or patient/caregivers might require alternative information displays.
For instance, compared to mere review of a medication list, prescrib-
ing activities require the additional knowledge of medication quan-
tity, number of refills, remaining time available on the previous
prescription, identification of the prescriber, the selected pharmacy,
identification of potential interactions, and formulary coverage
details.

Identifying user needs
From primary care physician members of our team, we identified
key user needs in reviewing and understanding complex medication
histories when caring for a patient with complex chronic diseases.
Physicians (and other prescribing provider users) need the following
information: medication names, strength, average total daily dose,
dosing instructions, start-stop dates for any dose change, reasons for
making those changes, quick comparison with other concurrent
drugs, and comparison to related lab results and vital signs (blood
pressure and weight) that affect or can be affected by the medication
in question. These data allow physicians to accomplish the kinds of
tasks listed in Table 1.

In 2012 and 2013, we reviewed 12 EHR products in general re-
lease ranging from large to small at the annual international HIMSS
conference trade show floor, assessing the capability for displaying
multiple years of medication history on a single screen and for mak-
ing cross-categorical temporal connections of data. We asked each
vendor to display a medication timeline view (if they had one) and
the table view of the medication list that could show past medica-
tions. None allowed a historical overview of all medications in a sin-
gle view
or information display. None used
graphical
data
visualization features.
In many EHRs, these information needs are currently address-
able only by scouring the content of past physician notes, or by dig-
ging through tabular views of many rows of medications past and
present (filterable to hide or reveal medications no longer actively
used by the patient). These puzzle pieces of information are

96

scattered among different areas of the EHR, making these existing
methods time consuming, frustrating, and error prone. They can
strain working memory by separating content within a page or be-
tween pages, which can cause a heavy cognitive load when making
comparisons with interrelated data (ie, prescriptions, dosage, and
dates) and associated data (such as lab results and weight). Time-
consuming tasks may produce no results because they can be unsuc-
cessful, aborted, or not even attempted due to difficulties with col-
lecting the data for decision making.

Reviewing history of timelines
Graphical timelines are well suited to this set of user needs. One of
the earliest timelines in print was Joseph Priestley’s timeline display
of “A New Chart of History” in 1769, listing events in 106 separate
locations.13 In the 1980s, data visualization enjoyed an increase in
popularity. In the 90s, different ways of visualizing medical informa-
tion were introduced, including the timeline, the most popular of
which was LifeLines.14,15 LifeLines incorporated a large variety of
medical information into an interactive display with several novel
features, including 1) a personal history overview on a single screen,
2) direct access to all detailed information from the overview with 1
or 2 clicks of the mouse, and 3) critical information or alerts visible
at the overview level. Since then, visualization technologies have in-
corporated many new features, but the medication timeline using
multiple bars has been seemingly unchanged.
Data visualization techniques have evolved over the past few
decades with the user in mind. Visualization techniques reduce cog-
nitive computation and reduce the amount of information needed to
be searched before drawing conclusions,16 and medical experts pre-
fer graphical representations over data tables when searching for
trends.17 Early techniques incorporated methods to denote specific
events, using various symbols to denote simple and complex events,
intervals of time, and overlapping events.18 Others utilized such
techniques for medical information timelines to emphasize the most
recent data while maintaining a visual history of the data.19

Several designs were introduced in the early 2000s using Shnei-
derman’s “overview first, zoom and filter, then details on demand”
mantra.20 Another popular feature was the colored bar to denote ex-
tended events, initially introduced as a feature of Patient History in
Pocket (PHiP), a medical history visualization software.21 A more
recent software development, Medical Information Visual Assistant
(MIVA), allows users to customize their experience with drag and

drop menus to highlight the features they are interested in
viewing.22

LifeLines is interactive, displaying only the medication start
dates on the broad overview (Figure 1A), but continuous colored
bar graphs upon zooming for details, with dispensing events and
expected duration of the medication prescription (Figure 1B).14

Alonso et al. evaluated Lifelines in a juvenile justice setting, compar-
ing timeline view to tabular view for responding to 31 detailed ques-
tions regarding youths’ personal history with the juvenile system.
The timeline excelled for interval comparisons and making interca-
tegorical connections, while the tabular view excelled at finding ex-
act dates.23

Iterating the baseline timeline model
The LifeLines model has several features that support our design
aims. These include an overview of all medications in a single view
for any time interval; high information density; rapid visual compar-
isons using pre-attentive attributes (color, size, shape, orientation,
motion); and the ability to display multiple medication variables at
once: duration (length), daily dose amount (color and intensity),
doses per day (symbol encoding), and incomplete adherence (gaps in
line). The medication timeline concept is well adapted to displaying
associated data (lab results, vital signs such as blood pressure and
weight, and key incidents such as hospitalization or surgical proce-
dures) in adjacent timeline or graphical views or added as annota-
tions. The LifeLines concept has been incorporated into several
operational systems.24

Belden has created various pencil sketch versions as early as
2010 exploring alternative design patterns with high information
density incorporating height to represent dosage strength (Figure 2),
color, line weight, and line style (single, double, triple, dashed, etc.)
to represent daily dosing instructions. These sketches explored alter-
native display methods for renewal and dispensing events and adher-
ence gaps. Pencil sketches allow rapid iteration at low cost and
embrace frequent failure as a strategy for succeeding sooner.25 For
example, early on, we opted in favor of using a fixed height bar with
color distinctions to represent dosage as opposed to using variable
height bars to convey medication dosage. Using variable height for
dosage required more vertical space than uniform width bars. Using
fixed height bars could employ black as a maximum dose (black is
readily recognized as “maximum gray”), whereas a maximum
height was not readily discernable. Recognizing dosage maximum
quickly helps to prompt physicians to add an additional medication.

Engagement of stakeholder workshop members
This medication timeline prototype effort was part of a larger 5-
domain effort for a clinically inspired design guide for EHR vendors.
To seek engagement from the EHR vendor community, we met with
the Electronic Health Records Association Clinician Experience
Workgroup to assure that our effort would address their commercial
needs to improve the clinician experience. We engaged 10 health IT
vendor workshop participants with product development experience
representing both large and small health IT organizations, distrib-
uted over 3 on-site workshops. Participant breakout group design
sketches and design requirements were subject to design critiques
and multi-voting to develop consensus. We held a kickoff workshop
with our vendor participants, and subsequent weekly calls with the
core author team, with more frequent iteration between the profes-
sional design team and the project leader. Starting with preliminary
design
concepts,
this
team
expanded
the
design,
explored

Table 1. Medication history review tasks for care of chronic disease

Task
EHR current state

Identifying current prescription on a
medication history
Easy

Identifying past prescriptions on a medi-
cation history
Can be done with 1 or
more steps currently
Identifying the length of time a medica-
tion has been prescribed
Difficult in list view; can
be searched in some
EHRs
Identifying new prescriptions in a given
time interval
Cumbersome

Identifying a dosage change in a given
time interval
Cumbersome

Making intercategorical comparisons of
medication changes with other data
categories (blood pressure, weight, lab
results)

Available in only 1 EHR
in mobile (tablet)
product

97

alternatives, and specified detailed sketches and feature lists for a
working medication timeline prototype intended to be open-source
for HIT developers to use and adapt. We modernized the look of
LifeLines with inspiration from the design language of the flight
search tool, Hipmunk.com.26 Given our budget and time con-
straints, we prioritized a set of minimal features for our interactive
timeline prototype and rendered the backlog content as supplemen-
tal static illustrations of additional feature designs.

Advisory panel
We convened an advisory panel of 12 subject matter experts in
human factors, pharmacology, medicine, and nursing to solicit
their critical review and user feedback, incorporating the feed-
back into iterative design revisions. This feedback was collected
using a combination of written submissions, a survey with a
small number of respondents (5), and 2 group conference calls
with written field notes. The conference call moderator asked the
participants to address the overall e-book product and respond
to a series of prompts about the content and the design frame-
work. The medication timeline was among several content
topics. There was unanimous consensus between the vendor and
advisory panel clinician participants about the content of the
medication timeline display.

RESULTS

Using an iterative design process, our team arrived at a final proto-
type (Figure 3), available online at inspiredEHRs.org/timeline.27

The features are detailed in Table 2, along with the associated prin-
ciples that support the design.

Harkening to the data visualization mantra of Shneiderman of
“overview first, zoom and filter, then details on demand,” we
wanted to harness the power of information visualization to provide
a chronological overview of the medication history, to enable zoom-
ing, sorting, and filtering the list, and to enable clicking a medication
bar graph to reveal further details on demand.32

Backlog features
In addition to the features included in our online final product, we
identified a set of backlog features and concepts that could not read-
ily be incorporated into the interactive prototype. We have clarified
most of the interaction design of these backlog features. The follow-
ing section presents the backlog features and their respective visual
mockups.
Clicking or tapping expands the row/bar, displaying additional
details, including dosing details and dates and reasons for medica-
tion changes (Figure 4).

Figure 1. LifeLines medication timeline (1A) overview and (1B) details.

98

Figure 2. Failing rapidly with pencil sketches. See “Bad idea” in left panel.

Figure 3. Medication timeline prototype screenshot – annotated.

99

Selecting a diagnosis in the problem list highlights corresponding
medications
in
the
timeline.
In
Figure
5,
the
diagnosis
of
“hypertension” is selected in the problem list, and 3 medications for
hypertension are highlighted in an accent color, teal. This is called
“brushing and linking” in the data visualization discipline.33 Associ-
ating the readily available “therapeutic class” for a medication will
not be as effective as using the clinician-assigned diagnosis. “The
physician and patient need to know why this medication has been
prescribed for this particular patient. Knowing that a drug is a beta-
blocker (the therapeutic class) is not sufficient, because a beta-
blocker might be used for any of these diagnoses: hypertension, an-
gina, coronary artery disease, atrial fibrillation, supraventricular
arrhythmias, tremor, migraine, and portal hypertension. The thera-
peutic class will often be meaningless to the patient.”31

We included a static mini-timeline in our interactive table view
of the medication list, available at http://inspiredehrs.org/medica-
tion-list/, and shown in Figure 6. This interactive table view allows
sorting by key columns, and filtering using the search field.

Additional sketches in the Appendix show less refined concepts
for additional display details or use cases.
Zooming shows increasing granularity, which could display
medication adherence gaps, refill events, and under-dosing if

corresponding patient adherence data and pharmacy dispensing data
were reliably available, sketched in Appendix Figures A1 and A2.
One example of quantitative measures of medication adherence is
medication possession ratio (MPR).34

Projecting the timeline into the near future allows display of
planned complex care transitions where several medication changes
occur in a relatively short time interval. One example of such a com-
plex care transition is the peri-procedural period where medications
may be paused, used in reduced doses for a limited time, tapering
(up or down) schedules are employed, or new temporary medica-
tions added (Appendix Figure A3).

We chose to display medication dosage as color intensity in a
uniform height horizontal bar graph, but alternative displays are
possible. An alternative timeline using height of the horizontal bar
to convey dose strength is shown in Appendix Figure A4. It also dis-
plays examples of adherence gaps, partial adherence, taking more than
the
prescribed
amount, and
predicted
duration
of
the
prescription.

EVALUATION OF PROTOTYPE

Methods
Using group email solicitation, we recruited 23 physicians who prac-
tice in the ambulatory clinics of University of Missouri Health Care.
We sampled for heterogeneity in gender, years since residency grad-
uation, and years using EHRs. Family medicine attending physicians
formed the sample majority; smaller numbers of internal medicine
attending physicians also participated.
The survey used multiple choice questions, asking participants to
select the best possible answer (or answers). Qualtrics recorded the
initiation time, time to first click, the time to last click, time to sub-
mit, and responses for each survey question. Task time was mea-
sured using the “time to submit,” the time between when a task was
initiated and when the participant submitted a response. Task cor-
rectness was determined based on the comparison of the pre-
determined response and the participant response.
To derive the questions for the survey, we began by identifying
common ambulatory clinical scenarios in the management of hyper-
tension, and which included a need to reference the prior medication
history in the EHR. We reasoned that clinical scenarios would rely
too much on the participants’ medical knowledge and experience,
and thus might confound the analysis of results. Therefore, we de-
rived discrete, fundamental tasks from these common patient sce-
narios.
All data were identical across each visualization—the only differ-
ence was in the presentation of the data (table vs. timeline formats).
All medications had the same start date, end date, and dosage his-
tory. All medications were sorted by descending, alpha-numeric or-
der. Participants were randomly assigned to either the table or
timeline formats (resulting in uneven Ns for each item). See
Appendix Figures 6 and 7.

Results
The survey was activated a total of 35 times. Of those activations,
24 participants completed the demographics survey questions
(Table 3). Of those participants, one participant dropped out and
for that participant, no responses were collected across any item.
Of the remaining 23 participants, 2 participants dropped out at
Item 5, and no responses were collected. One response to Item 1 was
intentionally removed because the response time was 71035 seconds

Table 2. Features of interactive medication timeline and their asso-
ciated human factors and design principles

Number
Feature
Principles and Rationale

1
Display overview of all medi-
cations for selected time on
a single screen without
scrolling.

•
Achieve spatial contiguity
and reduce demands on
working memory.28

•
Allow quick visual
queries.29

•
High information density
for complex patients.
2
Default interval is 2 years.
During ambulatory care visits
for chronic disease, pro-
viders need >12-month
history.
3
Medication names display on
both left and right sides of
the view area, making it
easier to identify the name
for an associated row.

Gestalt principles of proxim-
ity and alignment.30

4
Right-hand drug name panel
also serves as the time
scrubber, dynamically
updating drug and dose
as the user moves the
scrubber.

System shows state
dynamically.29

5
Use monochrome grayscale
bar graph, where black
represents maximum daily
dose for a given clinical in-
dication (diagnosis). Gray
is less, lighter is lower.

Intensity corresponds to
dosage strength.

6
Longitudinal bar graphs dis-
play start-stop-change
dates, dose intensity, and
gaps in continuity.

Pre-attentive attributes
(color, shape, length) allow
rapid visual processing of
medication dosing and du-
ration.31

7
Change the displayed time in-
terval (zoom in or out)
with range selector.

Overview ﬁrst, zoom and
ﬁlter, then details on
demand.32

100

Figure 4. Medication timeline showing drug details and user comment for selected row.

Figure 5. Brushing with color. Selecting a diagnosis from a list highlights the associated medications in a distinct color, as in right-hand panel.

101

(19.76 hours), 256 times greater than the next longest response
time. The participant’s remaining item responses did not produce a
noticeable outlier; and including or excluding these responses did
not change the outcome significance of the study. Therefore, the
remaining responses from this participant were included in the final
model. Determining a successful response required the participant to
answer the whole question correctly, and partial credit was not ap-
plied (Table 4).

Discussion
We expected that the data visualization timeline view would have
been more accurate than the traditional medication history view.
We found that physician accuracy increased across all 5 tasks, with
especially large increases in performance in tasks 2 and 3. The low
performance in task 5 suggests that some common medication-
related EHR tasks may be so difficult that specific design considera-
tions must be made for them to improve performance.
The timeline performed faster in 4 out of 5 tasks but did not
reach
statistical
significance.
Since
these
observations
were

Figure 6. Static mini-timeline (next to last column) in the Interactive Table view of the medication list.

Table 3. Demographic characteristics

Characteristic (N ¼ 23)
N (%)

Gender
Male
12 (52%)
Female
11 (48%)
Age group
24–34 years old
6 (26%)
35–44 years old
4 (17%)
45–54 years old
5 (22%)
55–64 years old
7 (30%)
65–74 years old
1 (4%)
Computer skill
Beginner
1 (4%)
Intermediate
18 (78%)
Expert
4 (17%)
Years of experience as a healthcare provider
0–5 years
6 (26%)
6–10 years
3 (13%)
11–20 years
3 (13%)
21 years or more
11 (48%)

102

performed in remote unsupervised testing, they may not be reflective
of real-world usage.
Data visualization tools such as the medication timeline can take
advantage of the power and speed of the human brain’s visual proc-
essing system. Features such as preattentive attributes including color,
size, shape, and proximity allow users to quickly spot treatment
changes such as medication dose changes, and to perceive gaps such
as medication adherence gaps. Data visualization also allows interac-
tivity and cross-category comparisons. These kinds of more complex
tasks can be expected to be much faster with data visualization meth-
ods than with existing EHR user experiences. With the interactivity
of data visualizations, a user can drill-in to explore any area of inter-
est such as an individual medication event or a transition in medica-
tion doses. Being able to visually explore cross-category relationships
such as those between a medication change and other data such as lab
results or vital sign (blood pressure and weight) changes allows users
to postulate causative correlations between these categories. Visually
correlating a change in lab results after a medication change should
be much easier than with current EHR display methods.

GENERAL DISCUSSION

Our goal was to produce a prototype example allowing physicians
to understand a patient’s complex medication list history in a single
graphical view, thus reducing time, effort, and cognitive load while
improving task speed and accuracy, thus enhancing safety. The time-
line was intended for rapid learning and shared use by patient and
physician, so visual simplicity was paramount. We limited the scope
to the ambulatory primary care setting of patients with multi-
morbidity chronic conditions.

The primary audience for our demonstration prototype is the
community of health IT developer teams, offering clinically inspired
design examples, with participation from stakeholders from that
community. Their participation helped root our design recommen-
dations in the reality of the commercial development environment
and marketplace. From personal communications, we are aware of
a handful of vendors who have since pursued or are pursuing medi-
cation timeline functionality.
The interactive prototype is released for use free of charge, and
the code for the prototypes is made available at https://github.com/
goinvo/EHR/tree/master/timeline under the Apache 2.0 open-source
license. Our accompanying online guide, “Inspired EHRs: Designing
for Clinicians,” explains the human factors science and information
design principles incorporated into this model.
There are limitations to this design project. Evaluation of this
timeline was completed using expert reviews from a group of clini-
cians (physicians, nurses, pharmacists), human factors researchers,
usability practitioners, and volunteers from the EHR vendor com-
munity. Our pilot study was performed unsupervised, remotely, and
had a small number of participants with weak statistical power. Fur-
ther research is needed to show whether this prototype performs bet-
ter than existing medication historical information displays. We
learned from implementation efforts at 1 EHR vendor and 1 client
organization that there is inconsistent and limited prescription dis-
pense and adherence data being exchanged or available currently.
The transmission of e-prescription details is inconsistent across com-
mercial EHR and pharmacy software products, thus limiting the
consistent display of prescription instruction detail. Prescribers may
write imprecise or non-standard dosing instructions, depending on
the flexibility of the prescribing software. When the data are

Table 4. Task accuracy and task time of table compared to timeline

Task

Table
Timeline
Table
Timeline

N
Answered
correctly
N
Answered
correctly
Mean
difference
Mean Time in
seconds (SD)
Mean Time
in seconds (SD)
Mean time
difference

1. Identifying current prescription on a medication
history
8
50%
14
64%
þ14%
44 (22)
69 (37)
þ25

“Based on the visualization provided, please identify
which of the following is not a currently prescribed
medication.”
2. Identifying past prescription on a medication history
12
17%
11
91%
þ74%
68 (22)
50 (17)
18
“Based on the visualization provided, please check
all past prescriptions. Our deﬁnition of ‘past pre-
scriptions’ includes only medication prescribed AND
not currently in use.”
3. Identify the length of time a medication has been pre-
scribed
9
44%
14
93%
þ49%
22 (8)
16 (6)
6

“Based on the visualization provided, how many
years has Alendronate been prescribed to the
patient?”
4. Identify new prescriptions in a given time interval
10
50%
13
62%
þ12%
65 (24)
30 (12)
35
“Based on the visualization, select all new medica-
tions from the list below prescribed between 2012
and 2013. New medications are all medications with
no record of any previous prescription to the
patient.”
5. Identify a dosage change in a given time interval
10
0%
11
18%
þ18%
36 (18)
30 (8)
6
“Based on the visualization, identify all medications
with a dosage change between 2013 and 2014.”

Mean time difference is calculated as timeline minus table value.

103

exchanged from EHR to e-prescribing hub to pharmacy software, or
make the return trip for a renewal request, the data may undergo
transformation that introduces new ambiguity. What started the
journey as discrete data elements, “lisinopril 10 mg; oral tablet; 1
tablet; 1 time a day,” may get transformed to unstructured text,
“lisinopril 10 mg; ‘TAKE ONE TABLET DAILY BY MOUTH.’”
Parsing the mixture of data formats to create a precise timeline dis-
play can be technically daunting.
Future efforts should include commercial production of medica-
tion timelines with our proposed features included or excluded
based on the workflow it is intended for. Changing the zoom level
could change the level of detail displayed, making it easier to show
more details as focus narrows, removing some details or features,
adding others, and thus maintaining a clean and balanced design.
Additional features could include cross-category comparisons if dis-
played inline or adjacent to time-based displays of other clinical infor-
mation such as lab results, blood pressure, and weight, thus allowing
quick, mental connections to relevant data with much less cognitive
effort. Our prototype makes use of different shades of gray to convey
dose strengths, but other techniques are worth considering and
researching to validate speed, accuracy, and clarity of prescription
and adherence data. Different considerations must be made when de-
signing for the various tasks a provider performs at any given time.
Whether this tool can thrive in the commercial HIT marketplace
remains to be seen. The SMART (Substitutable Medical Apps and
Reusable Technology) project (https://smarthealthit.org) harnesses
the FHIR (Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resources) from HL7 to
create open solutions and tools for innovators to build applications
that can connect to systems using the FHIR platform. Using this
platform or FHIR standards, non-commercial or commercial devel-
opers could create a medication timeline app that could be deployed
across any compatible EHR.

CONCLUSION

We have presented a design aimed at improving physician under-
standing of a patient’s complex medication history, using a visual-
ized medication timeline. The design was produced via iterative,
rapid prototyping, with consistent feedback from several stake-
holder groups. We believe that such a design would reduce the tem-
poral and cognitive load placed on physicians when evaluating a
patient’s medication history, leading to improved and safer care.