Original Paper

User-Centered Development of a Mobile App to Assess the Quality
of Life of Patients With Cancer: Iterative Investigation and Usability
Testing

Chantal N L Beutter1,2, MSc; Katharina Zeller1, BSc; Uwe M Martens1,3, Dr med; Bettina Pfleiderer2*, Dr med, Dr
rer nat; Christian Fegeler1,4*, Dr med

1MOLIT Institute gGmbH, Heilbronn, Germany
2Clinic for Radiology, University of Münster, Münster, Germany
3Internal Medicine III for Hematology, Oncology and Palliative Medicine, SLK Clinics GmbH, Heilbronn, Germany
4University of Applied Science Heilbronn, Heilbronn, Germany
*these authors contributed equally

Chantal N L Beutter, MSc
MOLIT Institute gGmbH
Im Zukunftspark 10
Heilbronn, 74076
Germany
Phone: 49 7131 1334500

Methods

Study Design

App Development

The app developed in this research is called Lion-App, which
enables a longitudinal survey of the QoL in oncology using a
smartphone. As questionnaires have high objectivity, reliability,
and validity [33], as well as high sensitivity to monitor changes
over time, the app provided an assessment of the QoL through
the EORTC QLQ-C30 in our research. Responses to the
questionnaires could either be viewed as individual answer
sheets or displayed in an evaluation over time. The evaluation
of the app included a calculated total score of the questionnaire
responses as well as the individual progressions of the subscales.
Additionally, it is possible for users to document their well-being
via an integrated patient diary.

The aim of the app is to help patients gain a better awareness
of their personal QoL. The goal is to support them in
self-management through different stages of their disease as
this knowledge can be used to specifically promote the QoL in

therapy or to identify and address limitations in long-term
survivorship. Therefore, the application of the app is detached
from clinical treatment but describes a solution for patients to
assess their QoL independently at home. As the app is intended
to be installed on the patient’s private device, it was developed
in a user-centered way to reduce usability issues for better
applicability.

User-Centered Design

In general, the design of the app’s interfaces was based on the
International Organization for Standardization (ISO) standard
9241, and a graphic designer managed the aspects of usability
and user experience (UX). The goal was to develop an
easy-to-use app for users to document their QoL through various
functions. In doing so, the steps in the ISO 9241-210 process

were performed iteratively, as seen in Figure 1. The first step
in planning the human-centered design process was performed
at the end of 2020. As a next step, several cancer support groups
were contacted, and focus groups were conducted at the
beginning of 2021 to understand and specify the user context.
Consequently, user requirements were specified, which led to
a first prototype for the first usability test (usability test 1) from
April to June 2021. Based on the evaluation of this
implementation, further design solutions were developed, which
were again evaluated in October 2021 (usability test 2) and from
December 2021 to February 2022 (beta test). In the process, the
maturity of the implementation increased over 3 cycles (usability
test 1, usability test 2, and beta test). Final adaptations in 2022
led to the release of the product afterward.

Figure 1. Process workflow of our user-centered design.

Implementation

After the initial planning phase of the human-centered design
process, several cancer support groups were contacted, to whom
the project was briefly introduced and whose interest in
participation was requested. The following cancer support
groups provided consent to participate:

•
Regional association of the support group for women in
Baden-Württemberg/Bayern
•
Regional association of the prostate cancer support group
in Baden-Württemberg
•
State association of patients with lung cancer and their
relatives in Baden-Württemberg

Three focus groups were conducted for each support group. The
aim of the focus groups was to collect the end users’perceptions
regarding eHealth apps and their needs to better understand user
requirements. All focus groups were moderated, and a transcript
writer was present.

The focus group for the support group for women in
Baden-Württemberg was conducted on April 21, 2021 (n=8,
38%, all female), the focus group for the prostate cancer support

group was conducted on June 8, 2021 (n=3, 14%, all male), and
the focus group for the lung cancer support group was conducted
on June 16, 2021 (n=10, 48%; n=6, 60%, female and n=4, 40%,
male). At that time, legal restrictions due to the COVID-19
pandemic prohibited on-site meetings. Thus, all focus groups
were performed online. Participants were free to participate in
the meetings.

All focus groups were guide-oriented and structured in the same
way: First, an introduction to Lion-App was provided. Second,
questions about prior experiences with QoL surveys were
elicited. Third, various options to map the QoL were presented
and individual preferences evaluated, followed by discussions
of their applicability and usefulness in a health app.

Finally, potential features of the app were presented and
discussed. For an initial evaluation of the look of a possible
color concept to be used in the app, an exemplary design of a
dashboard was shown to the participants. This screen also
included possible structural information about basic processes
of the app (eg, how to access features from the start page).
Participants were asked to rate this concept through a
questionnaire. After they answered the questionnaire, the focus
group concluded with an open discussion of additional

suggestions. At the end of the meeting, participants were
informed about individual usability tests, in which a more
detailed insight into the app would be possible, and invited to
participate in them. Patients included in the focus groups were
re-invited to participate in all further test stages. In addition,
new support group members participated, as well as
nonmembers of any support group who learned about this project
through word of mouth.

The basic user requirements and prioritization of functions
derived from the focus groups were analyzed and used as a basis
for the implementation of a first prototype. This prototype
consisted of mockups that were visualized in Adobe XD. The
first and second digital usability tests and the beta test (usability
test 3) are described in more detail in Multimedia Appendix 1.

In short, through our development cycles, we moved step by
step from a prototype in a controlled user environment to a
real-world setting and release version of the app. In usability
test 1, a prototype was presented based on mockups that were
to be tested with predefined tasks. In usability test 2, the app
was made available on a test device and users were asked to
use the app to document their QoL without using predefined
specific functions. In the final usability test (beta test), the app
was installed on users’ private devices and there were no
specifications for usage. Therefore, testing could be carried out
to any extent. Afterward, the app was processed for public
release. Written and verbal feedback was collected per test stage,
analyzed, and processed for the next development steps.

Since the literature states that user engagement should only be
measured if usability is already evaluated at a high level
[26,34,35], we decided to assess user engagement only in the
beta test after the previous usability tests. A combination of the
passively collected usage pattern, subjective evaluations of the
UX, and expectations was gathered for better insight. We also
investigated whether the integration of certain elements for
extrinsic or instinctive motivation (eg, certain gamification
elements) would impact user engagement over a longer period
of use.

Evaluation

User evaluations of the usability of Lion-App were analyzed
using verbal feedback by expressing the thoughts and
expectations via the “thinking aloud” methodology during use
of the app or at the end of usability tests or by observation of
user behavior. These results were combined with the responses

to the usability questionnaire that was included in all 3 usability
tests.

To evaluate usability and the UX across our development stages,
we decided to use different User Experience Questionnaires
(UEQs) from the existing framework [36]. A short version of
the general User Experience Questionnaire (UEQ-S) was used
once in the focus groups. It enabled users to classify the answers
provided into pragmatic quality (usability aspects), such as
functionality or efficiency, and hedonic quality (satisfaction),
such as innovativeness or novelty [37]. A modular extended
version of the User Experience Questionnaire (UEQ+) was used
for all further usability tests. This questionnaire can be
modularly built from a list of different UX scales. We decided
to use the scales assessing efficiency, clarity, intuitive use,
usefulness, quality of content, and trustworthiness of content
for our evaluation [38]. For each scale, the subjective importance
can be rated. Both scale assessment and importance can be
extracted with a 7-item Likert scale ranging from –3 to 3. The
combination of these values can be used to calculate a key
performance indicator (KPI) as well as the overall UX
impression across evaluations [39]. Even though the assessment
of the UX using the UEQ+ is not as common as when using
other tools, such as the System Usability Scale (SUS), we
decided on this approach because the UEQ+ scales provide
information about potential gaps in performance. Other
well-known survey methods, such as the SUS, often only
provide information about whether usability problems exist and
may need further work to identify the problems rather than
relying on existing limitations.

To better classify the responses of participants, the UEQ+ was
augmented by including additional questions about sex, age
(assessed in 5-year increments), and previous experience with
mobile devices. In usability test 2 as well as the beta test,
participants were also asked to indicate whether they had
previously participated in a usability test of Lion-App.

As the beta test was the first test conducted over a longer period
and on participants’ private devices, we could additionally
explore the impact of different displays and gamification
elements on user engagement. For this, participants were
randomly assigned to 3 versions of the app after registration.
All versions had the same basic functionalities as version A but
differed in add-ons, as shown in Table 1. We compared usage
rates as well as the use of certain functions in detail, such as the
number of responses provided to the integrated questionnaire,
depending on the version and gender or age.

JMIR Cancer 2023 | vol. 9 | e44985 | p. 4

Table 1. Overview of the functionalities of the 3 versions of Lion-App used for the beta test.

Add-ons
Functionalities
Version

N/Ab
A
•
QLQ-C30a

•
Patient diary
•
Information page for relevant topics related to cancer
•
Push notifications as a reminder for usage

B
•
•
Count of active weeksc
QLQ-C30
•
Patient diary
•
Medals
•
Information page for relevant topics related to cancer
•
Push notifications as a reminder for usage

C
•
•
Extended evaluation: (1) comparison of scores and (2) display

of IQRd
QLQ-C30
•
Patient diary
•
Information page for relevant topics related to cancer
•
Push notifications as a reminder for usage

aQLQ-C30: Core Quality-of-Life Questionnaire. Users were able to fill out the questionnaire at any time. Questionnaire responses were visible as an
answer sheet or in an evaluation (with a calculation of the scores).
bN/A: not applicable.
cNumber of interactions≥1.
dReference values from Scott et al [40].

Participants could only register for the beta test until 4 weeks
before the end of the test cycle, as we determined that a
minimum period of use of 4 weeks is required to evaluate
usability and to be able to draw a conclusion about user
engagement. Again, usability assessment was conducted using
the UEQ+, and an additional questionnaire for the general
impression and user engagement was administered. In this
questionnaire, participants were able to provide an overall rating
and state whether they would recommend the app and to what
extent they could imagine themselves using it in the future. The
results were also used to decide about the long-term integration
of an extended evaluation or gamification elements.

Since participants had to answer 2 questionnaires during the
beta test, the UEQ+ was assigned 2 weeks before the end of the
test cycle, whereas the other questionnaire was administered
after completion. After the beta test came closest to a real-world
application of Lion-App, we decided not to conduct another
test if the KPI was in the upper quarter (>1.5). In this case,
feedback was still incorporated before the app was published.

Participants

According to Nielsen and Landauer [41], 85% of usability
problems can be identified with only 5 users and almost 100%
can be identified with 15 users. Thus, we aimed to exceed the
critical number of 5 users per usability test conducted and to
reach ≥15 users, if possible.

Patients with cancer, during or after treatment of their cancer,
and older than 18 years were included in the usability tests. The
beta test contained 1 more exclusion criterion: as the app needed
to be installed on a private mobile device, participants without
a mobile device could not take part, as no one in the study could
be provided with a smartphone. In addition, participants did not
receive any compensation for participation. Throughout all test
stages, interested parties were informed about further usability
tests via support groups or email.

Data Analysis

To assess user requirements, the transcripts of the respective
focus groups were subsequently analyzed. This involved
evaluating what interest and experience existed across
participants and what prioritization of functions was preferred.
Accordingly, the order of the functions to be implemented was
determined. In addition to the KPI of the questionnaires of the
UEQ framework, descriptive analyses of the mean score (SD),
variance (var), confidence (C), and 95% CI were performed.
For internal consistency of the scales, the Cronbach α coefficient
was evaluated [42]. In addition, the median age of participants
was calculated, and the Mann-Whitney U test was performed
to detect differences between the UEQ+ ratings of the app based
on sex. In the beta test, a t test for independent samples was
additionally performed, including a test of equality of variance
using the Levene test for the exploration of the effect of sex on
the number and type of entries. For all age-dependent
calculations, a 1-factor ANOVA was performed. ANOVA
included all participants who indicated their age (12/19, 63%).
Post hoc tests were only performed when the first analysis
showed a significance of 5%. To determine the correlation with
a 2-tailed significance of 5%, a Pearson correlation was
performed. Before performing parametric tests, the normal
distribution of data was assessed based on a significance value
of >.05 in the Shapiro-Wilk test, which then was additionally
confirmed with the corresponding Q-Q diagram as well as the
histogram of the data.

SPSS version 28.0.1.1 (IBM Corp) was used for calculations.
Detailed descriptive analyses of the UEQ-S and the overall
UEQ+ are grouped in Multimedia Appendix 2, corresponding
statistical calculations stratified by sex are summarized in
Multimedia Appendix 3, and an overview of the interactions
stratified by the app version of the beta test is provided in
Multimedia Appendix 4.

Results

Characteristics of Participants

Characteristics of the participants through the test stages are
provided in Table 2. In general, no distinction was made
between diagnoses, symptoms, or stages of disease, as the aim
was to develop a generally applicable solution. Therefore, no
additional clinical data were collected in addition to those shown
in Table 2.

JMIR Cancer 2023 | vol. 9 | e44985 | p. 6

Table 2. Characteristics of participants through our stages of user-centered design. For the beta test, data could be drawn from the registration within

the app as well as from the answers to the UEQ+a.

Beta test (N=19; UEQ+ n=14,
Lion-App: n=19)
Usability test 2
(N=14)
Usability test 1

(N=18)b
Focus group (N=21)
Characteristics

December 2021-February 2022
October 2021
April-June 2021c
April-June 2021c
Time period (months)

Sex, n (%)d

UEQ+: 8 (57); App: 10 (53)
11 (79)
13 (72)
14 (67)
Female

UEQ+: 6 (43); App: 9 (47)
3 (21)
5 (28)
7 (33)
Male

Age (years), n (%)d

UEQ+: N/A; App: N/A
1 (7)
N/Af
N/Ce
30-34

UEQ+: N/A; App: 1 (5)
N/A
N/A
N/C
40-44

UEQ+: 1 (7); App: N/A
N/A
N/A
N/C
45-49

UEQ+: 3 (21); App: 2 (11)
2 (14)
2 (12)
N/C
50-54

UEQ+: 5 (36); App: 3 (16)
4 (29)
4 (24)
N/C
55-59

UEQ+: 1 (7); App: 2 (11)
4 (29)
8 (47)
N/C
60-64

UEQ+: 2 (14); App: 2 (11)
1 (7)
1 (6)
N/C
65-69

UEQ+: 2 (14); App: 1 (5)
2 (14)
2 (12)
N/C
70-74

UEQ+: N/A; App: 1 (5)
N/A
N/A
N/C
75-79

UEQ+: N/A; App: 7 (37)
N/A
N/A
N/C
Not indicated

Experience with mobile devices and apps, n (%)d

N/A
N/A
N/A
N/C
Never worked with mobile devices

3 (21)
2 (14)
5 (30)
N/C
Rarely work with mobile devices

11 (79)
12 (86)
12 (70)
N/C
Often work with mobile devices

Participation in previous usability tests, n (%)d

9 (64)
10 (71)
N/C
N/C
Yes

5 (36)
4 (29)
N/C
N/C
No

Version, n (%)

9 (47)
N/C
N/C
N/C
A

6 (32)
N/C
N/C
N/C
B

4 (21)
N/C
N/C
N/C
C

aUEQ+: extended version of the User Experience Questionnaire.
bOne person was unable to complete the interview due to illness, so information in the UEQ+ and additional questions asked were based on 17 participants.
cGroup-specific procedures (date of focus group), period of usability test 1: (1) regional association of the support group for women in
Baden-Württemberg/Bayern (April 21, 2021), April-May 2021; (2) regional association of the prostatic cancer support group in Baden-Württemberg
(June 8, 2021), June 2021; and (3) state association of patients with lung cancer and their relatives in Baden-Württemberg (June 16, 2021), June 2021.
dUnless otherwise stated, information was taken from the UEQ+.
eN/C: not collected.
fN/A: not applicable.

Assessment of User Requirements

In general, most of the participants had no previous experience
with the survey of the QoL but were interested in regular
mapping of the QoL in their daily lives. In the discussion of the
applicability of such an app, not only the app’s use in therapy
but also the transition from treatment to posttreatment and
survival was addressed. Within the discussion of the
prioritization of features, documentation of the QoL through a

patient diary and questionnaire was given the highest priority.
Other aspects, such as automated recording of movement via
sensors or the possibility of networking with others in the app,
were perceived as positive but received lower prioritization.

Across all participants, the UEQ-S was completed 11 times.
The evaluation indicated a higher pragmatic (mean 2.16, SD
0.76) than hedonic (mean 1.05, SD 1.43) quality. The confidence
of the pragmatic quality was 0.45 (95% CI 1.71-2.61), whereas

JMIR Cancer 2023 | vol. 9 | e44985 | p. 7

that of the hedonic quality was 0.85 (95% CI 0.21-1.90). Overall,
without separating the qualities, a mean value of 1.64 (SD 0.73),
with a confidence of 0.43 (95% CI 1.21-2.08) was achieved.
Cronbach α was .91 across all participants.

As the UEQ-S evaluation achieved sufficient results, neither
the basic process of accessing the main functions from the
dashboard nor the color concept was adjusted for the first
prototype.

Usability Test 1

In total 18 participants underwent usability test 1. The test cycles
for the support group for women were conducted from April
26 to May 7, 2021 (n=8, 44%, all female). In the same period,
2 (11%) additional people (nonmembers of any support group;
n=1, 50%, male and n=1, 50%, female) were included after they
asked to participate. Individual tests for the prostate cancer
support group were conducted on June 6, 2021 (n=2, 11%, all
male), and tests for the lung cancer support group were

conducted from June 21 to July 1, 2021 (n=5, 28%; n=2, 40%,
male and n=3, 60%, female). Each participant was given 30-45
minutes for the usability test. Within this period, participants
were provided with a short introduction, tested the app, and
evaluated their experience through the UEQ+. Since 1 (6%)
participant from the support group for women canceled her
participation before completing all tasks, the sum of UEQ+
responses was based on 17 (94%) of 18 participants.

All 18 (100%; median age 60 years) participants used a
computer to open the dummy version of Lion-App in their
preferred browser. A comparison of the assessment of the UEQ+
with the results of usability test 2 is displayed in Figure 2.
Overall, a mean KPI of 2.12 (SD 0.64) was achieved, and
Cronbach α was >.85 for all scales. Efficiency showed the
lowest average (1.75) with the highest variance (1.75). Utility
achieved the highest rating with a score of 2.43 and the lowest
variance (0.89) in the survey.

Figure 2. Overall rating of the UEQ+ (range: –3 to 3) for the first and second usability tests per scale. UEQ+: extended version of the User Experience
Questionnaire.

A separate sex-dependent analysis of the rating was also carried
out. The mean KPI of the female participants was 2.05 (SD
0.67) and that of the male participants was 2.24 (SD 0.57). The
Mann-Whitney U test did not result in significant differences
between sexes (P=.59).

The basic concept of the app was understood by most of the
participants. The most common problem was that scrolling was
overlooked. However, when overcoming the problem,
participants stated that they would scroll more intuitively on a
smartphone and that they would not change the process. Such
input was tested in usability test 2, when the app was available
on a test device.

In addition, more user feedback within the app was requested,
such as success messages when saving a diary entry or a
questionnaire response. As a result, toasts were planned to be
integrated for such messages. Additionally, a new subpage was
planned with a tutorial for all functions within the app.

Usability Test 2

Since the app was provided on a test device for the second stage
of usability testing, on-site meetings were necessary. As the
lung cancer support group could not participate in meetings
on-site, the number of participating groups reduced. Several
local groups of the support group for women in
Baden-Württemberg/Bayern, the prostate cancer support group,
and the 2 nonmembers of usability test 1 participated from
September 29 to October 18, 2021 (N=14; n=11, 79%, female
and n=3, 21%, male). Again, the test period per person was set
from 30 to 45 minutes.

Although the critical number of 5 persons was exceeded, the
overall target of ≥15 users per usability test was not reached.
The median age of participants was 60 years. An overview of
the evaluation of the UEQ+ can be found in Figure 2. Across
all participants, a mean KPI of 2.28 (SD 0.49) was achieved.
No significant differences between ratings from usability tests

JMIR Cancer 2023 | vol. 9 | e44985 | p. 8

1 and 2 could be found through the Mann-Whitney U test
(P=.65).

Since the number of male participants was below the critical
sum of 5 users, no further analysis stratified by sex was
performed.

Beta Test

The app could be downloaded and tested from December 8,
2021, to February 7, 2022, for a maximum usage of 60 days
(7.5 weeks). The app was installed a maximum of 20 times on
Android and 2 times on iOS smartphones. In total, 20
participants registered in Lion-App, and 19 (95%) had at least
1 interaction. For further analysis of the research questions, the
age and sex of the participants were taken from the user
registration in the app. Again, the median age of the participants
was 60 years. Across all responses to the UEQ+, a mean KPI
of 1.78 (SD 0.84) was calculated. For all subscales, Cronbach
α was >.85, except for the efficiency subscale (Cronbach α=.61).

Overall, 73 (64%) of 115 interactions were made by women.
Furthermore, 54 (74%) of 73 diary entries and 19 (45%) of 42
questionnaire responses were submitted by women. The mean
KPI for women was 1.46 (SD 0.98) and that for men was 2.2
(SD 0.23). The Mann-Whitney U test showed no statistical
significance between sexes (P=.18). In addition, no significant
sex-dependent differences were found in the general usage rate
(P=.30), the use of the diary function (P=.09), or the number
of questionnaire responses (P=.47).

Regarding the analysis of the usage rate related to the
participant’s age, no impact of age was found on overall usage
(P=.11) as well as on creating diary entries (P=.26). However,
we did find an effect of age on the number of questionnaire
responses (ANOVA P=.04). Of the 19 participants in the beta
test, 7 (37%) did not indicate their age, which left 12 (63%)
participants for further analysis. A 1-factor ANOVA with them
resulted in P=.02 (F5=7.3), indicating that there is a strong
negative correlation between age and questionnaire responses
with a 2-tailed significance of 5% (Pearson correlation
coefficient=–0.67, P=.02). Thus, the higher the age of the
participant, the fewer the questionnaire responses submitted.
The estimation of the dedicated 95% CI according to the r/z

transformation of Fisher resulted in a lower threshold of –0.9
and an upper threshold of 0.16.

Due to an error in the code, the randomized assignment of
participants into the 3 versions (A, B, and C; Table 1) did not
lead to the same group size. Due to the uneven distribution of
participants in the 3 app versions, group comparisons could not
be performed. Even though no statistical evaluations were
possible, we were able to extract the direction for further
development by considering the subjective experience submitted
by participants in the final questionnaire (n=7, 37%) as well as
the verbal and written feedback.

Even though 4 (57%) of 7 answers were related to the basic
version A without any add-ons, 5 (71%) of 7 users stated that
they could imagine using the app on a daily-to-weekly basis in
the future, and all respondents stated that they would recommend
the app to others. Additionally, we analyzed the KPI through
all test stages as the comparability of data was given as a
minimum of 64% (n=9; see Table 2) of participants already
engaged in previous usability tests. Figure 3 provides an
overview of the trend. The results of the UEQ+ analysis across
all stages as well as the evaluation of the app as applicable and
recommendable in the beta test indicated that additional features
of gamification and extended evaluation are not necessary for
an app for a regular survey of the QoL. Therefore, we decided
to exclude these features from further development. In addition
to the finding that these additional features did not seem to have
any influence, another conclusion could be drawn from the beta
test: participants reported that the length of the QLQ-C30 had
a negative impact on the regular use of the app. A regular
response to 30 questions was too burdensome to be integrated
into daily life, which led to the identification of a new user
requirement for a shorter questionnaire. Furthermore, the beta
test demonstrated that despite the extended explanation of how
the title and category of the diary differed, problems continued
to occur when using the diary. For this reason, the distinction
between category and title was discarded after the beta test. We
decided that an indication of a category would be deprecated
but the input for a title would remain. To assist users in selecting
an appropriate title, previous categories can be used to prefill
the title as an auxiliary.

JMIR Cancer 2023 | vol. 9 | e44985 | p. 9

Figure 3. KPIs (range: –3 to 3) reflecting all three stages of usability testing. The KPIs are comparable in all 3 stages of development. KPI: key
performance indicator.

Since the measurement of the QoL worldwide does not seem
to be influenced by sex or age [44], we decided to publish 1
general version in the Google Play Store and the Apple App
Store after the KPI reached the specified minimum value of 1.5.
Lion-App was released after incorporating the user requirements
with regard to critical problems. Therefore, the input of a diary
entry was adapted, and additionally, a shorter questionnaire,
the EuroQol 5 Dimension 5 Level (EQ-5D-5L), for regular
assessment of the QoL was integrated. As a requirement for
further versions, personalized periods for push messages as a
reminder for assessing the QoL were documented. In the beta
test, the user requirement for reminders of usage from the second
test cycle was also implemented through push messages. These
were sent if users had been inactive for at least 7 days. In the
evaluation of the beta version of the app, this feature was
perceived as positive but a requirement to personalize this period
could be identified.

Discussion

Principal Findings

An app for surveying the QoL of patients with cancer was
developed, which was rated as acceptable and applicable by
participants in the beta test following a user-centered
development approach. The app has now been released in the
Google Play Store and the Apple App Store. Even though there
exist many health apps, few have been developed to support
patients with cancer and none of them could be identified as
focusing on assessment of the QoL. This is an important step
toward increased patient empowerment of oncology patients in
clinical settings by facilitating personalized treatment with closer
inclusion of the patients’ QoL.

Impact of Age and Sex

Even though no significant differences in the sex-dependent
evaluation of the KPI were found, they cannot be ruled out
completely, as for both analyses, from usability test 1 to the
beta test, the average number of male testers was lower than
that of female testers. In both evaluations, the SD was higher

for women than for men. Interestingly, men rated the basic
version of usability test 1 almost the same as the beta version
(usability test 1=2.24, beta test=2.20), while the rating of the
beta test by women was far below their rating of usability test
1 (usability test 1=2.05, beta test=1.46).

Due to the small number of men in usability test 1, there was
most likely less variability in the evaluation data. Even though
more men participated in the beta test, they used the app more
seldom compared to women; 73 (64%) of 115 interactions were
carried out by women. Therefore, we cannot rule out that the
probability to detect a faulty function or a confusing process
was driven by women, which might also be reflected in the KPI
for the app’s rating. Moreover, as the research was conducted
with a small cohort of 19 participants and within the
environment of a beta test, sex differences of smaller effect
sizes may have been overlooked and should be further assessed
in an independent study.

Age was the only factor that influenced the entry form of a
questionnaire response. Of note, the 95% CI of the correlation
coefficient was 0, with a slightly higher upper threshold (0.16).
This may indicate that there is no influence of age on the number
of questionnaire responses within the app. However, with an
upper value only slightly above 0 but the lower threshold almost
at –1 (–0.9) and P=.02, the probability that there is an actual
effect cannot be completely ruled out.

Strengths and Limitations

One strength of our approach is that we not only focused on
user-centered development but also included assessment of the
QoL as a central component. Throughout our research,
user-centered development led to good results on usability. A
good acceptance of the concept over the development cycles
was also demonstrated in the evaluation via the UEQ+:
throughout all stages of development, the KPI of the UEQ+
responses was around 2. According to the literature, it is difficult
to achieve a KPI above 2 with large cohorts, due to the different
perceptions and experiences of the users [39].

JMIR Cancer 2023 | vol. 9 | e44985 | p. 10

Participants stated that they could imagine using the app for
self-management in their daily lives. By including end users
not only once at the beginning or end of a development but
throughout the whole implementation, we were able to not only
assess the expectations of users but also include their feedback
directly in the concept and conduct testing of the revised
implementation in the next iteration of usability tests. This
enabled us to first identify expectations and problem areas and
then focus on those functionalities step by step until a solution
was found that is user friendly and matches user requirements.

Even though we achieved good evaluation results, our results
might be biased as usability tests were conducted in cooperation
with cancer support groups. The participants of such groups are
already sensitive to questions related to the symptoms and
treatment of their own disease. In addition, the “thinking aloud”
methodology may cause participants to be more actively
engaged with the app than they would normally be if they were
using it in real life. This might also have influenced the
outcomes of the tests. Furthermore, adding personal questions
before the UEQ+ might have led to a bias in the evaluation.

Moreover, our study sample was not homogenous: patients with
cancer during as well as after completion of therapy were
included in our research. Neither the type of their cancer nor
the year of diagnosis was controlled for. Moreover, as no
medical records were collected or available, we had to rely on
the participants’ self-reporting of having received a cancer
diagnosis in the past. Another limitation may be the relatively
low number of participants. When conducting usability tests
with only small sample sizes, less deviations may occur within
evaluations. Therefore, corroboration in a further study with a
larger cohort to obtain robust results that could either confirm
or reject identified trends is needed.

Still, regarding the evaluation of usability, the number of
participants was sufficient according to the literature. On the
one hand, the critical number of 5 participants by Nielsen and
Landauer [41] was exceeded in all usability tests and the
recommendation of the Common Industry Format (CIF) to
include at least 8 people for usability research was met. In
addition, Chomutare et al [45] recommended a number above
7 to be sufficient, and Spyridakis [46] reported that groups of
10-12 participants yield statistically significant results. In

summary, our research exceeded these critical totals in all
evaluations.

Clinical Impact

The development of an app for the longitudinal survey of the
QoL of patients with cancer provides the possibility of including
the QoL and its monitoring into regular patient care. As data
collection can be performed by patients at home, monitoring of
the QoL can be performed easily. This provides the possibility
of symptom-based treatment during therapy and assessment of
the QoL posttherapy. By monitoring the QoL, not only can the
quality of treatment be improved and better tailored to the
patients’ needs but also the long-term impact of treatment may
be better understood [47].

Studies have already shown a positive impact of symptom-based
treatment on the course and outcome of therapy, but in clinical
practice, assessing patients’ QoL is still challenging, since
retrospective reports are usually distorted by recall bias [48]. It is 
therefore 
important 
to 
provide 
patients 
with 
a
self-management tool that enables them to record their daily
stress, symptoms, and QoL on a regular basis. Thus, not only
the impact of treatment but also how it affects patients can be
assessed [49]. The clinical impact of Lion-App has yet to be
investigated.

Conclusion

The results of our app development indicate that an iterative,
user-centered approach leads to a solution that is both user
friendly and can be used to document the patient’s QoL at home.
This is an important step toward empowering and engaging
patients to integrate them into therapy as part of the treatment
team. Our results can serve as an example of how user-centered
development may be executed. In this research, a standardized
self-management tool for patients with cancer to assess their
QoL was developed. As end users were integrated iteratively
into all stages of the development process, this led to a
continuous adaptation of user requirements, with improved
usability to implement a solution tailored to the needs of end
users. The results of this study may be used for scientific
exchange on new approaches to the user-centered development
of health apps and QoL research. In further research, the
long-term applicability and acceptance of Lion-App should be
assessed, as well as its clinical impact.