Original Paper

User-Centered Design and Evaluation of a Web-Based Decision
Aid for Older Adults Living With Mild Cognitive Impairment and
Their Health Care Providers: Mixed Methods Study

Laura-Mihaela Bogza1,2,3*, BA; Cassandra Patry-Lebeau2,3*, BA; Elina Farmanova2,3,4, PhD; Holly O Witteman1,3,
PhD; Jacobi Elliott5, PhD; Paul Stolee5, BA, MPA, MSc, PhD; Carol Hudon6, PhD; Anik M C Giguere1,2,3, PhD

1Laval University Research Centre on Community-Based Primary Health Care, Quebec, QC, Canada
2Quebec Centre for Excellence on Aging, Québec, QC, Canada
3Department of Family Medicine and Emergency Medicine, Laval University, Québec, QC, Canada
4Institute of Health Policy, Management and Evaluation, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada
5School of Public Health and Health Systems, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada
6School of Psychology, Laval University, Québec, QC, Canada
*these authors contributed equally

Anik M C Giguere, PhD
Laval University Research Centre on Community-Based Primary Health Care
Pavillon Landry-Poulin, Door #A-1-2, Office #2416
2525 Chemin de la Canardière
Quebec, QC, G1J 0A4
Canada
Phone: 1 4188214123

Methods

Study Approach and Design

We used a user-centered approach [23] to design a web-based
decision aid that improves the users’ knowledge, values
clarification, and its adoption in routine clinical practice. We
asked individuals with MCI, as well as HCPs, to evaluate the
web-based decision aid in 6 consecutive rounds using mixed
methods 
comprising 
semistructured 
interviews 
and
questionnaires [24-26]. New participants were recruited for each
round. We also verified the comprehension of the information
using a teach-back method and recorded any usability issues.
We recorded the audio and computer screen during the session.
After each evaluation round, we analyzed the data and, based

J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 8 | e17406 | p. 2

on the findings, tailored the web-based decision aid to improve
user experience.

Prototype Conception

On the basis of a published rapid-review approach [27], we
synthesized evidence on the benefits and harms of the available
options to maintain or improve cognitive functions in older
adults with MCI. The evidence gathered was structured into a
decision box template, which is in accordance with the
international patient decision aid standards and has been
described in earlier publications [8,9]. To ensure that the content
addressed the users’needs and was scientifically valid, we then
formed an expert advisory panel consisting of 8 clinicians (2
nurses, 2 family physicians, a neuropsychologist, a geriatrician,
an occupational therapist, and a pharmacist). We invited the
members of the panel to review the content, which was then
adjusted to take into account their recommendations before
testing with potential users.

The informational content was then inserted into a mock-up
designed to support older adults with MCI in making informed
and value-based decisions with their health care team. More
specifically, we designed the web-based decision aid to (1)
allow people to weigh the probabilities of experiencing benefits
against the probabilities of experiencing harms, for all the
available options; (2) allow people to clarify what is most
important to them; and (3) support people in voicing their
priorities to their health care team. The design process was
inspired by steps 3 to 5 of the Center for eHealth and Wellbeing

Research guidelines [28,29], which describe the design,
operationalization, and evaluation of a tool. Development was
initially informed by a review of the literature in the process of
developing web-based decision aids and their features [22,30-32]
and select examples of web-based evidence summaries and
decision aids (eg, drug facts boxes developed by Steven
Woloshin and Lisa Schwartz and used by the US Food and Drug
Administration [no longer available in a web-based format],
MAGICapp developed by Making Grading of Recommendations
Assessment, Development, and Evaluation [GRADE] the
Irresistible Choice, and option grids developed by Peter Scalia,
Glyn Elwyn and Marie-Anne Durand and commercialized by
EBSCO Health). Then, in a collaborative and iterative effort,
we conducted several brainstorming sessions to discuss the
functionality, user experience, and purpose of each of the
web-based decision aid’s components. The team comprised a
computer analyst, 2 graphic designers specialized in website
interfaces (one of whom was EB), a researcher specialized in
dementia and health literacy (EF), and the principal investigator
(AG), who specializes in shared decision making and is the
developer of the decision box template.

In this prototype, potential users were guided through a linear
decision-making process going from a general introduction to
a description of the available options to a values clarification
exercise before making a decision (Figure 1). Users could then
go back to change their choices as many times as they liked.
Once a decision was made, they could view their profile, which
summarized their priorities, decisions, and decisional comfort.

J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 8 | e17406 | p. 3

Figure 1. Navigation through the various sections of the web-based decision box as planned in the first prototype, before user testing.

Population and Sampling Strategy

Adults aged ≥60 years with MCI, their informal caregivers if
they had one, and HCPs of any profession who practiced in
family medicine clinics were eligible to participate. We initially
invited HCPs who worked in 7 primary care clinics in the areas
surrounding Quebec City. We sent them an email to explain the
study and invited them to confirm their interest in participating
in the study using a link to a web survey. We then asked those
who agreed to participate to identify eligible individuals among
their patients, who scored between 18 and 26 on the Montreal
Cognitive Assessment [33] and to contact them to ask their
permission for the research team to contact them. Only the
contact details of people who expressed an interest in
participating in the study were shared with the research team.
As we experienced challenges recruiting participants with this
strategy, we also invited people with MCI who were registered
in a Quebec database managed by one of us (CH). A diagnostic
procedure described elsewhere [34] was used to verify that these
participants with MCI met the Petersen criteria for single- or
multiple-domain MCI [35], which include (1) a subjective
memory complaint, corroborated by an informant; (2) an
objective memory impairment, based on a cut-off score of ≥1.5
SD below age-adjusted norms on at least one standardized
memory test in the neuropsychological battery; (3) preserved
general cognitive functioning; (4) largely intact functional
activities; and (5) not demented.

Evaluations

We invited the participants to evaluate the web-based decision
aid during a 60-min session, conducted either in participating
clinics, the research center, or in their own homes. The duration
of the session was adapted to the capacities of each participant.

At the beginning of the session (pretest), all participants
completed a self-report questionnaire to record their
sociodemographic characteristics, and older adults completed
the Values Clarity and Informed subscales of the Decisional
Conflict Scale (DCS) to rate, respectively, their feeling of being
clear about personal values for benefits and risks/side effects,
and their feelings of being informed [36]. We reversed the DCS
subscale scores to facilitate interpretation; increased scores
represented increases in feelings of being clear about personal
values and being informed. The research assistant was available
to support the participants in completing the questionnaire as
needed.

Then, they reviewed the web-based decision aid during a
semistructured interview that used a think-aloud approach [37].
A trained interviewer followed an interview guide designed to
evaluate the participants’information needs and their perception
of the strengths and limitations of the web-based decision aid.
The guide used to interview older adults also contained questions
inspired by the teach-back method to assess the users’
understanding of the information. Teach-back is used by HCPs
and consists of asking patients to explain the information back
to them [24,38-41]. The discussions were audio recorded, and

J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 8 | e17406 | p. 4

we captured the participants’ navigation on their computer
screens using the video feature.

At the end of the think-aloud evaluation of the web-based
decision aid (posttest), all participants completed 5 items of the
Ottawa Acceptability questionnaire [42] to assess the quality
of decision aids as well as the 10-item System Usability Scale
(SUS) [43,44]. They also rated their satisfaction with the
web-based decision aid using a single item, 5-point smiley face
rating scale. In addition, the HCPs completed a number of
questions to explore their willingness to adopt the decision aid
in clinical settings [25]. At posttest, the participating older adults
once again completed the Values Clarity and Informed subscales
of the DCS.

Tailoring the Web-Based Decision Aid to Users’Needs

After each round, a thematic qualitative analysis of the
discussions highlighted the strengths and limitations of the
web-based decision aid. One researcher (LB, EF, or CP)
conducted the analysis, and another reviewed it (AG). The expert
panel then met to prioritize the issues and find solutions to
mitigate them. To this end, members of the same
interdisciplinary expert panel who created the prototype met to
review the qualitative findings. The experts started by
prioritizing each issue using the following severity scale [45]:
(1) critical flaw: if unresolved, then users will not be able to
complete the task; (2) serious flaw: several users may be
frustrated and give up; (3) minor flaws: users may be annoyed,
but they will complete the task. They then chose solutions by
considering the magnitude, frequency, and severity of these
problems, and how they prevented the web-based decision aid
from achieving its primary goal (supporting evidence-informed
and value-based decision making).

The same evaluation and tailoring process was then used again
in 5 more rounds, with new participant subsamples each time.

Integrated Analyses

In the final analysis, we integrated the findings from the 6
rounds of qualitative and quantitative evaluations into the
web-based decision aid design. This triangulation process served
to validate our findings [26,46,47] and to form a comprehensive
picture of the web-based decision aid’s acceptability and

usability and of the level of detail required to support
evidence-informed and value-based decision making by older
adults with MCI, their caregivers, and HCPs. We determined
the level of detail based on the participants’ knowledge and
action. An appropriate level of detail was interpreted from the
decision aid’s potential to inform decision making and increase
decisional comfort, thereby inciting the user to take action. More
specifically, we considered the level of detail as appropriate if
the decision aid increased decisional comfort (ie, achieved 100
or a value closer to 100 on the DCS informed subscale at
posttest) and if the participants demonstrated high levels of
intention to use the decision aid to make a decision following
the diagnosis of MCI.

We assessed the suitability of the values clarification exercise
using the participants’ responses to the DCS Values Clarity
subscale and to open-ended questions about their experience
with the values clarification exercise. We considered the values
clarification exercise as suitable if it increased the participants’
feelings of being clear about personal values (ie, achieved 100
on the DCS Values Clarity subscale) and if participants
(especially those in the fifth and sixth evaluation rounds)
reported a positive experience using the decision aid.

Ethical Considerations

Ethical approval to conduct this pilot study was granted by the
Integrated University Health and Social Services Center of
Québec City (CIUSSS-Capitale-Nationale, no. 2016-2017-08).

Results

Participant Characteristics

We recruited 7 HCPs (3 social workers, 2 nurses, 1 physician,
and 1 psychologist; Table 1) and 12 community-based older
adults with MCI (Table 2). Out of the 12 older adults, 3 did the
interview in the presence of a friend or family member, whom
they did not consider to be a caregiver, and 9 did it alone with
the research assistant. Of which, 2 of the persons with MCI
were aged between 60 and 64 years, 6 between 65 and 74 years,
3 between 75 and 84 years, and 1 was >85 years. The
participants’ education levels varied from none to university
degree.

J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 8 | e17406 | p. 5

Table 1. Description of the characteristics of the participating health care professionals (N=7).

Values, n (%)
Characteristic

Age (years)

1 (14)
<30

4 (57)
30-39

2 (29)
50-59

Sex

6 (86)
Female

1 (14)
Male

Profession

1 (14)
Physician

2 (29)
Nurse

3 (43)
Social worker

1 (14)
Psychologist

Practice experience (years)

2 (29)
0-4

0 (0)
5-9

1 (14)
10-14

2 (29)
15-19

1 (14)
20-24

0 (0)
25-29

0 (0)
30-34

1 (14)
35-39

J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 8 | e17406 | p. 6

Table 2. Description of the characteristics of the participating older adults with mild cognitive impairment (N=12).

Values, n (%)
Characteristic

Age (years)

2 (17)
60-64

6 (50)
65-74

3 (25)
75-84

1 (8)
≥85

Sex

6 (50)
Female

6 (50)
Male

Ethnicity

12 (100)
White

Primary language

12 (100)
French

Marital status

1 (8)
Single

9 (75)
Married or common-law relationship

2 (17)
Widow

Education a

1 (8)
No formal education

4 (33)
High school diploma

3 (25)
College diploma

3 (25)
University diploma

Place of residence

12 (100)
Home

Has a caregiver

2 (17)
Yes

If so, who?

1 (8)
Family member

1 (8)
Friend

Lives with their caregiver

1 (8)
Yes

1 (8)
No
 

aOne of the participants had missing data for education.

We conducted 6 evaluation rounds, starting with the prototype
version (V1), and then produced 5 different versions (V2-V6)
before creating the final version (VF) that is currently available
on the Decision Box website [48]. Of which 6 HCPs evaluated
the prototype (V1) and 1 evaluated V2. Additionally, 3, 3, 2, 3,
and 1 older adult with MCI evaluated versions 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6,
respectively. The participating HCPs reviewed only the first
and second mock-up.

Qualitative Findings

A total of 3 major issues emerged from the qualitative analysis:
(1) users should be guided through the decision-making process;

(2) the content should be simple, but not simplistic; and (3) the
interface should be intuitive and user friendly.

Guided Decision-Making Process

As mentioned, the first prototype (V1) proposed a linear
directional navigation, going from general to specific
information based on users’ preferences (Figure 1). It led users
to read all available options before clarifying their values and
making a decision. As a result, we observed that participants
often paused in the Benefits and Harms section and did not
complete the next steps because they grew tired or lost focus:

J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 8 | e17406 | p. 7

Participant: Geez, this is quite something, isn’t it?
You’re making me work hard, you know. Where are
we at now? [interviewer explains the next steps]. I
don’t know whether I’m coming or going. [Older adult
#1001]
Interviewer: What do you mean?
Participant: Well, I...I’m tired, now.
Hence, to ensure participants would complete the values
clarification exercise, we used a nondirectional navigation
strategy in V2, allowing users to start either with a review of
the options or with the values clarification exercise. This also
helped meet the needs of HCPs who visit the web-based decision
aid without their patients, to review the evidence about the
available options. However, user testing revealed that this

nondirectional design confused several users who wondered
about the correct path:

[After the interviewer explains that they can choose
whichever path they prefer] So, are we going to
explore all the options or uhh…? [Nurse #3009, V2]
The experts therefore decided to revert to a directional
navigation in the next version (V3), leading users to complete
the values clarification exercise before reviewing the options
(Figure 2), which is in the opposite direction from V1. Once
people had clarified their values, the web-based decision aid
presented them with the options that matched their values. The
other options were still available for review in case they wished
to learn more about them.

Figure 2. Navigation through various sections of the web-based decision box as planned after user testing.

Moreover, V3 included clear indications of the next steps to
improve usability. Despite directional navigation, the prototype
still allowed users to access any page at any time, using a
progression bar that we added above the menu.

After V3, the users did not report feeling fatigued, overworked,
or lost as they went through the web-based decision aid. This
was likely because they could read the options most relevant to
them and then move on without feeling that they had missed
out. This meant that they could better manage their navigation
to match their energy levels and improve their likelihood of
making it through all the decision-making steps. Furthermore,
it helped simplify the web-based decision aid, as discussed in
detail in the following section because it limited the number of
options to be read before making a decision. This modification

also made the web-based decision aid more patient centered, as
opposed to professional centered.

Simple but Not Simplistic

Throughout the various versions, participants consistently asked
for a simpler design. Therefore, the challenge was to simplify
the web-based decision aid while retaining its informative value
to ensure that users would have enough information to make
informed and value-based decisions. The amount of information
to read (content density) and its complexity (content clarity)
were of major concern to the users.

J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 8 | e17406 | p. 8

Content Density
Participants made frequent comments about the overwhelming
nature of the information, especially in the Introduction and
Options sections of V1 as shown in Multimedia Appendix 1
(Warning: this is a preliminary version and the data is not final.
For a final version, please see [48].). In V1, we observed that
many participants did not read all the available information in
these sections:

Oh my! It’s going to take so long to read all that.
[Social worker #3004, V1]
To address these concerns, we modified the information layout
in the Introduction section. The information that was initially
structured into columns was put into bulleted lists, in separate
accordion tabs that could be expanded by clicking on a + button.
In V3, we also removed the references from the text and moved
them to a separate page, as shown in Multimedia Appendix 2.

To improve the Options section, we tried integrating the options
to the values clarification exercise results page. This was meant
to allow people to read the information most important to them
first when they had the most focus. This strategy offered a more
straightforward reading path, but some participants still did not
read the information regarding all the options in V4:

Wow, there are a lot of things [talking about all the options]! I
won’t read all that. [Older adult #1008, V4]

After 5 unsuccessful versions trying to limit the users’ burden
as they read the options, we classified the options into 3
subcategories: (1) options that matched their priority, (2) options
that did not match their priority, and (3) other options to
consider. People could only view the subcategories related to
a single priority at a time. This prevented us from having to
remove information that we deemed essential to support
informed, value-based decision making (which would have led

to a simplistic design), while still allowing us to highlight the
information most relevant to the user.

Content Clarity

Scientific Terms
Several of the HCPs who evaluated the first version found the
content too scientific and potentially difficult to understand for
laypeople, as pointed out by this participant:

I mean, maybe a doctor or a nurse will be able to
understand, but me, I don’t have… I don’t have any
medical training. I’m a social worker, so when you
show me terms like that,… you lose me. [Social
worker #3004, V1]
Users did not like the style either, as pointed out by this
participant:

It’s very scientific. I don’t identify with the text. [Older
adult #1008, V4]
The content was progressively modified to use more lay terms,
as demonstrated by the change of the decision aid title from
Mild Cognitive Impairment to Mild Problems with Thinking
and Memory in the final version.

Probabilities
Information clarity was also jeopardized by the users’
misunderstanding of the probabilities presented in the Options
section (V2, V3, V4, and V6). In fact, most participants
misunderstood the absolute effect sizes presented in larger font
sizes, in percentages, in V1 (Figure 3; warning: this is a
preliminary version and the data is not final. For a final version,
please see [48]). They interpreted them as mean effect sizes (eg,
a 15% increase in mental capacities) while in reality they
represent the proportion of people who might benefit from the
intervention (15 persons out of 100 improve their mental
capacities):

J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 8 | e17406 | p. 9

Figure 3. Presentation of one of the options in prototype V2. Warning: This is a preliminary version, and the data are not final.

It can improve by 11% compared to my… compared
to now. [Older adult #1004, V3]
To minimize influence on decision making, we replaced
numbers and percentages with text in the final version. For

example, we replaced “↑15% improvement” with “↑ General
mental capacities” in a slightly larger font size (Figure 4), and
we presented the detailed proportions (for every 100 older
adults, 15 improve their mental capacities) in smaller font on
the right-hand side.

J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 8 | e17406 | p. 10

Figure 4. Presentation of one of the options in the final version showing the pop-up format and with an enlargement showing an example of the expanded
accordion tabs to learn more about the grading of recommendations assessment, development, and evaluation ratings.

Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development, and
Evaluation Ratings on Confidence in the Results
Participants also often misunderstood the GRADE ratings
associated with each effect size in the earlier versions of the
web-based decision aid (V1 and V4):

Oh, this is high: 4 out of 4 stars! It’s like when you
choose a holiday spot down south! [Older adult
#1007, V4]
Therefore, we layered the GRADE ratings, allowing easy access
by the most curious users under a Learn more about the studies

accordion tab placed under each option in V5 of the web-based
decision aid (Figure 4).

Feedback After the Values Clarification Exercise
As mentioned earlier, the feedback provided to users after they
had completed the values clarification exercise (Figure 5)
required several modification rounds before it was understood.
The goal was to present the options that matched the person’s
values. The options were initially shown in a matrix table, which
most users misunderstood (Figure 6; warning: this is a
preliminary version and the data is not final. For a final version,
please see [48]), as demonstrated by this participant’s comments:

J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 8 | e17406 | p. 11

Figure 5. First prototype version of the web-based decision aid, showing the values clarification exercise.

J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 8 | e17406 | p. 12

Figure 6. First prototype version of the web-based decision aid, showing the feedback page after the exercise. Warning: This is a preliminary version,
and the data are not final.

Interviewer: Did you think the check marks were
choices you had to make?
Participant: Yeah, yeah...I thought I was the one
placing the check marks. [Older adult #1006, V3]
The modifications made to the matrix table in the next round
did not improve the participants’understanding, as demonstrated
by this quote:

Here, what am I supposed to do? [...] I have to make
a check mark...Should I make a check mark? What is
it? [...] I see there’s an X. If I click, will it give me a
check mark? [Older adult #1007, V4]

Therefore, we decided to limit the feedback to its simplest form.
We discarded the matrix table in V5, and instead listed the
options as a series of boxes underneath each of the values
(described hereafter as priorities) selected by the person, with
a maximum of 3 values (Figure 7). We kept a visual connection
between the values clarification exercise (Figure 8) and the
feedback by using the same format in both pages for the values.
We also reduced the number of values presented from 8 to 4, a
decision that will be explained later in the Values Clarification
Exercise section.

J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 8 | e17406 | p. 13

Figure 7. Final version of the web-based decision aid, showing the feedback page after the exercise.

We initially included the option of taking cholinesterase
inhibitors, as health care providers sometimes consider this
medication. However, the scientific evidence described in the
decision aid underscored their ineffectiveness in improving
cognitive functioning, and this was more confusing than helpful
for the participants. Therefore, we removed it from the options
available in the subsequent versions. All options lacking
evidence of benefits have been removed in the same manner.

Pictograms
Once they reached the Decision section, several participants
did not recall the information related to each of the available
options. We, therefore, added a pictogram representing each
option every time it was discussed (eg, Figures 4 and 7). This
feature was meant to improve recall, and we did indeed observe
some improvements in this regard after it was added:

Participant: The definition of...umm of...the sneakers,
right? [Older adult #1012, V6]
Interviewer: Yes, the physical activity.
Participant: Yes, physical activity.

Intuitive and User-Friendly Interface

Interface Features
We incorporated several modifications, at all stages, to design
an intuitive and user-friendly web-based decision aid. For
example, we defined more complex words in a glossary. We
initially placed the glossary on a separate page at the end of the
web-based decision aid, which was accessible when users
clicked on a complex word. However, some users became
confused when redirected to a different page; they forgot why
they were there and did not know how to get back to the main
activity. We therefore arranged for definitions to appear as
information tips when the cursor hovers over a word, as shown
in Multimedia Appendix 3. This way, users could see the
definition of a word while remaining on the Introduction page.

We also had to add instructions on how to expand the accordion
tabs, as participants did not understand at first (Multimedia
Appendix 1):

Participant: [reading out loud] Take into account the
patient’s preferences. [to the interviewer] Do I...What
do I do now...? [Older adult #1005, V3]

J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 8 | e17406 | p. 14

Interviewer: Yes, here you could click, it’s a link to
open a section with a bit more information about that.
To this end, we added a Learn more link next to the + sign to
indicate the possibility of expanding the accordion (Multimedia
Appendix 2).

Several users could not find a way to return to the previous page
after clicking on an option to read more information about it
(Figure 3). Thus, we showed the benefits and harms of the
options in a pop-up instead of on a standalone page (Figure 4).
This facilitated navigation, as users simply had to close the
option to get back to the main page.

We also modified another feature related to the Decision section,
where users were invited to select an option. We used a
drop-down menu in V1 (Multimedia Appendix 4); however,
the task was not understood by all participants. We therefore
replaced the drop-down menu with checkboxes from V3 onward
(Multimedia Appendix 5), which resolved the issue:

Participant: Do we do all that? [Older adult #1001,
V2]
Interviewer: Have you seen the menu? There is a
menu. It says you have to select the option you prefer.
Participant: Oh. My goodness!
Interviewer: If you click on… [interviewer shows the
participant how to use the drop-down menu].

Values Clarification Exercise
In the first version of the values clarification exercise tested by
older adults, most participants needed explanations from the
moderator to complete the exercise:

Participant: [Participant reads the priorities out loud]
Now you want me to look at that, what do you want
to know about what I’m looking at? [Older adult
#1002, V2]
[Interviewer explains the exercise]
Participant: Uhh, let’s say I put one here, then two...
Caregiver: Actually, aren’t you supposed to move
this here?
Interviewer: Exactly.
Several of the participating HCPs felt that there were too many
priorities and that the wording was too complex, partly because
they were worded negatively. Therefore, we changed the
wording and reduced the number of priorities from 8 (Figure
5) to 4 (Figure 8). We also changed the format of the exercise
from vertical (Figure 5) to horizontal (Figure 8), primarily to
allow the content to fit most computer screens without scrolling
down, but also to improve continuity with the feedback, which
also displayed the selected priorities horizontally.

Figure 8. Final version of the web-based decision aid, showing the values clarification exercise.

J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 8 | e17406 | p. 15

Quantitative Results

Assessments of the Web-Based Decision Aid
The limited number of participants did not allow for any
statistical testing to compare the users’ assessment of the
web-based decision aid, or impacts of the decision aid, between
rounds, or between types of users (Table 3). There is no
consistent trend, as the rounds progressed, for any of the studied
variables.

Impacts of the Web-Based Decision Aid
We did, however, have sufficient data to compare the mean of
all users’ratings on the DCS before and after using the decision

aid. We observed statistically significant improvements in older
adults’ feelings of being clear about personal values and being
informed before and after their use of the web-based decision
aid (one-tailed t-test for values clarity: t11=4.16; P<.001 and
informed: t11=1.92; P=.04).

Integrated Analyses

Several changes made to V1 addressed comments that the
decision aid was too complex and too dense. These comments
were translated to one of the lowest usability scores across all
versions (Table 3).

Table 3. Assessments of the successive versions of a web-based decision aid by mixed samples of older adults and health care professionals and impact
of the decision aid on the perception of older adults of the clarity of their values and of being well-informed before (pre) and after (post) using the
decision aid.

Total (n=12
OA and 7
HCP)

Version 6
(n=1 OA)
Version 5
(n=3 OA)
Version 4
(n=2 OA)
Version 3
(n=3 OA)
Version 2 (n=3

OAb and 1 HCP)

Version 1

(n=6 HCPa)

Outcome

N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/Ad
4 (0)
3 (1)
Willingness to use the decision

aid—postc, mean (SD)

N/A
55 (0)
75 (16)
56 (16)
77 (10)
65 (20)
56 (23)
System usability scale—poste,
mean (SD)

N/A
73 (0)
86 (4)
82 (9)
92 (8)
84 (6)
76 (9)
Acceptability—postf, mean
(SD)

N/A
5 (0)
4 (1)
3 (1)
5 (0)
4 (1)
4 (1)
Satisfaction—postg, mean (SD)

61 (27)
50 (0)
75 (17)
38 (41)
64 (10)
64 (43)
N/A
Values clarity (DCSh)—prei,
mean (SD)

83 (16)
92 (0)
92 (8)
63 (30)
83 (14)
83 (8)
N/A
Values clarity (DCS)—posti,
mean (SD)

22
42
17
25
19
19
N/A
Pre-post mean values clarity
(DCS) score increase

63 (30)
67 (0)
72 (27)
54 (30)
61 (24)
61 (54)
N/A
Informed (DCS)—prej, mean
(SD)

82 (14)
67 (0)
92 (14)
79 (6)
92 (8)
69 (10)
N/A
Informed (DCS)—postj, mean
(SD)

19
0
20
25
31
8
N/A
Pre-post mean informed (DCS)
score increase

aHCP: health care practitioner.
bOA: older adult.
cScale from 1 to 5, with 5 indicating higher willingness. Answered only by HCP.
dN/A: not applicable, certain measures were used only with HCP or OA.
eScale from 0 to 100, with 100 indicating higher usability. Answered by both OA and HCP.
fProportion of people who find the web-based decision aid acceptable. Answered by both OA and HCP.
gScale from 1 to 5, with 5 indicating higher satisfaction. Answered by both OA and HCP.
hDCS: decisional conflict scale.
iScale ranging from 0 to 100, with 100 indicating higher clarity. Answered only by OA.
jScale ranging from 0 to 100, with 100 indicating. Answered only by OA.

Comments on V2 came from 3 older adults and 1 HCP. Issues
with content density were still prominent, as evidenced by one
of the lowest increases in participants’ feelings of being
informed before and after using the decision aid.

Changes in V3 increased the postdecisional comfort score on
the Informed subscale from 61.1 to 91.7, which reflects the
effort put into facilitating navigation. Version 3 had the highest
acceptability (92%), usability (mean 76.7, SD 10.1), and
satisfaction (mean 5.0, SD 0.0) scores, which confirmed the

J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 8 | e17406 | p. 16

team’s efforts to layer the web-based decision aid to make it
more 
manageable. 
The 
older 
adults 
still 
expressed
misunderstanding of the values clarification exercise feedback
page, which was the focus of the alterations in the next versions.

We made a final attempt at fixing the matrix table used on the
VCE feedback page in V4. The older adults who evaluated this
version presented relatively lower values clarity and perceptions
of being informed before using the decision aid, and the
qualitative comments indicated some frustration with the matrix
table (the crux of the web-based decision aid). This seems to
have influenced their assessments of the decision aid, as it scored
the lowest in satisfaction and garnered one of the lowest
usability scores.

In V5, we introduced a simpler values clarification exercise
feedback format, which coincided with the highest posttest
values for the Informed and Values Clarity measures, although
the participants also had the highest scores in both of these
subscales before using the decision aid. Nonetheless, these
scores correspond to relatively high usability, acceptability, and
satisfaction, and the comments appear to indicate that users
understood this version of the feedback the best.

Version 6 introduced pictograms and a better classification of
options to improve information recall, but it was tested with a
single user only. The older adult that tested version 6 appreciated
the usefulness of the pictograms. The highest increase in
decisional comfort on the Values Clarity subscale was also
measured in this round (meanpre 50, meanpost 91.7), which
suggests that the new feedback design achieved its goal.
Usability (mean 55.0) and acceptability (mean 71.4) scores are,
however, the lowest across all versions, but several comments
made during data collection led us to believe that some of the
SUS items may have been interpreted incorrectly. For example,
to the SUS question “I think that I would need the support of a
technical person to be able to use this system,” the sole
participant that tested version 6 mentioned appreciating having
access to technical resources in general, and thus gave a low
usability score. These relatively low SUS scores also contrast
with the user’s high level of satisfaction (mean 5.0) with the
decision aid.

Users consistently demonstrated enthusiasm with regard to
decision aid across all versions. HCPs sometimes expressed
concerns about being able to integrate it into their practice, and
older adults were not always sure that clinicians would care or
have time to go through the whole process with them.

Research Process

Throughout the data collection process, several observations
were made. First, asking users to review a mock-up instead of
a finished product requires much more involvement from the
interviewer, which prevented us from observing real user
interaction with the web-based decision aid. Second, having the
users communicate their difficulties was not always easy
because they generally felt that they understood the content
even when it was clear to the interviewer that they had not. This
highlights the importance of the evaluation approaches used in
this project because observations of users interacting with the
decision aid and teach-back allowed more issues with the

web-based decision aid to be raised, compared with direct
comments from users regarding their appreciation of it. Finally,
spending time with community-based users and listening to
them talk about their experiences and share their stories while
navigating the web-based decision aid emphasized the wealth
of information available from direct contact with users. Many
modifications made to the web-based decision aid were first
suggested by users, such as the addition of pictograms, the use
of arrow buttons at the bottom of each page, and enlargement
of the font size.

Discussion

Principal Findings

This study aimed to adjust the level of detail of a web-based
decision aid and to apply features that best support
evidence-informed and value-based decision making for older
adults with MCI. Our main findings indicate that, to achieve
this goal, the web-based decision aid needs to provide a guided
decision-making process, the content needs to be simple but
not simplistic, and the interface and navigation should be
intuitive and user friendly.

Guided Decision-Making Process

First, we found that a patient-centered web-based decision aid
that helps adults >60 years with MCI to make a value-based
decision performs better when it helps users clarify their
priorities early on in the process. This allows for a tailored
presentation of content that guides the user toward the most
relevant options for their specific needs. Presenting fewer
options at a time helps to avoid overwhelming the user with
reading material about all available options, especially when
there are several. Moreover, a study that was conducted with
adults of various ages found that the first option presented in a
decision aid was more likely to be chosen as a treatment option,
especially when there were several options [49]. This suggests
that it is important to present options in a way that reflects the
user’s priorities, especially if their cognitive abilities may be
impaired. It also coincides with the findings from a 2016 study
that showed that a linear navigation had a higher success rate,
lower performance time, better satisfaction ratings, and greater
user preference than hypertextual navigation for elderly users
[50]. In addition, it converged with studies showing that older
people prefer having fewer options [13].

However, tailoring must be performed carefully to avoid
removing essential information, as this could lead to bias in the
decision-making process, increased decision conflict, and
decreased knowledge [22]. More specifically, if a values
clarification exercises is proposed to tailor information about
options in a decision aid, then the aid should still allow access
to information on all options as patients need sufficient
knowledge of the options before being able to clarify their values
[51].

Considering that web-based decision aids can also be used by
HCPs and caregivers, in addition to older adults with MCI, they
should remain flexible despite their general linearity, so people
who prefer to either skip or read some sections exhaustively
have the option to do so. In brief, the web-based decision aid

J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 8 | e17406 | p. 17

should be directive rather than restrictive. This implies that, in
the case of cognitively impaired people, the decision relies more
heavily on the accuracy of the values clarification exercise, and
therefore on the accurate pairing of each option with the
priorities they are designed to meet.

Simple, Not Simplistic

Next, our team resorted to information layering to simplify the
design while retaining the level of detail to support informed,
shared decision making. This helped provide a straightforward
layout that allowed users to understand the decision aid’s
structure. The text was also modified to use clear and
comprehensible wording to retain only meaningful content and
remove overwhelming details. These results converge with the
findings of Peters [12] that less is more when it comes to making
informed and high-quality decisions, especially in people with
lower numeracy skills. Considering that people with MCI often
have episodic memory impairments [52], it is important that
the information be concise, meaningful, and easy to remember.
Our results indicate that the pictograms are a useful strategy to
help users remember the options available and, in the process,
summarize the information into a visual reminder. These
findings converge with those found in literature reviews,
indicating that pictograms are good for, among other things,
increasing visual attention and recall [53,54].

In our streamlining efforts, we had to be careful about
oversimplifying the decision aid’s content. Although users might
find it easier for someone else to make the decision for them,
studies show that informing them of the benefits and harms
supports better outcomes [55]. Therefore, even if probabilities
are hard to understand for most users, they are the very core of
the decision aid, and we tried several approaches to make them
clearer. The scientific literature reviews several ways of
presenting risk probabilities (benefits and harms). Most agree
that percentages and natural frequencies using a uniform
denominator, as was done in the final version of the web-based
decision aid, are the most effective way to present risks [56,57].
It has also been found that when visual aids such as icon arrays
and bar graphs are added, comprehension—and retention—of
the numbers increases significantly [57,58]. Nevertheless, other
findings suggest that people with low graph literacy understand
risks presented in numbers better, whereas people with high
graphical literacy skills better understand those presented in
graph form more readily [59]. It would be interesting to test a
web-based decision aid that offers a graphical display of the
risks in a layer for people seeking to learn more. Having said
that, when an analysis was made of the participants’perceptions
of being informed and clear about their personal values before
and after using the web-based decision aid, it showed that their
comfort with decision making generally improved with the use
of the tool.

Intuitive and User Friendly

Finally, we conclude from our findings that users require a
seamless experience when navigating the web-based decision
aid to avoid any distraction and frustration with the
decision-making process. The SUS scores that we measured
throughout the rounds suggest that we achieved good usability
at best, according to Sauro’s reported average score of 68 across

studies [44], despite several rounds of user testing. Some
comments also suggest that the SUS items were not clearly
understood, which might warrant validation in this population.
These findings converge with those of Malinowsky et al [60],
who found that older adults with MCI experience more difficulty
using technology than those without any cognitive problems.
Although further testing might help us reach greater usability,
this emphasizes the importance of testing tools with the intended
demographic during the design phase, to avoid creating decision
aids that hinder the decision-making process instead of helping
it. Our results show improved usability when the interface
displays clear components that require little interaction (eg,
checkboxes instead of drop-down menus) when page jumping
is minimized (eg, pop-ups and information tips) and when all
page content fits on a single screen, thereby eliminating the
need to scroll down. This last observation converges with the
results of another study on the implementation of a mobile health
app, showing the value of content that is at one’s fingertips [45].
This is also consistent with the guidelines of the United States
Department of Health and Human Services [61], which are
based on Morville and Rosenfeld’s book [62] and which state
that the interface should stay simple, with clear instructions and
a page structure that is clear in its purpose [61].

Limitations of the Study

One of the limitations of the study is that the web-based decision
aid shown at each round to the participants was a mock-up. This
approach allowed us to minimize costs, to avoid programming
several test versions of the decision aid, and is a standard
approach used in website design. However, the mock-up
functionality was limited and caused some unintended glitches.
It is difficult to estimate the extent to which this affected the
participants’ understanding of the web-based decision aid in
general; however, the mock-up clearly impaired understanding
of the values clarification exercise. In the mock-up, we had to
predetermine values clarification exercise priorities to avoid
unnecessary design work at an early stage. Knowing that older
adults with MCI present deficits in their executive functions
and working memory [63], it is possible that the task of planning
for a fictitious case was even more difficult for them, perhaps
even impossible for some. Many of the participants with MCI
were confused or even frustrated at not being able to put their
real priorities in the values clarification exercise. This type of
reaction was also found in another study to build a web-based
shared decision-making tool with older adults living with
neurocognitive disorders [64]. We recommend using a fully
functional values clarification exercise when testing prototypes
for this type of participant.

This work is also limited by the small sample sizes of HCPs
and older adults with MCI. The vulnerability of the population
made it hard to recruit subjects with the help of HCPs, as they
wanted to protect them from the hassles of a research project.
Consequently, we had to rely on alternative strategies to recruit
older adults with MCI. We could not, therefore, diversify the
participants who helped at each evaluation round, for example,
for levels of MCI, educational background, and technology
skills. Further research projects could lead to qualitative
interviews with a smaller number of participants while
simultaneously asking a larger group to test the web-based

J Med Internet Res 2020 | vol. 22 | iss. 8 | e17406 | p. 18

decision aid. This would allow for the analysis of a larger
amount of quantitative data while retaining the richness of the
qualitative data gathered during the interviews.

Potential limitations of the quantitative data collected should
also be clarified. The DCS that we used to help us tailor the
decision aid measures only feelings about the decision, not the
degree to which the values presented coincided with the
individuals’ actual values. In addition, given that participants
were face to face with their interviewers, some may have
answered in a way they felt was expected of them (social
desirability bias).

Conclusions

Overall, we can say that we have successfully identified and
applied features that best support values clarification and
understanding of evidence in older adults with MCI and have
adjusted the level of detail of a web-based decision aid for
individuals with MCI, although there is still room for
improvement. For example, we designed this interactive decision
aid for tablets and computers, whereas internet access is
increasingly used via mobile devices.

In conclusion, this study resulted in a promising web-based
decision aid. Further ongoing research will allow its
implementation to be tested in clinical settings. This decision
aid will be useful in supporting health workers who regularly
interact with older adults, such as nurses, physicians,
geriatricians, social workers, psychologists, community
pharmacists, or volunteers from community organizations. This
decision aid will allow HCPs to meaningfully engage older

adults in the decision-making process, so that patient values are
prioritized. It will also be useful in informing older adults with
MCI of the options available to improve their cognitive abilities,
allowing them to feel a greater sense of control over their
condition.

Our findings support three recommendations to create web-based
decision aids for older adults with MCI:

1.
Although we recognize that some evidence supports
understanding options before completing a values
clarification exercise [5,51], our research suggests that the
website should guide users in completing a values
clarification exercise before presenting any options,
allowing for tailoring of the presentation of options to the
users’ priorities, while also allowing flexibility for those
users who prefer jumping from one section to the other in
no specific order.
2.
Content should be simple, but not simplistic, notably by
using information layering, lay language, and pictograms
to represent each option.
3.
The interface should be intuitive and user friendly, for
example, by preferring check marks to drop-down menus,
using pop-up windows and information tips, and by limiting
the height of the window to avoid having to scroll down.

We also recommend that decision-aid developers consult users
early on in the design process and combine observations of user
interactions with the decision aid with a teach-back approach,
to collect rich information from the get-go, and to ensure that
they design an understandable and usable web-based decision
aid for this more vulnerable population.