A Clinical Decision Support System for Integrating
Tuberculosis and HIV Care in Kenya: A Human-Centered
Design Approach

Caricia Catalani1,2*, Eric Green3,4, Philip Owiti5, Aggrey Keny4, Lameck Diero5, Ada Yeung6,
Dennis Israelski1,7, Paul Biondich5,6

1 Innovative Support to Emergency, Disease, & Disaster (InSTEDD), Sunnyvale, California, United States of America, 2 School of Public Health, University of California,
Berkeley, California, United States of America, 3 Kijani Consulting, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, United States of America, 4 Duke University, Chapel Hill, North Carolina,
United States of America, 5 Academic Model for the Prevention and Treatment of HIV (AMPATH), Eldoret, Kenya, 6 Regenstrief Institute, Indiana University, Indianapolis,
Indiana, United States of America, 7 School of Medicine, Stanford University, Palo Alto, California, United States of America

Methods

As described, the HCD approach involves strategic use of
qualitative and quantitative research methods to meet the
objectives of each stage of design. For the TB Tech initiative,
this included site observations, key informant interviews, lab
simulation, and in-context usability testing.

Data Collection
Site Observations.
The TB Tech research and clinician
teams identified 9 sites for visit and observation sessions, among
the 49 active sites in AMPATH’s networks. These sites were
purposefully selected with the aim of diversity across the following
key characteristics: rural/urban, average monthly patient volume,
total number of active providers, and AMPATH’s clinical
categorization of 1–6 (1 being a village kiosk and 6 being a
district referral hospital). Site observations required 3–4 hours
each and were conducted by a trained ethnographic researcher,

using a semi-structured observation guide. Site observation field
notes were used in analysis.
Key Informant Interviews.
The TB Tech team identified
key informants through purposeful selection with the aim of
diversity across the following key characteristics: health area of
expertise (HIV, TB, information technology), role at AMPATH
(clinical, managerial, research), department (laboratory, pharma-
cy, radiology, clinic), and geographical responsibility (regional
office, mother site, satellite site, village home-to-home). Key
informant interviews required 45 min to 1 hour and were
conducted by two trained qualitative researchers using an
unstructured interview guide. Interviewees included medical
superintendents, clinicians, Ministry of Health officials, laboratory
managers, pharmacy managers, medical directors, TB care
providers, AMPATH administrators and program managers, data
quality workers, and community health workers. During the
interviewers, one researcher facilitated the interview while the
recorded audio and took detailed notes. All interviews were
conducted in English. Audio recordings were used in analysis.
Lab Simulation Testing.
Using a set of 217 pseudo-patients,
the TB Tech programming and development team ran the clinical
decision support system algorithms and identified the message
content that would be delivered to a clinician during that
particular patient’s visit. Pseudo-patients were mock patients
whose histories and electronic medical records were based on
actual patients. Lab simulation allowed the TB Tech team to
assess the system’s accuracy. Clinical accuracy was based on
AMPATH’s standards and priorities for TB prevention and
treatment. During this iterative process, any time that the decision
support system produced an inaccurate message or had a missing
message, the system rules were refined and lab simulation was
repeated. This process was repeated until all pseudo patients
received the medically appropriate decision support message.
Quantitative reports with the details of the number of false
negatives, false positives, and correct messages occurring during
each iteration of lab testing were used in analysis.
In-Context Usability Testing.
The TB Tech team conduct-
ed usability testing at three clinical sites, among ten HIV clinicians.
These sites were chosen based on convenience, as the clinical
leadership at each site was open and interested in testing an
innovative approach to TB care integration. During usability
testing, a mixed-methods usability survey was used to assess
clinician’s perceptions of the understandability,
importance,
helpfulness, practicality/feasibility, and accuracy of each TB
reminder message that they received throughout a normal day of

doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0103205.t001

3

clinical visits. Clinicians scored reminders on a scale from 1 (very
bad) to 5 (very good) for these five usability criteria. These
quantitative survey responses were used in analysis. At the end of a
day clinical visits and experience with the new system, clinicians
participated in in-depth interviews to provide feedback on the
system as well as the general challenges and opportunities for TB
and HIV care integration through clinical decision support and
other interventions. Interviews were conducted by two trained
interviewers.
Interviews required
20–30 minutes
each,
were
conducted in English, and were audio recorded using a Livescribe
Sky digital pen. Qualitative audio recordings of interviews were
used in analysis.

Data Analysis
All qualitative data, including key informant interview record-
ings, site observation field notes, and in-context usability interview
audio recordings, were analyzed using a modified ground theory
approach [36]. This approach involved identifying codes from
within the data, systematically applying codes to data, and
extrapolating
to
a
set
of
thematic
constructs
relevant
to
opportunities and challenges for the integration of HIV and TB
care. Coding and analysis of qualitative data, including direct
coding of audio files, was facilitated by Dedoose version 4.5.95
copyright 2014, a cloud-based mixed methods analysis software.
Quantitative data collected during the formative stages of our
HCD initiative, including lab simulation reports and in-context
usability surveys were analyzed using simple descriptive statistics
through Microsoft Excel version 12.3.6 copyright 2007.

Ethics Statement
This study was approved by the ethics review committees at
institutional partners Population Council, Indiana University and
Moi University in Kenya. The study relied exclusively on de-
identified data, meaning that the site observation field notes,
interview transcripts, and ratings forms included no documenta-
tion
of
names,
geographical
location,
contact
information,
personal identification numbers, descriptions of physically identi-
fiable characteristics, or other established identifiers. As such, all
three IRB committees determined that consent was unnecessary.
Population Council’s IRB determined that the study did not
actually involve ‘‘human subjects’’ was exempt. Nevertheless, as a
courtesy to those participating in key informant interviews, our
team obtained oral consent by reading a short statement about the
risks and benefits of voluntary participation. If key informants
volunteered to participate, then the interview team checked a box
on the interview guide indicating as such.

Findings

During each stage of the HCD process, research data was
analyzed and findings were reported to the team. As such, findings
were consistently integrated into the iterative process of refining
the team’s understanding of the challenge of integrating HIV and
TB care, identifying innovative solutions, developing prototype
systems, and deploying a new system.

Hear
To understand social context and inspire new solutions during
the hear phase, researchers conducted site observation sessions
and key informant interviews. Analysis of this qualitative data
revealed four major themes relevant to the challenges and
opportunities for TB and HIV integration: clinician’s attitudes
about IPT, clinician’s knowledge of IPT, clinician’s practices

around IPT, clinician’s perceptions of information systems, and
clinical resources for IPT case-finding.
Clinician attitudes about IPT.
Through interview and
observation sessions, some key attitudes about TB screening, TB
testing and diagnosis, IPT initiation, and TB/IPT treatment and
adherence became evident. Clinicians believed in the importance
of identifying HIV patients who are eligible for IPT, however they
reported several major barriers to initiating IPT.
First, they reported that it was often difficult to manage TB
priorities among many other priorities. They explained that, in this
clinical setting, all walk-in and scheduled patients arrive early in
the morning and form a line to see providers. Providers see
patients according to the order in line and reported some pressure
to see as many patients as possible, as quickly as possible. On a
typical day, a single provider might see 20–40 patients before they
break for lunch. Frequently, providers explained that managing
just HIV care is quite demanding, although they have substantially
more training, experience, and institutional resources for this care.
Patients may not see the same provider from visit to visit and so
providers explained that they rely on a patchwork of paperwork
and patient self-report to determine what steps in intensified TB
case-finding and IPT eligibility have been completed.
Secondly, and most commonly reported among clinicians, in
the rare case in which IPT eligibility could be confirmed during a
patient visit, providers remained hesitant to start a patient on IPT
due to pharmacy shortages. Previous experiences with periodic
and long-term ‘‘stock-outs,’’ as participants described them, made
clinicians wary of contributing toward drug resistance by exposing
patients to IPT and not completing the regimen. And, so, as
clinicians repeatedly explained, if they were not confident that all
of their eligible patients had a 9-month supply of IPT, they
preferred not to start IPT at all.
Clinician knowledge of IPT.
Interview transcripts and
observation sessions alike revealed that, although some clinicians
were quite knowledgeable about global and institutional standards
for determining IPT eligibility, most had insufficient knowledge to
determine eligibility for their patients. In particular, they often
described being unsure about the role of chest x-ray, when and if it
should be ordered and how to read radiographs. Most providers
reported receiving no special training in TB and only some
providers reported receiving a two-day training in reading chest
radiographs.
Clinician perceptions of information systems.
Clinicians
and managers were overwhelmingly positive about the electronic
medical record (EMR) system and, in particular, the HIV clinical
decision support summary. Key informants explained that without
it, providers would likely forget or overlook critical steps in HIV
care. They emphasized that reminders were prompts, simple and
shorthand cues related to services that they were already well
trained and experienced in providing. Many agreed that a simple
prompt about IPT eligibility might not be adequate to answer
providers’ broader questions and concerns about initiating IPT.
Clinicians perceived the information systems, however helpful,
to frequently suffer from missing patient data. They explained that
it was common for a clinician to be prompted to provide a service
that had already been provided. Information system managers
understood that this problem derived, in part, from the lack of
integration between patient’s EMR, laboratory management
information systems, pharmacy information systems, radiology
information systems, and TB patient records. Given this integra-
tion challenge, it is not surprising that clinicians most typical
complaint about the patient information systems was missing
documentation on chest x-ray orders and results.

4

Clinical resources for determining IPT eligibility.
Clinicians
and facility managers explained that there were several clinical
resources needed to rule out TB among patients who exhibited some
potential symptoms such as cough, night sweats, fever, and weight loss.
Often, laboratory analysis of sputum samples was frequently necessary.
TB testing and diagnostics services were available at nearly every site,
even those located in more rural settings. The more accurate, timely,
and expensive GeneXpert diagnostic test was available at centralized
AMPATH sites, but was reserved for diagnosis among a subset of
complex cases. Additionally, and as described above, AMPATH clinics
require a chest x-ray to determine patient eligibility for IPT. Chest x-
ray facilities, however, were centralized and not available at most
smaller and satellite sites. Interviews and observations confirmed that
radiology capacity varied during any given week, with unpredictable
downtimes due to equipment, electricity, and staffing challenges.
Managers at AMPATH described intensive institutional efforts to
ensure x-ray access to all patients, including building and deploying
mobile x-ray vehicles, but acknowledged that access remains a
challenge.

Create
As the team developed and refined a clinical decision support
system to integrate HIV and TB care during the create stage,
findings from lab simulations and in-context usability testing were
immediate translated into prototypes.
Lab simulation.
Laboratory simulations with pseudo-pa-
tients revealed challenges in developing a clinically accurate
decision support system. During each iteration of the system’s
algorithm, based on computer-based IPT eligibility rules and the
ensuing programming code, laboratory simulation identified cases
in which patients wrongfully received a particular reminder or
wrongfully received no reminder at all. The objective of these
simulations was not to identify detailed sensitivity and specificity
ratios, but rather continue to improve the design until there was no
evidence of errors. The team conducted dozens of cycles of
prototype development and simulation before reaching zero
errors.
Usability testing in context.
During the development of
alpha and beta versions of the clinical decision support prototype
system, lab simulation was followed by in-context usability testing
for a small-scale assessment of how the system performed in real
world contexts. Usability criteria and clinicians’ ratings of IPT
reminders received during a day of typical patient visits are
described in Tables 2–3. Providers rated all reminders that they
received, yielding a total of 51 reminder ratings. Ratings provided
usability insights into the IPT clinical decision support system’s
data (the patient EMR data), algorithm (the computer-based rules
and programming), content (the written messages), and medium of
delivery (the paper clinical summary sheet).
The understandability, importance, helpfulness, and practical-
ity/feasibility of IPT messages all ranked highly, ranging from 4.2
to 4.5 on a scale of 1–5. Although providers rated the messages

relatively highly, they found the accuracy and actionability of the
clinical decision support system problematic. Providers indicated
that roughly over a quarter of the reminders were not correct for
that particular patient and that particular day. Moreover, slightly
less than half of the reminders were not considered actionable on
that day.
In-depth interviews with providers at the end of a day of
receiving IPT messages revealed some of the reasoning for these
ratings and assessments. Most of the messages deemed incorrect
were related to ordering a chest x-ray. Providers explained that the
EMR was missing chest x-ray data although other information,
such as paper documentation in the patient record or patient self-
report, indicated that the chest x-ray had in fact been ordered
and/or read. One provider explained,

‘‘If I see the chest x-ray missing, first I ask the patient if they
did it recently. If they say yes, then I ask what the result was.
If they tell me that everything was ok, then I make a note of
it to update the information. And sometimes I repeat this
note to the data team several times and nothing changes in
the system. I keep getting the reminder.’’

When probed, clinicians revealed that they often based
diagnosis and care decisions on patient self-report. They ask
patients for their past diagnoses, testing results, and other patient
history details, and if this information conflicts with the EMR
history, they frequently trust patient recall over the EMR data.
Clinicians reported that they had little special education or
training around TB care and were unsure about the steps for
determining IPT eligibility. More than just alerts or reminders
about steps missed in the past, clinicians requested proactive
information about what actions to take moving forward. For
example, one clinician asked:

‘‘So, it says to check for chest x-ray. And what if I find the
results now? Then what do they want me to do? Am I to wait
for the next time they come in to find out what I should have
done?’’

As such, several providers indicated that they were unable to
take the action step recommended for TB care because they were
not sure what that next step might be.
Additionally, even when they were aware of the appropriate
next step toward initiating IPT, many providers described other
barriers or concerns that resulted in not complying with the
recommended next steps in care. Hesitance and inability to act
were focused in three areas: 1) providers did not share the
institutional prioritization of chest x-rays for all HIV patients,
regardless of the presence or absence of TB or other pulmonary
symptoms; 2) providers were not confident in the sustainability of

doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0103205.t002

5

IPT supplies, in agreement with findings during earlier key
stakeholder interviews; and, 3) chest radiography was frequently
inaccessible during the same day as the patient visit and referral
due to equipment failure and staffing inadequacies.
Findings from lab simulations and in-context usability testing
were used to refine the clinical decision support system. By the end
of this stage, the team created a system to integrate HIV and TB
care through the clinical decision support system. To describe how
this system functions, first, the provider writes patient information
on a paper encounter format the point-of-care while conducting a
patient exam as usual. When computer hardware becomes
accessible and acceptable in medical offices, then this information
will be entered directly into the patient electronic medical record.
Second, a data entry team inputs paper encounter forms into the
OpenMRS electronic medical record system. Third, computer-
based algorithms for TB and IPT care produce messages that are
patient-specific, educational, and promotional to inspire behavior
change among HIV providers. The content from these messages is
included in table 4, with key characteristics identified. If a required
action is not completed, such as most commonly due to delays and
breakdowns in radiography, then the reminder is repeated during
the next patient visit. Before the patient’s next scheduled visit, the
decision support messages are delivered to providers through the
most reliable and feasible means: paper. This system produces
individualized & tailored reminders, to be printed on a clinical
summary sheet & placed in the patient paper file—the only means
to ensure that these messages are seen exactly when providers need
them and in a medium that is acceptable and accessible regardless
of access to digital hardware, internet networks, and power at the
point-of-care. This design was made feasible and acceptable by
relying on many existing AMPATH procedures and systems,
clinical resources, and provider practices.

Deliver
During the deliver stage of the TB Tech project, the team
assessed and addressed feasibility challenges, prepared to roll-out
operations, implemented the clinical decision support system, and
commenced a randomized clinical trial to assess impact. In
assessing and addressing feasibility challenges, the team identified
major stumbling blocks to successful implementation and impact
based on findings from formative research described above. These
included technology systems requirements such as functional
printers, reliable electricity, and improvements to EMR data
quality and they also included clinical requirements such as
adequate IPT stocks and supply-chain management, improved
access to radiology, and provider knowledge of TB and IPT
standards of care. Working in close partnership with AMPATH,
our team committed six months to addressing feasibility challenges
to the extent possible. In doing so, some of the key activities
included: purchasing and distributing new hardware and supplies,
hiring and training new staff to collect critical TB and IPT data at
each site, improving IPT supply chain management through
decentralized stockpiles and detailed accounting of stock supplies,
strategically locating mobile radiology units in proximity to clinical

sites with most limited access, and carrying out a TB and IPT
educational campaign among all AMPATH providers and clinics.
There were minimal activities required to prepare for opera-
tions rollout. By design, the clinical decision support system would
build on existing practices across the AMPATH system. By relying
on paper print outs and data from an existing EMR system, no
fundamentally
new
equipment
or
practices
needed
to
be
introduced or managed. Moreover, our staff and efforts were
focused on ensuring that the existing system was functioning
optimally and that known challenges, as listed above, were
addressed adequately. The clinical decision support system was
first rolled-out to randomly selected clusters of clinics among 68
active sites, as a part of a randomized clinical trial reported
elsewhere [35].

Conclusions

The TB Tech initiative provides evidence that human-centered
design can facilitate digital innovation in resource-constrained
settings. Using this approach, our team improved our understand-
ing of the needs and assets of providers in a low-resource HIV care
context, created a TB clinical decision support system to improve
intensive case-finding and IPT initiation among patients living
with HIV, and implemented the system among 3 pilot sites and
then an extensive network of 68 HIV clinics in Western Kenya. As
leaders of HIV programs worldwide introduce innovative digital
solutions, techniques in human-centered design can facilitate the
process of developing and using mHealth and eHealth tools to
address complex problems.

Conceived and designed the experiments: CC EG LD DI PB. Performed
the experiments: CC EG PO AK. Analyzed the data: CC AK. Contributed
to the writing of the manuscript: CC EG PO AK LD AY DI PB.