Original Paper

Untold Stories in User-Centered Design of Mobile Health: Practical
Challenges and Strategies Learned From the Design and
Evaluation of an App for Older Adults With Heart Failure

Victor Philip Cornet1,2, MS; Tammy Toscos2, PhD; Davide Bolchini1, PhD; Romisa Rohani Ghahari2, PhD; Ryan
Ahmed2, MS; Carly Daley2,3, MS; Michael J Mirro2,3,4, MD, FACC, FHRS, FAHA, FACP; Richard J Holden4,5, PhD

1Department of Human-centered Computing, School of Informatics and Computing, IUPUI, Indianapolis, IN, United States
2Parkview Mirro Center for Research and Innovation, Parkview Health, Fort Wayne, IN, United States
3Department of BioHealth Informatics, School of Informatics and Computing, IUPUI, Indianapolis, IN, United States
4Department of Medicine, School of Medicine, Indiana University, Indianapolis, IN, United States
5Regenstrief Institute, Indianapolis, IN, United States

Richard J Holden, PhD
Regenstrief Institute
1101 W 10th St #421
Indianapolis, IN, 46202
United States
Phone: 1 317 278 5323

Methods

Overview

The objectives of this study were as follows:

•
Characterize practical challenges encountered while
implementing UCD to design an mHealth app for older
adults with heart failure.
•
Discuss strategies that we used or considered using to
manage these challenges.

In presenting these challenges and strategies, we offer
illustrations from our own experiences, particularly the Power
to the Patient (P2P) project (R21 HS025232) and cite others
that have been described in the literature in and outside the
mHealth arena.

Power to the Patient Project

From 2017 to 2019, we performed a UCD study to design and
evaluate information technology for older adults with heart
failure. On the basis of previous literature, we knew that these
patients had unmet needs and required additional support to
monitor and manage symptoms and various related behaviors,
including medication use, dietary and fluid restriction, and
physical activity [35-37]. Our work focused on delivering
information and decision support by leveraging a novel
technological opportunity, namely, sharing with patients the
data from their cardiac implanted electronic devices (CIEDs).
Many patients with heart failure have CIEDs for the delivery
of timely cardiac therapy and the capturing of data that can
predict decompensation and other events leading to
hospitalization and other downstream outcomes [38,39]. Patients
seldom receive their CIED data [40,41], but technical and
cultural changes are increasing the likelihood that they will in
the future [41-43].

Figure 1 presents an overview of the project’s timeline, and
Textboxes 1 and 2 further elaborate on the methods used. Select
methods and results from the project are available elsewhere
[19,32,44-47].

The project began with a problem analysis or formative study
of the domain as a precursor to design. This phase comprised
interviews with 24 older adults with heart failure, half of whom
had CIEDs, to learn about how they made decisions about their
health. These interviews used the critical incident technique, a
method that asks participants to recall and describe a specific
event or scenario and uses probes to better understand the
participants’ thoughts and actions during the event or scenario
[48,49]. We also examined participants’ decision-making
strategies in response to fictitious scenarios [16]. In these
scenarios, individuals were presented with hypothetical
situations related to data from a fictitious CIED and asked to
think aloud as they made decisions about how to respond. Other
formative study methods were a brief observation of a device
clinic, meetings with 2 cardiologists, and sharing of findings
and design work from 2 recent similar studies on CIED data
sharing [43,50].

Textbox 1. Formative research methods used to establish the Power to the Patient’s domain space.

Patient interviews

•
Method: 70-min (1) critical incident interviews and (2) scenario-based cognitive interviews to understand the decision-making process of older
adults with heart failure

•
Participants: 24 English-speaking older adults (≥65 years) diagnosed with heart failure (New York Heart Association Class II-IV) and 14
accompanying support persons (family and friends). Patients were receiving care at Parkview Health (Fort Wayne, Indiana)

•
Procedure: (1) Participants were asked to describe a recent minor adverse health event and were probed with questions about their thought,
feelings, and actions. (2) Participants were presented with a picture of a fictitious device that could give them a CIED score representing their
heart health; they were asked to describe what they would think and do depending on the score displayed on the device

Patient advisory meetings

•
Method: One-on-one meetings with patient advisors soliciting feedback on (1) personas and use-case scenarios and (2) early design concepts
and prototypes

•
Participants: 2 older adults with heart failure from the community (Indianapolis, Indiana) who voluntarily assisted the study in an advisory
capacity

•
Procedure: (1) Advisors met with the research team to discuss the preliminary findings from the interviews and early persona development. They
provided feedback on the findings, methods, and relevance of the work. (2) Advisors were presented with design alternatives of a Power to the
Patient prototype, and then they interacted with it while thinking aloud using a computer and a mouse

Clinician advisory board meeting

•
Method: Group dinner with clinician experts to elicit feedback on personas, use-case scenarios, and early concepts

•
Participants: 7 Parkview Health clinicians (2 cardiologists, a device clinic supervisor, 2 technicians, a nurse, and the vice president of operations
for the Parkview Heart Institute)

•
Procedure: Personas and scenarios were presented, among other findings, and questions were asked of clinicians regarding the validity of the
findings and related current protocols (some of which were subsequently collected)

Individual interviews with 2 cardiologists

Observation of clinical encounters with a patient in the device clinic

Textbox 2. Evaluation methods used during the Power to the Patient development.

Usability evaluations, round 1 (R1) and round 2 (R2)

•
Method: 90-min task-driven evaluation sessions of Power to the Patient prototypes to assess usability (primarily) and acceptability (secondarily)

•
Participants: 4 (R1) and 8 (R2) English-speaking older adults diagnosed with heart failure and 3 accompanying support persons (2 in R1 and 1
in R2)

•
Procedure: Participants performed specific tasks in the prototype while thinking aloud. Testing occurred in a private room, with an interactive
prototype made in Axure RP 9 running on a Samsung Galaxy S7 smartphone. Participants’ manual interactions were video recorded. Pretest,
participants completed a demographic survey (ie, age, gender, technology use, and education level) and the Newest Vital Sign health literacy
screening (NVS) [51]; posttest, they completed the system usability scale [52], National Aeronautics and Space Administration Task Load Index
(NASA-TLX) [51], and user acceptance survey. Participants were also interviewed about their understanding and projected use of Power to the
Patient prototypes.

Usability evaluation, round 3 (R3)

•
Method: 90-min scenario-driven evaluation sessions of Power to the Patient prototypes to assess acceptability (primarily) and usability (secondarily)

•
Participants: 12 English-speaking older adults diagnosed with heart failure, with cardiac implanted electronic devices, and accompanied by 5
support persons

•
Procedure: Participants simulated days 1 and 10 of longitudinal use of the Power to the Patient prototype while thinking aloud. They completed
the same assessments as in earlier rounds and were interviewed about their understanding and projected use of the Power to the Patient prototype.

Heuristic evaluation

•
Method: Heuristic evaluation questionnaire to assess usability of Power to the Patient prototypes

•
Participants: 3 user-centered design experts external to the team

•
Procedure: Participants explored the prototype based on 2 use cases. They then reported their observations for 9 heuristics and gave an overall
rating for the usability of the prototype

Findings from the formative study were analyzed to develop
personas, representing distinct ways patients made decisions,
and use-case scenarios, representing decision-making situations
in which hypothetical patients with CIEDs might find
themselves. A model was also created depicting the flow of
naturalistic decision making for heart failure self-care. These
products were presented separately to 2 patient advisors and a
panel of clinicians, who provided feedback on the realism and
relevance of the personas and scenarios. The personas, use-case
scenarios, and a review of the literature and market landscape
(eg, app store reviews of similar mHealth products) were used
to formulate requirements and early design concepts to be
presented to patient advisors.

The design involved writing requirements and 5 months of
iterative prototyping, concluding with an interactive prototype.
Subsequently, 
we 
performed 
3 
rounds 
of 
formal
laboratory-based usability testing with 24 participants,
interleaved with periods of prototype redesign. Each round had
a more complete prototype and an increasing number of
participants (ie, n=4 in round 1, n=8 in round 2, and n=12 in
round 3). The project concluded with a final refinement of the
prototype and formal heuristic evaluations by 3 outside UCD
experts.

The P2P app designed in this study had 4 core patient-facing
components: a heart health score calculated from CIED data (a
fictitious concept inspired by existing research [53,54]),
self-assessments on recommended heart failure self-care
domains (eg, medication use, sodium-restricted diet), tips and
strategies for better self-management, and logs of data captured
by the app. We designed and tested different implementations
of these core concepts, changing information architecture and
amending feature sets as we received feedback from study
participants. For example, in one iteration, assessments, tips,
and strategies were organized using the concept of plans that
users could select.

Results

Overview

The UCD process as a whole and the 3 major UCD phases of
formative research, design, and evaluation present associated
implementation challenges. Twelve of the most pervasive
challenges are summarized in Figure 2. Next, we discuss each,
with examples from our experience with P2P, supplemented by
relevant literature.

Whole User-Centered Design Process

We identified 3 challenges related to the UCD process as a
whole: deciding on the number of design-and-test iterations
(UCD process challenge 1); managing logistics associated with
UCD projects, such as preparing materials and recruitment costs

(UCD process challenge 2); and collaborating as a
multidisciplinary team by navigating misaligned goals and
communication breakdowns (UCD process challenge 3).
Recommendations for the UCD process are listed in Textbox
3.

Textbox 3. Recommendations for the user-centered design process.

1.
Keep the number of iterations flexible, estimating the range based on available resources but adjusting as the project progresses.

2.
Avoid endless iterations by having a clear criteria for when to end the design and testing activities.

3.
Consult or collaborate with experienced practitioners to anticipate and manage logistic challenges.

4.
Explicitly discuss and seek to align multidisciplinary team members’ goals and preferences early on, managing these over time through open
communication.

5.
Involve a multilinguistic conductor to lead the team and coordinate members with diverse values, norms, practices, vocabularies, theories, and
methods.

User-Centered Design Process Challenge 1: Deciding
on the Number of Iterations

We planned the number of design-and-test iterations early in
the project to satisfy the requirements of the funding agency
and Institutional Review Board (IRB). Three iterations were
originally estimated as feasible, given the timeline and amount
of funding. Each iteration was assumed to require an average

of at least 2 months of time and budget. As the project
progressed, it became apparent that those assumptions were
correct and that to adhere to budget and project timeline
restrictions, we would be able to complete the 3 planned
iterations. The number of participants in total and per iteration
was based on several considerations. The total of 24 test
participants were based on the project budget and timeline, as
above, and the goal of having an average of 8 participants per

test, a typical upper range for formative testing. For the initial
2 iterations, our focus was on identifying overt usability issues,
and based on Nielsen’s recommendations, we planned to enroll
about 4 to 8 participants (a few participants can uncover most
usability issues [55]). In the last round, as our focus shifted
toward evaluating acceptance and the extent to which the design
was usable across a more diverse set of users, we recruited 12
participants.

Iterations in UCD benefit software development by reducing
usability issues and improving features before it is too late or
too expensive to make changes [56]. Iteration is generally
recommended [56], but the number of iterations is not fixed
and often depends on the project and how it progresses.
However, deviating from a planned number of deviations can
be costly or prohibited for other (eg, regulatory or management)
reasons. Conversely, endless iteration is counterproductive and
delays in-the-wild field testing and actual implementation.

UCD Process Challenge 2: Managing UCD Logistics

Many of our recurring challenges were related to logistics, such
as meeting recruitment goals, preparing and managing materials
(ie, instructions, presentations, and design documentation), and
arranging a specific time for members and advisors to meet
despite being geographically dispersed. Others have reported
similar challenges in mHealth projects [57,58], but more often
they are assumed and discussed informally between
practitioners. This means that novice UCD practitioners tend
to underestimate logistic challenges and have limited
information on how to address them. UCD logistics challenges
often mirror challenges to implementing patient-centered
research in general, for example, the taxonomy of challenges
by Holden et al [59], which includes patient identification and
recruitment; privacy and confidentiality; conflicts with
compensation; and logistical issues, such as travel, timing, and
communication. Authors have described strategies to achieve
buy-in, trust, transparency, accommodation (flexibility),
openness, and anticipation [59,60], as well as checklists for
implementing these general strategies [61].

Others have described the additional costs of recruiting end
users for UCD projects [20,57]. It is even more difficult to
recruit a representative sample in a technology project when
technology ownership and proficiency are among the eligibility

criteria [62] or the notion of technology leads individuals to
decline participation [63]. Age- and illness-related physical and
cognitive limitations may also exclude some individuals from
mHealth studies [6,64]. In such cases, UCD projects must also
consider whether to involve informal caregivers or others (eg,
translators) who could assist patients during formative research
or testing.

UCD Process Challenge 3: Collaborating as a
Multidisciplinary Team

Our P2P project was the fruit of collaboration between a
research university and a research center in a large health
system, with support from patient and clinician advisors. Our
team included a cardiologist coinvestigator who provided
invaluable clinical information, feedback, and access to local
and national clinical leaders. However, with disciplinary
diversity comes disagreement, communication difficulty, and
differences in assumptions, and although these are all desirable
elements, they require efforts to manage, for example, by
frequently asking team members to state their assumptions.

Multidisciplinary collaboration is often encouraged in UCD
[6,65,66], including partnerships between designers and
clinicians [67,68]. Those who have attempted such
collaborations are aware of the methodological and cultural
misalignment or divergent goals between Human-Computer
Interaction technologists and clinicians [65,69]. Strategies to
overcome these collaboration challenges include structured
communication and the involvement of a multilinguistic
(symphonic) conductor, a person who has learned “each team
member’s discipline- or profession-specific values, norms,
practices, vocabularies, theories, and methods to coordinate and
translate between dissimilar members” [70].

Formative Research

We encountered 3 types of formative research challenges in the
P2P project: determining when and how to involve stakeholders
(formative research challenge 1), recruiting participants and
advisors who are representative of stakeholder groups (formative
research challenge 2), and fostering meaningful interactions
between stakeholders and designers despite personnel constraints
(formative research challenge 3). Recommendations for
formative research are listed in Textbox 4.

Textbox 4. Recommendations for formative research.

1.
Involve stakeholders early.

2.
Avoid over recruiting or collecting more data than can be expediently analyzed.

3.
Use shorter-cycle iterative research sprints with smaller sample sizes instead [55].

4.
Carefully balance expectations placed on stakeholders versus what they are able or willing to do.

5.
Deprioritize but do not discard the ideas that stakeholders rejected early on before the ideas reached maturity.

6.
When possible, generate involvement from multiple stakeholder groups.

7.
Use diverse recruitment methods to ensure stakeholders are chosen for representativeness, not convenience.

8.
Foster direct relations between designers and stakeholders.

9.
Minimize avoidable personnel changes and practice cross-staffing across user-centered design phases.

Formative Research Challenge 1: Determining Timing
and Level of Stakeholder Involvement

We involved patients and clinicians early in the P2P project in
several ways, including informant interviews and feedback on
analyses, requirements, and early design concepts. This helped
learn lessons early, such as clinicians insisting that because of
interindividual variability in physical activity, activity goals
should be highly individualized, whereas other goals (eg,
medication adherence) could be identical for all users. Early
learning allowed earlier decisions about scope, facilitated
evidence-based design choices, and prevented having to make
costly future design revisions. In terms of the scope, early
stakeholder involvement helped eliminate especially difficult
or risky design concepts, for example, including medication
titration advice.

Early involvement was not always simple. The number and
depth of P2P interviews yielded more data than could be
analyzed in the time allotted. As a result, several important
findings from stakeholder interviews were not discovered until
further in the design process, negating some of the benefits of
early learning. Furthermore, having sought feedback early may
have prematurely terminated concepts that were promising but
premature at the time.

The forms of involvement vary from collecting extensive data
to asking individuals to assess early products [65]. The level of
involvement can also be adjusted between informing (as in
interviews), advising (as in reviewing concepts), and doing (as
in having stakeholders co-perform research or design work)
[71]. However, more active or laborious stakeholder
involvement risks asking individuals to do more than what is
realistic, reasonable, or affordable [21,72]. This is often the case
when individuals are asked to be co-designers without adequate
training in design, compensation for their contribution, or
understanding of the problem space. Although some
involvement is essential to UCD, more is not always better [71].

Formative Research Challenge 2: Choosing Stakeholder
Representatives

P2P was fortunate to obtain input from patients sampled from
a pool of current patients; volunteer advisors who were willing
to meet repeatedly with the design team; and various clinicians,
some of whom also offered access to their clinic and protocols.
Not every design team can easily access stakeholders for
formative research in a timely manner, far less multiple
stakeholder groups, especially when the stakeholders include
busy professionals. Some researchers resort to gathering data
from less representative convenience samples, including online
services offering access to paid volunteers, such as Amazon’s
Mechanical Turk or the Qualtrics Panel [73-75].

Despite having adequate access, P2P was also limited in the
variety and representativeness of stakeholders. The patients we
interviewed in our formative research were all white, and
two-third were male. Patient advisors were more likely to be
educated and engaged in their health than peers, consistent with
the general trend that patient advisors are rarely ordinary people.
Clinicians in our study may have been more motivated than

nonparticipants. Although stakeholder involvement is essential
to UCD [1,76], it is predicated on stakeholders having unique
knowledge or insights that designers do not have. However,
stakeholders too have limited knowledge and represent primarily
the communities to which they belong, meaning even with
stakeholder involvement, there may exist multiple blind spots.
When those who are involved differ from end users (eg, on race,
education, or motivation), those blind spots may disadvantage
underrepresented groups [63]. In practice, however, few design
studies have the opportunity to conduct formative research with
large samples representative of the population, whereas
increasing sample size exacerbates formative research challenge
1 (“When and how much to involve stakeholders”), as discussed
above.

Those who have worked extensively with patient advisory
boards offer useful advice on assembling the right group of
stakeholders, especially when they must work together, as on
a panel. Suggestions include leadership commitment to listening
to stakeholder suggestions, diverse recruitment (to avoid the
abovementioned blindspots), careful selection of individuals
who will work well with others, and adequate funding to
compensate or otherwise support stakeholders [77].

Formative Research Challenge 3: Fostering Interactions
Between Stakeholders and Designers

We attempted to promote direct interactions between designers
and both patient and clinician stakeholders. Designers attended
many of the formative research sessions or had direct access to
the collected raw data. Furthermore, to ensure continuity, there
was cross-staffing of formative research, design, and evaluation
teams. One project member personally participated in almost
every interview, feedback session, design meeting, and usability
test. However, she was the only design team member who had
interviewed patients and was therefore expected to be the voice
of patient participants on the design team. Over time, turnover
greatly reduced the number of team members who had been
present from the beginning of the project and had therefore
participated in any formative research activities.

Having designers interact directly with stakeholders, and
especially end users, has been shown to yield better results [78]
than hearing about the stakeholders and end users from another
source [71]. Continual interaction with stakeholders during the
UCD process helps designers gain a firsthand experience of the
domain [78,79]. However, when projects progress sequentially
from formative research with stakeholders to design and
evaluation, turnover and staffing limitations may mean that
those designing or testing the product may not have had such
firsthand experience.

Design

We identified 3 challenges related to the design phase of UCD:
overcoming designers’ assumptions with empirical research
findings (design challenge 1), managing project scope and
complexity and avoiding scope creep (design challenge 2), and
maintaining the innovation equilibrium by balancing new ideas
with outside constraints (design challenge 3). Recommendations
for design are listed in Textbox 5.

Textbox 5. Recommendations for design.

1.
Engage stakeholders during design as ad hoc informants or co-designers to challenge incorrect assumptions.

2.
Conduct iterative new rounds of data collection during the design phase as questions arise that are best answered by gathering evidence.

3.
Seek simplicity and thus reducing complexity.

4.
Monitor for scope creep [80] and overly complex designs, relative to what end users need.

5.
Plan for feature deimplementation (ie, removing features from design), using techniques such as a formal termination plan [33].

6.
Without stifling innovation, ensure stakeholders can rule out designs that are unsafe, unacceptable, infeasible, inconsistent with clinical reality,
or otherwise impractical.

7.
For innovative ideas transcending conventional practice, develop clear plans for how the design will fit in or overcome existing infrastructure
constraints, regulations, preferences, and habits.

Design Challenge 1: Overcoming Designers’
Assumptions

Designers naturally make decisions that are inspired by but
immediately validated by end user evidence. Some of these
decisions are based on assumptions that go unquestioned during
design but are discovered to be incorrect during testing. This
situation underscores the value of testing and the limitations of
design. In the P2P project, for example, we incorporated rewards
based on the literature. Nothing in the formative data
contradicted the potential value of rewards, so it was not until
testing that we learned that most participants thought the rewards
were distracting. Some assumptions are also persistent and can
be made despite disconfirming formative research findings. For
example, members of the design team persistently believed that
end users would have little technology experience, despite
evidence to the contrary from formative research and usability
testing.

Designer bias is difficult to overcome, even when UCD methods
are used to collect contradictory evidence. The sequence of
design following formative research means some assumptions
are not tested or contradicted until the testing phase, by which
time the assumptions may have greatly influenced the design.
An alternative would be to conduct additional research to
challenge the design team’s assumptions during the design
phase, but before formal testing [81]. Furthermore, designers
should be judicious in the use of design techniques, such as
personas, which can lead to oversimplification and encourage
misleading assumptions about end users [82]. Other strategies
to mitigate incorrect assumptions include conducting more
frequent testing or including stakeholders on design teams to
challenge assumptions during the design process [50,71].

Design Challenge 2: Managing Project Scope and
Complexity

Similar to other design projects, P2P produced many ideas,
which were easier to generate than to dismiss. As a result, we
attempted to include in a single app a large variety of features.
We also attempted to integrate these many features to produce
a coherent product. Often, multiple features were being slowly
designed in parallel, rather than perfecting 1 feature before
moving on to the next. These conditions sometimes led to
confusion about the purpose of the app. More features also
meant less time and effort spent designing or testing each.

Complexity and scope need to be carefully managed to avoid
natural tendencies to add (rather than subtract) from taking over.
Additional research could be used to help prioritize features and
determine which features are attractive to designers but not
needed by end users [28]. When a project’s scope is intentionally
large, steps can be taken to create distinct modules (chunks of
features) [83], which provide coherent structure and separation.
If complexity is inevitable, the project team will need to plan
for more extensive testing by conducting longer sessions or
sessions with more users.

Design Challenge 3: Maintaining the Innovation
Equilibrium

In our experience, designers, clinician stakeholders, and patient
stakeholders were divided on what was possible for and needed
from the product being designed. Generally, clinicians were
more conservative, preferring to replicate existing practices and
avoid less studied or riskier options. For instance, clinicians
were more conservative than designers about how much
unedited information and control over its interpretation to offer
patients. Another point of contention was whether to integrate
the product into other health information systems, including
electronic medical records. Patients preferred integration,
whereas designers were divided on leveraging those systems at
the expense of their practical limitations and regulatory
constraints. Innovation also conflicted with clinical reality, a
case where a patient or designer might envision something that
is not technically possible or clinically relevant [32]. For
example, the design team assumed an ability to predict heart
failure events through CIED data that were beyond publicly
available scientific knowledge. Designers’ innovative ideas
could also be mismatched with what patient end users were
used to and could comfortably perform. This may have been
the case with patients’ dislike of rewards or reluctance to rate
their health using standard online rating conventions (eg, out
of 5 stars). In general, end users tend to have more conventional
preferences than designers [26]. In mHealth projects, patients
may be unaware of or reluctant to suggest all the technological
possibilities granted by smartphones [29], such as push
notifications [84] or smartphone sensors [27].

In conversations with innovators, UCD professionals often hear
the statement attributed to Henry Ford, “If I had asked people
what they wanted, they would have said faster horses.” The
broader challenge is maintaining the innovation equilibrium:
allowing innovators to innovate, while also allowing

stakeholders to influence or evaluate their design, especially
when it comes to usability, safety, and privacy. The related
challenge is to prevent innovation from creating products that
commit what Cornet et al [32] call type 2 design error, which
“occurs when designers do not accommodate the clinical reality,
including biomedical knowledge, clinical workflows, and
organizational requirements.”

Evaluation

We identified 3 evaluation challenges: managing the tradeoff
between laboratory and in-the-wild usability sessions (evaluation
challenge 1); adapting standardized methods to the end user
population, in our case, older adults (evaluation challenge 2);
and deciding on the number of concurrent evaluation methods
relative to the effort spent setting up sessions and analyzing
data (evaluation challenge 3). Recommendations for evaluation
are listed in Textbox 6.

Textbox 6. Recommendations for evaluation.

1.
Use a laboratory setup for usability testing to improve efficiency and effectiveness.

2.
Begin testing in the laboratory but transition to in-the-wild testing as time and budget allow.

3.
Adapt methods to end user needs, when necessary, even if this means deviating from the standard.

4.
Allow for flexibility and experimentation, at times sacrificing standardization.

5.
Control the number of concurrent evaluation methods; use efficiency, pacing, and workload management strategies if multiple methods are
implemented.

Evaluation Challenge 1: Conducting Laboratory or
In-the-Wild Usability Sessions

P2P usability testing was conducted in a laboratory setting,
albeit in meeting rooms without built-in usability or simulation
equipment (eg, a control room, multicamera recording, eye
tracking). Although this setting was adequate in most cases, it
was at times inconvenient. The laboratory setting was more
challenging because it required participants to test prototypes
in a time and place dissimilar from the intended context of use.
Participants spent 30 min using a prototype technology meant
to be used for weeks, months, and years. They were then asked
to project how they would use the technology in practice. In the
third round of testing, scenarios were used to simulate several
days in the prolonged use of the product to help participants
project future acceptance and use. However, the cross-sectional
and laboratory-based design of our testing limited our
confidence in our findings regarding acceptance and future use,
relative to findings of usability (eg, observed errors or subjective
usability ratings).

Evaluating mHealth prototypes in a laboratory setting offers
ideal conditions for detecting product software usability issues,
such as navigation or layout issues. Such evaluation however
lacks external validity in reproducing the context of the use of
the mHealth product [85] and therefore fails to assess most
issues related to product hardware usability, operating system
usability, acceptance, and longer term outcomes (eg, changes
in behavior or health) [6]. Laboratory evaluation is appropriate
to quickly iterate on designs and address usability issues before
in-the-wild testing to avoid fielding a poorly designed product.
However, in-the-wild testing is expensive and time-intensive
and may not be possible in every project.

Evaluation Challenge 2: Adapting Methods to End Users

We adapted the standard methods in several ways, including
accommodating older adult participants. For example, we
administered a simplified version of the System Usability Scale
(SUS) self-report measure, which we developed specifically for
older adults [9,86,87]. We built flexibility for breaks during

testing, especially given the use of diuretic medications by
patients with heart failure. We also discovered challenges that
we had not anticipated, for example, a participant having
difficulty completing computer-based surveys because of vision
and motor impairment.

In the context of mHealth projects, adapting standardized
usability evaluation methods to end users is often necessary to
accommodate patient abilities and limitations. For example,
most standardized usability scales have technical or difficult
words [86]; thus, many studies edit these measures, for example,
by changing the “cumbersome” in the SUS to “awkward” [88].
Although standardized methods ensure scientific reproducibility,
rigidity in the UCD process can undermine the goal of iteratively
improving a product, which often requires flexibility and
experimentation [65]. If, for example, researchers discover that
some older participants have difficulty using a touchscreen
device, it may be worth adapting the protocol to permit the use
of a mouse or stylus in subsequent testing.

Evaluation Challenge 3: Deciding on the Number of
Concurrent Evaluation Methods

Our testing involved participant consenting, lengthy pre- and
posttest surveys, posttest interviews, and task-based usability
testing with think-aloud. In addition, each testing session
required a pretest room and equipment setup and posttest
aggregation of data from audio, video, computerized, and written
recordings. At times, the multiplicity of methods in a single
session resulted in testing sessions being cut short. Moreover,
the amount of data collected during testing affected the speed
at which the team could analyze usability test findings and
prepare the next design for another round of testing.

Using multiple concurrent evaluation methods improves
triangulation and therefore mHealth usability [89]. However,
each method adds burden and affects the timeline. Thus, those
implementing UCD should pursue strategies to reduce
inefficiency (eg, use of a dedicated testing room to reduce setup
labor), ensure pacing (eg, blocking off staff time for testing and

analysis), and reduce workload (eg, use of automated usability
data collection or analysis) [90].

Discussion

Limitations

The challenges reported were based on our experience with a
P2P project, supplemented by firsthand experience with multiple
other mHealth projects and a review of the literature. However,
the literature yielded few explicit depictions of challenges and
less formal discussion of them. (This validated the goals of this
paper.) Both our experiences and most of those described in the
literature originated in academic environments, which have
unique staffing, timing, and funding characteristics. The UCD
implementation challenges and strategies encountered in the
industry may be different, although an examination of gray
literature (eg, blog posts and popular design books) shows some
similarities. Finally, our recommendations are to be taken with

caution, as they have not been formally validated across projects,
project teams, or environments. The mHealth UCD community
should actively debate these recommendations and produce new
ones.

Conclusions

UCD implementation for mHealth apps can lead to highly usable
and acceptable patient-centered and clinically valid solutions.
Implementation is challenging, as the 12 practical challenges
in this paper easily illustrate. However, these challenges can be
overcome, and our recommendations may help others apply
UCD to mHealth or similar arenas. Telling and learning from
the typically untold stories will result in more efficient, effective,
and sustainable mHealth design efforts, effectively bridging the
gap between the science and practice of UCD and mHealth
implementation. We call on our fellow researchers, designers,
and UCD experts to document and share their own challenges
and strategies toward improving the implementation of UCD.