Original Paper

A Web-Based Program for Informal Caregivers of Persons With
Alzheimer’s Disease: An Iterative User-Centered Design

Victoria Cristancho-Lacroix1,2, MApsych, MSc; Florence Moulin1, MApsych; Jérémy Wrobel1, MApsych; Bénédicte
Batrancourt3, PhD; Matthieu Plichart1,4, MD, PhD; Jocelyne De Rotrou1*, PhD (Psych); Inge Cantegreil-Kallen1*,
PhD (Psych); Anne-Sophie Rigaud1,2, MD, PhD

1Assistance Publique des Hôpitaux de Paris (APHP), Hôpital Broca, Service de Gérontologie, Pôle de Gériatrie, Paris, France
2Research team Equipe d'accueil 4468. Maladie d'Alzheimer, facteurs de risques, soins et accompagnement des patients et des familles, Institut de
Psychologie, Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France
3Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière (ICM), Unité mixte de recherche (UMR) 975, Institut national de la santé et de la recherche médicale
(INSERM) U 1127, Centre national de la recherche scientifique (CNRS) UMR 7225, Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris, France
4Inserm UMR-S970 - Centre de recherche cardiovasculaire de Paris, Equipe 4: Epidémiologie cardiovasculaire et mort subite, Paris, France
*these authors contributed equally

Victoria Cristancho-Lacroix, MApsych, MSc
Assistance Publique des Hôpitaux de Paris (APHP)
Hôpital Broca, Service de Gérontologie
Pôle de Gériatrie
54-56 rue Pascal
Paris, 75013
France
Phone: 33 0144083351
Fax: 33 0144083510

Methods

Design

This was an exploratory-descriptive study, which consisted of
a double iterative design allowing for the adaptation of the
content and usability of the website. A group of health
professionals (project team) participated in the iterations for
determining the content, layout, and program design in the
different stages of development through the workshops. In
parallel, we conducted a proof of concept with caregivers and
two usability tests with healthy older adults. The latter were
based on a mixed research method with a convergent parallel
design. Indeed, the protocol of the usability tests consisted of
qualitative and quantitative data that were collected
concurrently, but analyzed separately, and finally merged during
the interpretation [18]. We used this method in order to obtain
a more comprehensive analysis of data, and to raise the
reliability of results. All the participants gave their written
informed consent prior to their inclusion in the study.

Diapason Program Development Process

Overview

The program development process took place from 2009 to
2011 and included the following component parts: (1) design
and development of the first two versions of the website, (2)
proof of concept, and (3) two iterative usability tests (Figure 1
shows the development process).

Project Team Workshops

Participants
The project team comprised twelve health care professionals
and researchers who participated in the regular meetings, 2
physicians, 8 psychologists, and 1 sociologist, all from the same
geriatric department, as well as an informatics engineer.

Procedure
Throughout the whole development process, two psychologists
(FM or VCL) moderated and conducted regular workshops in
an informal setting with the project team. During each workshop,
their specifications and recommendations were collected by one
of the moderators. Based on their feedback, the informatics
engineer built the website prototype (V.0.0), and its successive
versions for the proof of concept and usability tests.

In addition, the project team analyzed the offline prototypes
during the workshops. The analyses were focused on the
following 
criteria 
inspired 
from 
usability 
guidelines
[13,14,19,20]: (1) avoiding technical terminology (neither
medical- nor informatics-related); (2) ameliorating accessibility
for nonexperienced users, providing a familiar look (eg, looking
like a printed notebook); (3) improving readability (including
font size and contrast); (4) facilitating navigation (eg. providing
visual cues); and (5) adapting the content to the target users
(privileging condensed, clear, quick, and easily accessible
information).

Proof of Concept

Participants
We recruited six informal caregivers of PWAD who attended
the memory clinic, including three children, mean (SD) age

50.3 (12.4) years, and three spouses, mean (SD) age 73.4 (7.5)
years, having at least once used the Internet. A purposive
sampling approach was used to recruit the same number of
children and spouses. Purposive sample techniques involve
selecting certain units based on specific purposes rather than
randomly. These techniques are used when the researcher wants
to “set up a comparison between different types of cases”; it
allowed us to compare the opinions of younger and older users
about the program.

Procedure and Evaluation Tools
Each participant received a clear explanation of the program’s
aim, and then browsed the Diapason website offline v1.0. After
that, a semistructured in-person interview carried out by a
psychologist (≈ 40 minutes) was recorded in order to evaluate
the opinions of caregivers.  Semi structured interviews have a
flexible and fluid structure, organized around an interview guide
[21]. Questions regarding website usability and appearance were
covered in the course of the interview.

First Usability Testing (Test 1)

Participants
As mentioned in the Introduction, since older people experience
more difficulties with Internet use than other caregivers, we
targeted them for usability testing. In order to avoid the learning
bias, we recruited two different groups for each prototype
version. There were 16 self-reportedly healthy persons 60 years
and older (age mean 73.81, SD 7.03), having at least once used
the Internet, that were recruited from three seniors associations
in Paris. Sociodemographic information is summarized in Table
1.

Procedure and Evaluation Tools
A research psychologist conducted a one hour individual
usability test with each participant. The session was divided
into four steps:

1.
The 
participant 
filled 
out 
a 
questionnaire 
on
sociodemographic data, Internet experience, and the
monthly frequency of Internet use.
2.
The participant was asked to follow written instructions
(Textbox 1) of navigation on the offline version of v1.1

(Figure 2 shows this version) using a “think aloud” method
[22]. In the “think aloud” method, which is common in
usability testing, the users are asked to think aloud while
using the system, allowing the evaluator to understand what
they are doing and the reasons for their actions [13]. The
five tasks were selected to cover the main functions of the
website. The test sessions were video-recorded for a
behavioral analysis. Moreover the psychologist noted the
participant’s mistakes, difficulties or comments, and
avoided to interfere with the evaluation.
3.
The participant’s opinions of website usability were
assessed with a five point Likert scale (0= negative to 4=

positive) designed by our team (VCL). The survey evaluated
five topics: (1) overall impression about the website; (2)
easy-to-use perception; (3) pleasant to use perception; (4)
coherence of website layout; and (5) satisfaction with the
website design (font, colors).
4.
At the end, the participant was asked to answer a
semistructured interview on the following topics: (1)
positive and negative aspects of the website, (2) difficulties
when using the website, (3) discomforting situations during
navigation on the website, and (4) advice to improve the
appearance and design.

Textbox 1. Five step usability test.

1.
Please enter to the website: www.etreaudiapason.com

•
Username: Participant

•
Code: 123456

•
Go back to the home page

2.
Go to the session “Managing the caregivers stress”

•
Watch the video “caregiving-related stress” and change to full-screen

•
Go back to the home page

3.
Search the glossary

•
Read the meaning of the word “hippocampus”

•
Go back to the home page

4.
Go to the stories

•
Read the story of “Lucia”

•
Go back to the home page

5.
Go to the forum

•
Post the message: I’m using Diapason

•
Go back to the home page

Second Usability Testing (Test 2)

Participants
We recruited 15 healthy volunteers over 60 years old, age mean
72.12; SD 7.03, through three seniors associations in Paris. They
had at least once used the Internet. Sociodemographic
information is summarized in Table 1.

Procedure and Evaluation Tools
With the second usability test, we evaluated the offline v1.2
(Figure 2). The protocol was identical to the first usability test.

Analysis Methods

Qualitative data from the workshops (ie, moderator’s notes),
the proof of concept (ie, interviews), and the usability tests (ie,
interviews and mistakes, difficulties or comments; observed

and collected by the evaluator) were analyzed based on the
thematic analysis method [23]. After being familiarized with
data JW and VCL coded the relevant extracts of material
concurrently. Then, they analyzed the themes based on the
recommendations of various usability authors [13,14,24,25].
Finally, they corroborated the pertinence of the selected topics,
comparing them with initial verbatim.

Assisted by the software “The Observer XT” and an observation
grid, two trained psychologists (VCL and JW) collected, coded,
and analyzed videos of usability tests. We measured the
frequency of mistakes, requests for help, and the duration of
task performance.

Finally, we analyzed the satisfaction survey results using
descriptive statistics.

Results

Participants

In total, 49 persons were involved in the Diapason program
development: 12 health care professionals, 6 caregivers, and 31
healthy older adults. The development process resulted in four
successive website versions as shown in Figure 2 for which the
qualitative results of the iterative design are provided in Table
2.

Qualitative Results

Project Team Workshops

The results of the first workshops showed that most
professionals were motivated by the new project. They proposed
interesting and creative ideas to develop the Web-based
program. They stated that the Diapason program should be made
easily and rapidly accessible to overwhelmed caregivers who
may have only fifteen or twenty minutes to spend with the

program. Some professionals also expressed concerns about the
suitability of Internet use for caregivers, since most of them
were spouses of patients and likely inexperienced with this
technology. Some also thought that computers might increase
caregivers’ isolation.

Based on the criteria selected by the team (described above in
the Procedure of Workshops), the website v0.0 was not retained.
The content was too long, complex, and technical for
nonprofessionals. The appearance was dark, sad, and
stigmatizing (Figure 2). As for v1.0, the project team suggested
the use of a more “common” language for the button sections.
They also recommended using a “light box” effect, to facilitate
navigation (Figure 3 shows this display). Concerning v1.1, the
team found “My journey” functionality unnecessary or
infeasible. It was also suggested to add a “Relaxation training”
in the program. As regards v1.2, the professionals supervised
the consistency of changes made by the informatics engineer
on the website following the demands of end-users, and
prioritized them, based on their feasibility and relevance.

Proof of Concept

Overall Opinion of Caregivers
The caregivers found the website prototype (v1.0) clear and
understandable. All of them, and especially the PWAD’s
spouses, appreciated the aims, the topics, and the website's
layout. Although the participants thought the Web-based
program likely to be useful for isolated caregivers, most of them
underlined the need to communicate with professionals and to
maintain face-to-face contact.

The suggestions to change the look (adding photos and
modifying colors) were implemented in the following version

(v1.1). Moreover, the caregivers pointed out important usability
issues.

Unfamiliar Terminology
Although the project team aimed to avoid jargon (from
informatics or medical areas), some of the terms used remained
confusing for the participants in this version. For instance, the
“Resources” button (ie, “Ressources” in French), giving access
to additional sections (eg, relaxation training, glossary, etc),
was understood as giving access to financial help. Consequently,
the website was reorganized, and potentially confusing words
or expressions were replaced by more commonly used website
terminology (Figure 4 shows this layout).

Font Readability
The younger caregivers found the font size too small and thought
it would constitute an obstacle for older users. By contrast, older
participants did not raise this issue, but reported that some pages
were difficult to read due to the lack of contrast between the
background and the font. In the subsequent version (v1.1) the
font size was increased and the contrast enhanced.

Ergonomics
To access the sessions, the user had to click on a button, and
then confirm their choice by clicking on another one. This
condition was simplified.

Simplified Layout
Based on the project team and on caregivers’ suggestions, the
website’s layout was simplified (Figure 3). The version v1.1
and the final version only offered three main sections: (1)
thematic “sessions”, (2) a “forum”, and (3) the “documents”
providing access to other content (eg, relaxation or glossary).

Unfortunately the option “contact a professional” and the
videoconferencing options were not implemented, owing to a
lack of resources. Moreover, the section “My journey”, a private
diary for caregivers, was removed because the system could not
encrypt the data.

Usability Test of v1.1

In this version, the overall program content was added to the
website. Moreover, the readability improvements performed
during the proof of concept phase were appropriate, as no
participant reported any visual discomfort while browsing the
website (except for the forum, as described in this section).
Concerning the easy-to-learn perception, many participants
asserted that they would have performed better if they had used
the website more than once.

Using the website would be easy provided I received
training or that I spend more time using it. [Mrs. H,
71 y/o]
However, various ergonomics issues were identified. Although
the website home page was kept accessible using a script
(JQuery Superbox) to display a screen with a light box effect

(Figure 3), most participants did not know how to go back to
the previous page.

To go back to the home page sometimes I had to click
in a grey zone or sometimes click on the close button,
this is not practical. [Mme GG, 69 y/o]
To correct this, we added an icon at the top right of the screen
with the message “Close this window” (in Figure 3, the button
“Fermer cette fenêtre”). Some other issues remained unsolved
due to technical or logistical reasons: (1) the font size and
symbols in the forum and video-player interfaces did not
facilitate reading; (2) the post button for forum messages was
at the bottom of the screen, requiring the use of the scrollbar;
and (3) the least experienced participants often double clicked
in the website, which was in conflict with the one-click activated
“light box” effect, as the second click immediately closed the
window. For each of these problems, a clear explanation was
provided in the user's manual.

Usability Test of v1.2

There were two additional problems that were identified during
the second usability test. The website display varied according
to the Internet browser and/or the computer model, and some
participants did not know how to use the hyperlinks in the
website. We adapted the Internet and printable version of the
user’s manual, taking into account the results of both usability
tests, including the issues without a quick or easy solution (Table
2).

Additional Findings From the Usability Tests

Although during the usability tests the evaluators found most
of the problems reported by users in the interviews, the
evaluators also identified additional problems regarding the
computer interface, and the Internet browsers. The mouse cursor
and the scrollbar were not visible enough on the screen (lack
of contrast or small size), and some participants did not
distinguish the website settings from the Internet browser or
computer interface. For instance, a participant recommended
changing the order of icons of the Internet browser because he
thought that the latter was part of the website. When asked to
go back to the “home page” of the website, another participant
closed the browser window, then could not find, unaided, the
icon of the Internet browser to continue the task. These problems

were observed even for the people with more than one year of
experience of Internet use.

Quantitative Results of Usability Tests

Behavioral Analysis of v1.1 and v1.2

There were two psychologists using an observation grid who
analyzed the videos of usability tests sessions with The Observer

TX. The three main variables analyzed are presented in Table
3: (1) the duration of the task, (2) the total of errors, and (3)
requests for help during the evaluation. We observed an
important reduction in completion time and the total of requests
for help after the website improvements were made between
the first and the second iteration. However, the overall number
of errors remained similar in the two versions, possibly owing
to unsolved usability problems.

Usability/Satisfaction Survey

As shown in Table 4, the two website versions yielded similar
scores. Overall the participants’ opinions of the website were
positive. The lowest scores were for the system’s “ease of use”.
A plausible explanation was that most of the participants

evaluated website ease of use for themselves, but not for other
seniors. During the semistructured interviews, the most
prominent argument was that the “other seniors” might be in
poorer health and cognitive status than the participant himself.
This suggests that this item reflects the participants’perception
of older adults more than their experience using the website.

Discussion

Program Development

In this paper, we describe the iterative development of a
Web-based psycho-educational program (Diapason) aiming to
reduce or prevent stress in caregivers of PWAD. To our
knowledge, this is the first published work describing a
user-centered design process for the development of a program
addressed to caregivers of PWAD. To that end, we involved
end-users and health care professionals in a double iterative
design, allowing for a cyclic adaptation of the content and design
to the targeted population. During the whole process, our project
team elaborated tailored guidelines for the engineer’s mission,
based on their own professional experience, but also taking into
accounts the feedback from end users.

In fact, the involvement of end-users was decisive in the
development of our program. The caregivers and healthy older

adults pointed out various website usability deficiencies which
had been unnoticed by the professionals. In agreement with the
user-centered design approach, our aim was to prevent users
lacking the necessary cognitive (experience or abilities) or
physical resources from having to deal with the maladjusted
and imposed technology devices [13]. Various authors have
demonstrated the relevance of this approach to design eHealth
interventions. For instance, Chiu and Eysenbach [11] found that
caregivers attracted to a service which they considered useful,
could eventually stop using it if they perceived the service as
nonuser-friendly. Furthermore, focusing on caregivers’ needs
(and their representatives) during the development process is a
critical aspect for the acceptability and adoption of interventions
[6].

Principal Findings

The Proof of Concept evaluated the program's content and
website usability, and was carried out with a group of caregivers
of PWAD, consisting of children and spouses. As hypothesized

by our team, and in accordance with the literature [13], the
difficulties linked to usability issues were preeminent in older
participants. Thus, the usability tests were focused on adapting
the program in a senior-friendly website. As a consequence, we
decided to privilege the recruitment of a group of healthy older
persons rather than the (overwhelmed) caregivers for usability
tests.

In order to obtain a more comprehensive appraisal of usability
tests’results, we designed a mixed research method combining
behavioral analysis with think aloud method, individual
interviews, and questionnaires [13]. In this study, the
questionnaire was the least sensitive and informative of the
three methods. A plausible explanation is that closed-ended
questions offer answers on “what” the users' opinions are, or
“how” difficult the website is to use, but they do not give
information as to “why” this might be. For example, researchers
may obtain information on the degree of disagreement about
an item, but not “why” the subject disagrees with it. In contrast,
interviews and behavioral analysis (using thinking aloud)
provided us with valuable and accurate data about the difficulties
that users encountered in the website. For instance, additionally
to usability issues described elsewhere, we observed that the
participants confused the website and the Internet browser
interfaces, and some had many difficulties with the computer
interface or Internet browser themselves. As stated by Nielsen,
even the most recent and popular operating systems Interfaces
could present important usability issues, which entail cognitive
overhead and add memory load [26]. Therefore, designers and
evaluators of website usability should effectively disentangle
website conception issues from problems due to computer and
Internet environments (eg, Windows 8, Internet browser...).

It is also noteworthy that most of the older adults who filled out
the satisfaction questionnaire during usability tests considered
the website easy-to-use for them, but not for other seniors. They
argued that they thought about older adults with poorer health
and more perceptual and cognitive deficits than themselves.
This result matched those of previous studies by our team [27].
In both projects we explained to the participants (older adults)
that the study aimed to identify their needs to create a
senior-friendly technology. As described in this study, older
adults rarely identified themselves as the “target” of
gerontechnology, which was not intended for them, but for
“other” older adults who may be (much) older, frailer, and more
isolated than they are. This attitude may be due to “negative
self-stereotyping”, described in the literature [28,29]. In our
study, children of PWAD (see in Proof of Concept section) also
expressed this stereotyping of aging people. These results prove
the advantage of observation methods, which provide an
objective basis for the (un)necessary improvements.

As regards the program’s content, the project team designed
the Web-based Diapason program based on the Aide dans la
Maladie d’Alzheimer (AIDMA) program content, retaining the
most pertinent information and making it more accessible and
easier to use. In fact, the AIDMA program was proposed in 2
hour face-to-face sessions, while we adapted the Web-based
program to be used 15-20 minutes per week. Nevertheless, slight
changes in topics were required through the development
process, since some of them had already been tested by our team

in the AIDMA project [17], and improved based on
professionals’ and caregivers’ feedback.

Finally, although most of the professionals and end-users judged
the Web-based program likely to be useful for isolated
caregivers, some of them also worried that these interventions
might increase (or reinforce) caregivers’ isolation. We also
encountered health care professionals who rule out the use of
technologies and claim face-to-face interventions are the only
way to help patients and their families. In our team, even if we
recommend the use of face-to-face interventions, we also
consider it appropriate to propose additional support for
caregivers or for patients who cannot benefit from on-site
psycho-educational programs.

Limitations and Lessons Learned

The acknowledged limitations of the present work might be
useful for methodological and logistic considerations in future
projects. First, even if our usability questionnaire was more
adapted to our project context, it did not include items intended
to measure “learnability” and “usefulness” perceptions [30],
instead, we conducted the interviews at the end of the
evaluations exploring these constructs. To improve the analysis
of both dimensions, we recommend to conduct a field study
during the development process, such as pilot tests in which the
users have access to the program for one or two weeks [31]. In
fact, these two measures would be valuable if some usability
issues remained unsolved, as in our study. The difficulties
encountered by the users may demand a learning process, and
the developer has to know whether the website facilitates this
process. Additionally, a pilot test may be a reassuring step before
a clinical trial.

In this work, the involvement of both professionals and
end-users was critical to develop a ready-to-use eHealth program
[13,14,32]. Moreover, this work provides additional arguments
supporting the effectiveness of using usability guidelines to
increase Internet accessibility for older adults [20]. Nonetheless,
based on our current knowledge about website usability for
seniors, we think that some ergonomic mistakes in the first
versions of our website could have been prevented earlier in
the development process, with the help of an expert in
ergonomics at these stages. For instance, we recommend
avoiding the use of open source “ready-to-use” programs, since
they do not always respond to the universal design criteria.

Finally, and in accordance with other studies [20], our findings
highlighted the relevance of using a mixed method approach,
combining subjective and objective methods, such as
observation analysis and interviews, to obtain complementary
data.

Conclusions

The implementation of Web-based programs requires the
adaptation of the system, including content and ergonomics, to
match the needs of target populations. In fact, even when the
content and aims are well established and tested, the face-to-face
programs need to be reviewed and adapted for Internet use.
Only the optimal usability and readability of interventions may
prevent the underuse or incorrect use of these programs.
Through usability iterative evaluations, the latest website version

of our program has been improved, and is currently being tested
in a randomized clinical trial [33]. For future user-centered
design studies we recommend the following: (1) involving
end-users from preconception stages, (2) using a mixed research

method (mainly based on interviews and observations) in
usability evaluations, and (3) implementing pilot studies to
evaluate acceptability and feasibility before a clinical trial.