Original Paper

Development of eHOME, a Mobile Instrument for Reporting,
Monitoring, and Consulting Drug-Related Problems in Home Care:
Human-Centered Design Study

Nienke Elske Dijkstra1, RN, MSc; Carolina Geertruida Maria Sino1, RN, PhD; Eibert Rob Heerdink2,3, PharmD, PhD;
Marieke Joanna Schuurmans1,4, RN, PhD

1Research Group Care for the Chronically Ill, University of Applied Sciences Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands
2Research group Innovation in Pharmaceutical Care, University of Applied Sciences Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands
3Division of Pharmacoepidemiology and Clinical Pharmacology, Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht, Netherlands
4Julius Center for Health Sciences and Primary Care, Department of General Practice, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands

Nienke Elske Dijkstra, RN, MSc
Research Group Care for the Chronically Ill
University of Applied Sciences Utrecht
Heidelberglaan 7
Utrecht, 3584CS
Netherlands
Phone: 31 641620681

Methods

Design

The development of eHOME was guided by the development
phase of the framework for the development and evaluation of
complex interventions of the Medical Research Council (MRC)
[16]. The users and stakeholders were involved throughout the
development phase by means of the human-centered design
(HCD) for interactive systems [17] to develop a usable
eHOME-instrument that fits the needs of the end users. The
study was approved by the Medical Ethics Research Committee
of the University Medical Center, Utrecht (the Netherlands)
(11-129/C).

Setting and Procedure

This study was performed from September 2014 to March 2017
in a setting of home care teams, general practices, and
pharmacies.

The HCD approach was divided into 6 phases: (1) the Delphi
round; (2) the development, evaluation, and redesign of the
prototype report webpage and the monitoring webpage interfaces
for home care; (3) the usability evaluation pilot of the report
webpage and the monitoring webpage interfaces for home care;
(4) the expansion and development of the monitoring and
consulting webpage interfaces for home care, GPs, and
pharmacists; (5) the usability evaluation pilot of the report
webpage and the monitoring and consulting webpage interfaces;
and (6) the development of the final webpages interfaces. Table
1 shows how the 6 phases are mapped into the HCD described
in ISO 92410-201 [17].

Delphi Round

In October 2014, a Delphi round was conducted in a workgroup
of 13 participants (a postdoctoral researcher, a project manager,
2 pharmacists, 7 home care workers of one home care team,
and 2 software developers). In the Delphi round, the context in
which eHOME should be used and the requirements of the users
for a report system (to report DRPs by home care workers who
perform home visits), a monitoring and consulting system (for
home care nurses, GPs, and pharmacists) and requirements on
the organizational level were identified. During both parts of
the round, the project manager played the role of an observer
and reported the requirements on a whiteboard.

Development, Evaluation, and Redesign of the Prototype
Report Webpage and the Monitoring Webpage Interfaces
for Home Care

Two software developers developed a prototype of the report
webpage and the monitoring webpage interfaces and a link
between these 2 interfaces, based on the formulated requirements
of phase one. In a second workgroup meeting, the prototypes
of the webpage interfaces were presented and installed on the
mobile phones and personal computers of the workgroup
members, and they were tested by the home care workers. The
report webpage interface was tested by the home health care
assistants, who performed home visits, in a case study exercise.
Several home care practice-based signs and symptoms of DRPs
were reported by the report webpage interface in the exercise.
The home care nurse evaluated the usability of the monitoring
webpage interface for the home care nurses and assessed
whether the reported problems of the home health care assistants
were forwarded from the report webpage to this webpage
interface. This process allowed the home care workers to get
used to the webpage interfaces for the usability evaluation pilot.
Additionally, the workgroup meeting resulted in a plenary
discussion with a set of adjustments to improve the usability of
the prototype webpage interfaces. By the adjustments as a result
of the plenary discussion, the content of the signs and symptoms

of the report webpage for the home care was redesigned. This
phase was carried out from September to October 2014.

Usability Evaluation Pilot of the Report Webpage and
the Monitoring Webpage Interfaces for Home Care

To assess the usability of the webpage interfaces, a usability
evaluation pilot among the home care team was performed.
During a 6-week pilot period (November to December 2014),
the home health care assistants (n=6), who performed home
visits, reported signs and symptoms of DRPs by the report
webpage interface. At the end of the pilot period, the home
health care assistants answered a questionnaire about the
usability of the report webpage interface. To explore the
usability of the monitoring webpage, a semistructured interview
with the home care nurse was carried out. The interview was
audiotaped and transcribed verbatim. Data of the questionnaires
and the semistructured interview resulted in a set of requirements
to improve the usability of eHOME.

Expansion and Development of the Monitoring and
Consulting Webpage Interfaces for Home Care, General
Practitioners, and Pharmacists

Between January and May 2015, the software developers
expanded the monitoring webpage interface for the home care
nurse with a consulting system. Furthermore, the monitoring

and consulting webpage interfaces for the GPs and the
pharmacists and a link between the monitoring and consulting
webpage interfaces that allows 2-way communication between
the home care nurse and the GP or the pharmacist was
developed.

Usability Evaluation Pilot of the Report Webpage and
the Monitoring and Consulting Webpage Interfaces

To test the possibility of communication between the home care
nurses and the GPs or the pharmacists through the monitoring
and consulting webpage interfaces, a second evaluation pilot
of 3 months was initiated. Using a convenience sample strategy,
2 groups were selected. The first group consisted of 12 home
care teams and 3 pharmacies. The pilot of group one took place
from November 2015 to February 2016. The second group
consisted of 6 home care teams, 7 general practices, and 6
pharmacies. The pilot in the second group took place from
March to June 2016. Before the start of the pilot, participants
received information about the types and the consequences of
DRPs in home care patients, the importance of early recognition
of DRPs, the webpage interfaces, and an explanation of the pilot
in a workshop meeting. The workshop was led by a home care
nurse, 2 pharmacists, and the first author (ND). During both the
pilots, the home care workers, who performed home visits,
reported the signs and symptoms of DRPs by the report webpage
interface, and the home care nurses performed daily triage of
the reported signs and symptoms with the monitoring and
consulting system. Nurses in group one could report problems
to a pharmacist and nurses in group two could report problems
to a GP and or a pharmacist by using the monitoring and
consulting webpage interfaces. The GP or the pharmacist was
asked to respond to the signs and symptoms by the monitoring
and consulting webpage interfaces. Anonymized descriptive
statistics of consultation data between home care nurses, GPs,
and pharmacies showed whether the consultation between the
users occurred. Semistructured interviews with 8 home care
workers were performed following the pilot. The interviews
were held at the home care workers’ home or the home care
practice. Besides the interviews, every 2 weeks, an evaluation
with the home care nurses (n=18) through a phone call was
carried out. The interviews and the evaluation with the home
care nurses aimed to explore the strengths and the weaknesses
of the webpage interfaces and to explore the potential solutions.
The interviews and biweekly evaluations were carried out by
the home care nurse of the workgroup and ND. The interviews
were audiotaped and transcribed verbatim.

Development of the Final Webpages Interfaces

Data of the semistructured interviews and the biweekly
evaluations were used to adjust the webpage interfaces so that
a final version of the webpage interfaces that meets the user
requirements could be designed. The final version of the
webpage interfaces was developed by the software developers
between October 2016 and February 2017.

Results

The results are described for the following 6 phases: (1) the
Delphi round; (2) the development, evaluation, and redesign of

the prototype report webpage and the monitoring webpage
interfaces for home care; (3) the usability evaluation pilot of
the report webpage and the monitoring webpage interfaces for
home care; (4) the expansion and development of the monitoring
and consulting webpage interfaces for home care, GPs, and
pharmacists; (5) the usability evaluation pilot of the report
webpage and the monitoring and consulting webpage interfaces;
and (6) the development of the final webpages interfaces.

Delphi Round

Context of Use

To achieve optimal management of DRPs by eHOME, it was
determined that eHOME should be used by a multidisciplinary
team of home care workers, GPs, and pharmacists. The goal for
optimal management of signs and symptoms of DRPs in home
care patients by eHOME is twofold. First, home health care
assistants who visit clients for essential care (activities of daily
living such as bathing) report the signs and symptoms. Second,
a bachelor trained home care nurse performs a daily triage of
the reported signs and symptoms and forwards problems to a
GP or a pharmacist when their expertise is needed.
Subsequently, the GP and pharmacist send feedback on the
DRPs to the home care nurse. It was decided that eHOME must
consist of 2 webpage interfaces: a report webpage interface for
home health care assistants who perform home visits, and
monitoring and consulting webpage interfaces for home care
nurses, general practices, and pharmacies.

User Requirements eHOME

Requirements for both webpage interfaces and requirements on
the organizational level were formulated.

Report Webpage Interface

The content of HOME-instrument [15] formed the basis for the
report webpage interface. Home care workers unanimously
decided that the report webpage interface needs to include the
signs and symptoms of the HOME-instrument, 6 common home
care practice-based problems: (1) medication used has not been
listed on the medication list; (2) medication on the medication
list is not in use; (3) home care patient uses other amounts or
dosages; (4) home care patient uses medication on another time
(notice which medicines and when); (5) thick legs or feet; and
(6) wounds, and a possibility to add any other potential sign or
symptom of a DRP. To monitor DRPs for a longer period (eg,
thick legs or feet or bruises), the possibility to add photos of
these observations was required.

Monitoring and Consulting Webpage Interfaces

The monitoring and consulting webpage interfaces must contain
the reported DRPs of home care patients out of the report
webpage interface (with information of client’s name, sex, and
date of birth), possibility to add new profiles of home care
patients with detailed identification details (eg, name[s], sex,
date of birth, name of GP, and pharmacist).

Organization Level

A link between the report webpage and the monitoring and
consulting webpage interfaces of the home care and a link
between the monitoring and consulting webpage interfaces of

home care nurses and GPs and pharmacists was required so that
the information of reported problems between the webpage
interfaces could be shared. Furthermore, the webpage interfaces
needed to be available for smartphones, tablets with the iOS
and Android operating systems, as well as personal computers.
All webpage interfaces must contain a log-in screen, so personal
details of patients could be assessed by the users only by
entering a username and a password in the log-in screen.

Development, Evaluation, and Redesign of the
Prototype Report Webpage and the Monitoring
Webpage Interfaces for Home Care

One report webpage interface was developed in which the DRPs
could be reported and forwarded to the monitoring webpage of
the home care nurse. For the home care nurse, one monitoring
webpage was developed for incoming DRPs. All home care
workers were able to report the problems of the case study
exercise by the report webpage interface. Additionally, it was
found that the reported problems appeared all in the monitoring
webpage interface. Following the evaluation pilot, it was decided
that the content of the first version of the report webpage
(presented in Multimedia Appendix 1) needed to be divided
into several webpages to improve the usability. Instead of one
report webpage, including 33 signs and symptoms, 10 webpages
were developed. The 33 signs and symptoms were replaced into
2 main categories (represented with an icon) and 7
subcategories. Furthermore, some textual changes were made
to enhance the readability. Specification of the changes and the
final content of the report webpage interfaces are presented in
Multimedia Appendix 2.

Usability Evaluation Pilot of the Report Webpage and
the Monitoring Webpage Interfaces for Home Care

Seven home care workers of the workgroup took part in the first
pilot. Home health care assistants, who performed the home
visits (n=6), indicated that the report webpage interface is a
convenient, clear, and a usable instrument. One home health
care assistant missed the possibility to review their own reported
observations, and 3 home health care assistants reported the
need for a conformation that an observation was forwarded to
the home care nurse. The home care nurse commented in the
interview adjustments to optimize the monitoring webpage
interface; first, a link between the electronic patient file and the
monitoring webpage interface was mentioned so that patient
data will automatically be added to the webpage interfaces.
Thereby adding a client profile manually to the monitoring
webpage can be avoided which is time-saving. Second, the
possibility to forward observations of signs and symptoms to a
GP and a pharmacist was desired so that phone-calls can be
avoided, which is in turn time-saving.

Expansion and Development of the Monitoring and
Consulting Webpage Interfaces for Home Care,
General Practitioners, and Pharmacists

As a result of the usability evaluation pilot, it was possible to
expand the monitoring webpage for the home care nurse with
a consulting service and to develop a monitoring and consulting
webpage for GPs and pharmacists and a link between the

monitoring and consulting webpage of the home care nurse and
the GPs and pharmacists.

Usability Evaluation Pilot of the Report Webpage and
the Monitoring and Consulting Webpage Interfaces

Home health care assistants indicated in interviews that they
were more aware of the problems related to medication use
because of the signs and symptoms presented in the report
webpage. Furthermore, the report webpage was considered to
be easy to use, and specific problems of the various categories
of medication problems and body symptoms were usable and
easy to find. Home health care assistants were able to add a note
and a photo, but only after a problem was already sent to the
home care nurse. This sequence was perceived as not logical,
and a reverse sequence was mentioned as a solution. The home
care nurses were satisfied with the clear overview with the types
and amount of problems per client of the monitoring and
consulting webpage. Home care nurses indicated that by using
the monitoring and consulting system service, more
collaboration with pharmacists and GPs were experienced
leading to more solutions for DRPs. Home care nurses informed
home health care assistants about the feedback of a GP or
pharmacist by a telephone call, which was experienced as time
consuming. The solution to forward feedback of a home care
nurse, a GP, or a pharmacist from the monitoring and consulting
webpage to the report webpage was mentioned. Furthermore,
home care nurses indicated that the daily triage of the report
problems was necessary but not performed as intended because
of workload and because they needed to get used to the daily
task. Therefore, some home care nurses decided to share the
triage task with nurses who had the capability to perform a
triage. The home care nurses indicated that if a problem is
reported during a home visit, a notification by means of a pop-up
on their mobile device will ensure that daily triage will take
place. Adding new client profiles in the monitoring and
consulting webpage was experienced as time-consuming. During
the pilot, the home care nurses decided to share this task with
home health care assistants. Home care workers mentioned that
a link between the electronic patient file and the monitoring and
consulting webpage is desirable and will ensure that data of
clients who are added to the home care will be automatically
added to the monitoring and consulting webpage. Extraction
data showed that communication between the home care and
pharmacies in group one and communication between home
care and pharmacies and between home care and general
practices in group two using the monitoring and consulting
webpage interfaces was possible during the pilot.

Development of the Final Webpages Interfaces

In the report webpage interface, the sequence to add a note and
a photo to a problem before sending the problem to the home
care nurse was adjusted. Furthermore, this webpage was
expanded with an extra webpage, for the feedback of home care
nurses, GPs, and pharmacists on reported DRPs (see Figure 1
for screenshots of the report web page interface). The following
aspects of the monitoring and consulting webpage interfaces
were modified: a consulting service between the monitoring
and consulting webpage interfaces of nurses and the report
webpage interface of home health care assistants; a pop-up

notification for incoming problems for home care nurses, general
practices, and pharmacies; a link between the electronic patient
files and the report webpage and the monitoring and consulting
webpage for home care; and a link between the monitoring and

consulting webpages of GPs and pharmacies to facilitate
consultation between these disciplines (see Figure 2 for a
screenshot of the monitoring and consulting web page
interfaces).

Discussion

Principal Findings

This study resulted in eHOME, a mobile version of the
HOME-instrument and a monitoring and consulting system for
primary care that will help home care workers to report observed
DRPs during home visits and to communicate DRPs with GPs
and pharmacists.

In our study, a systematic development of the eHOME webpages
was conducted. The systematic development of this study
reflects the phases of an HCD therefore, the methods of this
development study are mapped into the HCD approach [17].
The HCD approach process enabled collaborative decision
making by home health care assistants, home care nurses, GPs,
and pharmacists for the design and development of eHOME
webpage interfaces, which was found to be convenient, clear,
and easy to use.

Limitations

Within the HCD approach, it is important to involve all humans
(eg, users and stakeholders) from the beginning of the
development process to develop a system that fits the context
in which the system will be used and to meet the user
requirements and technical requirements, which may increase
the usability in clinical practice. In this study, the GPs, one
group of users, are not involved in the context of use and user
requirements analysis and the first usability evaluation pilot.
Even though GPs were not involved in the decision-making
process of the context of use and user requirements analysis
and the first usability evaluation pilot, the second usability
evaluation pilot showed that the monitoring and consulting
webpage was usable for their clinical practice.

With the help of this study, the report and monitoring and
consulting webpage interfaces have been developed however,
the effectiveness of the multidisciplinary approach of DRPs by
eHOME on patient outcomes is not yet known. Further research
on the clinical effectiveness of eHOME on patient outcomes is
needed.

Conclusions

By employing an HCD approach, the HOME-instrument was
converted to eHOME webpage interfaces, which was considered
convenient, clear, and easy to use for the report of the signs and
symptoms of potential DRPs in home care patients and for the
monitoring and multidisciplinary consultation of these problems
in primary care. This study provides a description of a systematic
approach that can be used for future development of digital
systems of paper-based tools.