Case Report

Rapid development of visualization dashboards to
enhance situation awareness of COVID-19 telehealth
initiatives at a multihospital healthcare system

Ram A. Dixit,1,2 Stephen Hurst,3 Katharine T. Adams,1,2 Christian Boxley,1,2

Kristi Lysen-Hendershot,4 Sonita S. Bennett,1,2 Ethan Booker,4,5 and
Raj M. Ratwani1,2,5

1MedStar Health National Center for Human Factors in Healthcare, Washington, DC, USA, 2MedStar Health Research Institute,
Hyattsville, MD, USA, 3MedStar Simulation Training and Education Lab, Washington, DC, USA, 4MedStar Telehealth Innovation
Center, Washington, DC, USA, 5Georgetown University School of Medicine, Washington, DC, USA

Received 7 May 2020; Revised 22 June 2020; Editorial Decision 27 June 2020; Accepted 30 June 2020

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Foundations of telehealth visualization development
A human factors-based theoretical model of situation awareness
(SA) guided conceptualization of visualization dashboards to meet
the needs of telehealth stakeholders. The SA model postulates 3 dif-
ferent levels: perception, comprehension, and projection.3,4 Level 1,
perception, is the most basic level and is the ability to perceive the
current state and monitor specific data elements in the environment.
Level 2, comprehension, is the ability to integrate and synthesize dif-
ferent data elements. Level 3, projection, is the ability to forecast or
predict future states. During the initial phases of the organization’s
adoption and scaling of telehealth technology, our team supported
perception and comprehension needs through visualization of plat-
form
performance
and
utilization.
More
complex
modeling
approaches to achieve enhanced projection were delayed in order to
fulfill these immediate needs.
Visualization development was driven by a user-centered design
process that put the needs of end users at the forefront of design and
development.5–7 This design process involved developing prototype
visualizations, soliciting feedback from end users, and iteratively im-
proving the visualizations. Because of the urgent need for visualiza-
tions, a rapid process of development and user feedback from
domain experts and/or end users was developed.
Our multidisciplinary visualization team used a 5-step process to
create and iteratively refine visualization dashboards to support the
initial launch and ongoing development of the expansive telehealth
program. This study was approved by the institutional review
board.

Subject matter expert interviews to increase domain knowledge
With a visualization team new to telehealth there was an immediate
need to increase domain knowledge. We conducted interviews with
the 3 operational directors of the telehealth program and the 3 oper-

ational managers of the different areas of telehealth (on-demand vis-
its, ambulatory visits, and provider consults). The interviews with
the directors were focused on understanding the telehealth program,
current and near-term operations, and identification of key stake-
holders that required awareness of the telehealth program. The
interviews with the operational managers were focused on under-
standing the technology, specific vendors supporting it, clinical use,
and the data it produced. These interviews lasted for about 1 hour
and were the beginning of an ongoing channel of communication
about needs and visualization feedback. Notes were taken during
the interviews and these notes were discussed by the visualization
team.

User needs analysis and feature identification
Once stakeholder groups were defined from the subject matter ex-
pert interviews, we conducted a “quick and dirty” needs analysis
with the operational directors and 1–2 members of each operational
team to identify information needs for operational decision-making
and executive awareness. User needs were elicited through 30-min-
ute virtual meetings in which these stakeholders were asked about
the information they needed. These needs were then synthesized
through group discussion to create a short list of visualization
requirements for each stakeholder group (Table 1).

Processing telehealth data sources
The visualization requirements for each stakeholder group were
used to guide the acquisition and analysis of relevant data produced
by the telehealth platforms. Our telehealth system relied on 2 inde-
pendent platforms supported by different vendors, each with their
own unique data architecture and structure. As neither vendor fully
supported industry-standard application programming interfaces
nor a common data format, data were retrieved from their proprie-
tary data platforms using semi-automated scripts and ingested into
structured relational database tables. Data were validated through a
manual quality assurance process. Varying time constraints from
each of our stakeholder groups, evolving data structures, and vari-
able reliability of these data feeds required redundant and flexible
extraction methods in order to maintain a resilient situation aware-
ness infrastructure. Further, each platform had unique ways of re-
cording constructs (visit time, visit duration, and dropped or
disconnected calls), requiring data interrogation to determine appro-
priate metrics for operational needs. We were not able to apply any
standard data format or coding system to these data.

Visualization design, development, and testing
Dashboards were developed using Tableau (Version 2020.1) was
connected to the relational database.8 With the variety of stake-
holder and end user needs, our visualization team divided into pairs
consisting of a lead developer, driving dashboard development, and
a support developer, handling data issues or providing additional
context around each telehealth platform or program. These pairs
would create prototype dashboards, starting with a basic layout of
data feeds in a development environment then rapidly iterating with
end users to ensure the dashboards met their needs. They would also
share these iterations with the broader visualization team to solicit
feedback on the design and highlight any data discrepancies between
dashboards. After stakeholder and visualization team approval,
dashboards would be checked by 1 member of the visualization
team to ensure proper functionality and labeling before being
uploaded to a production environment.

Dissemination and iterative refinement
Once in the production environment, these dashboards were dissemi-
nated to all relevant stakeholders as either a push (scheduled e-mail
or message alert) or pull (on-demand availability on a network
server). End users were engaged openly and continuously for feedback
in order to ensure that dashboard design, elements, and functionality
met their specific role-based needs. Each piece of feedback or feature
request was then prioritized based on estimated level of effort and im-
pact then fit into the visualization team’s development plan.

RESULTS

Through our 5-step visualization development process we identified
distinct stakeholder groups based on their information needs and
designed, developed, and implemented dashboards to meet those
needs. The visualization team began work on March 16th with each
of the 7 members dedicated full-time. The 5-step process was com-
pleted over 2 to 3 days for generation of each initial dashboard and
then optimized on an ongoing basis.
Our interviews resulted in the identification of 3 different
stakeholder groups and their respective SA awareness needs:
healthcare system executives, telehealth leaders, and telehealth
managers (Table 1). At the highest level of the organization,
healthcare executives included the chief medical officer and others
with responsibility for overall organizational operations. From our

interviews with telehealth leaders, we identified that executive
stakeholders needed weekly awareness of high-level metrics and
trends to convey the overall activity of telehealth across the system
(Table 1). Figure 1 shows an example of the eVisit executive sum-
mary dashboard.
Telehealth leaders were identified as a second stakeholder
group including 7 people charged with leading day-to-day tele-
health operations for the healthcare system. These stakeholders
requested daily awareness of key operational performance indica-
tors with the ability to integrate information to determine if a spe-
cific operational area needed focused attention and resources
(Table 1). These needs were met with an overview dashboard rep-
resenting volume and platform performance across all 3 telehealth
initiatives (Figure 2). These operational leaders also had access to
all dashboards being developed and could investigate more detailed
information through the operational manager dashboards as de-
scribed below.
Telehealth operational teams included managers and team mem-
bers involved in active development and maintenance of each tele-
health program. These stakeholders needed detailed information
about their respective areas with the ability to diagnose where issues
such as increased patient volumes, poor patient experiences, or
dropped calls were occurring (Table 1). A dashboard was created for
each program (see eVisit dashboard, Figure 3), and, wherever possi-
ble, features were developed to support projection needs for clinical

staffing and platform technical issues. Finally, ad-hoc visualizations
were produced on request to support specific issues or questions.
The primary users of these dashboards are healthcare system op-
erational leaders and telehealth operational staff. These dashboards
were not distributed to frontline clinical staff. Table 2 provides an
approximate number of users and frequency of use and a summary
of user feedback. Dashboard feedback was generally positive with
several users expressing specific benefits, including efficiency of ac-

cess to data and ease with which they could understand critical
information compared to use of the raw data feeds or vendor-
provided platforms with limited visualization capabilities. The pri-
mary limitations were a lack of connection to other data systems
and lack of detail for diagnosing specific technical issues. Our visu-
alization team also observed that developing these dashboards facili-
tated the centralization of data sources and standardization of
metrics
and
terminology
across
the
operation.
Operational

telehealth leader and management users also provided feedback on
operational decisions and functions that were influenced by these
dashboards. These included the following:

•
Identifying when telehealth platform issues were occurring and
deciding where to dedicate resources to troubleshoot technical/
training issues.
•
Tracking Video Visit provider utilization across specialties to
identify where additional workﬂow and/or training optimization
is required.
•
Informing eVisit provider stafﬁng decisions by knowing current
and past patient volumes and wait times.
•
Identifying patient experience and patient follow-up needs by know-
ing which patients are not able to complete eVisits or Video Visits.

DISCUSSION

COVID-19 has required many healthcare organizations to rapidly
expand telehealth services, requiring operational teams to have
robust situation awareness of patient and provider experience as
well as telehealth platform performance. To meet these needs, we
formed a multidisciplinary visualization team with a situation
awareness model as our conceptual framework and a rapid user-
centered design approach. User feedback suggests the visualizations
improved situational awareness and may have provided valuable in-
formation to better inform operational decisions. We also faced sev-
eral
challenges,
including
interoperability,
poor
vendor
data
standards, and challenges accessing real-time data. Limitations to
our approach include: no formal interrater reliability when synthe-

sizing interview content, no design for different devices (eg, mobile
phones, tablets, etc), and no consideration for users with disabil-
ities.
We have identified several lessons learned that may be valuable
to other visualization development teams:

•
Use a lightweight user-centered approach: A rigorous user-
centered design approach is not possible when the goal is to pro-
duce same day data visualizations.9 Use a lightweight approach
by quickly identifying stakeholder groups and identifying at least
1 actual or representative user for feedback.
•
Basic (accurate) visualization is better than no visualization: User
needs should be identiﬁed quickly and basic dashboards for im-
mediate use should be developed as a starting point for rapid
feedback cycles. Focus on meeting user needs as opposed to
spending time on complex or comprehensive representations of
data.
•
Clearly indicate development status and timeliness: Having users
view dashboards that are still in development is necessary, given
the pace of work; however, this information as well as the
“freshness” of data being represented should be clearly marked.
•
Develop prioritization criteria for visualization and feature de-
velopment: Work with a variety of stakeholders to develop clear
criteria based on operational strategy on how to prioritize dash-
board development effort.
•
Stabilize the data environment as much as possible: Reliably re-
ceiving data from telehealth vendors, particularly under rapid
growth, can be challenging. Time should be invested to under-
stand data source characteristics and ensure efﬁcient methods for
data ingestion and storage. Further, consider mapping telehealth
data standard identiﬁers or existing datasets to enrich dash-
boards, as many stakeholder needs may require integrating tele-
health data with data from other clinical information systems.
•
Metric design, user literacy, and user control should be based on
audience: Be mindful of the audience and ensure that the metrics
being
presented
meet
audience
needs.10
Terminology
for
executive-level audiences should be jargon-free. Certain dash-
boards should be designed as awareness for the occasional user
and others as tools for superusers.

COVID-19 requires the rapid adoption and expansion of tele-
health to protect both patients and providers. With this unprece-
dented shift comes the need for effective visualization of telehealth
data to support operational needs. With a multidisciplinary visuali-
zation team, these needs can be met. Next steps include improve-

ments to the data warehouse and gathering more feedback from end
users for dashboard optimization.