The Third Wave of Self-Regulated Learning’s 
Measurement and Intervention Tools: Designing  

‘Diaria’ as a New Generation of Learning Diary

https://doi.org/10.3991/ijet.v18i09.35605

Baginda Anggun Nan Cenka, Harry B. Santoso, Kasiyah Junus()

Universitas Indonesia, Depok City, West Java, Indonesia

Abstract—Digital transformation accelerates the undertaking of online 
learning at various levels of education. Online learning mandates students to 
have high self-regulation skills. Therefore, self-regulated learning (SRL) plays 
an important role in the education field. The third wave of SRL measurements 
suggests how measurement is applied concurrently with the intervention. This 
study proposes a learning diary that we call Diaria to take part in the third wave. 
Diaria was developed using a user-centred design with three phases: design 
research, design prototype, and design evaluation. Usability testing was selected 
as an evaluation design method involving 30 participants. The evaluation results 
were examined based on several categories, including distribution of the System 
Usability Scale score, issues, task performance, and potential solution. An ini-
tial investigation of the impact of learning diaries on students’ SRL skills was 
carried out as a pilot study. This experiment involved 24 participants in a linear 
algebra course. The interview method was applied to collect data, followed by 
a thematic content analysis to understand the resulting transcripts. The results 
showed that the prototype has good usability. In addition, recommendations for 
improvement are suggested. Further, the pilot study has shown that there are 
various student learning strategies and advantages to a learning diary and has 
provided valuable notes for the main study.

Keywords—self-regulated learning, learning diary, personal learning 
environment, user-centred design, usability testing

1	
Introduction

In the current digital era, digital transformation in education is inevitable. Many 
educational institutions develop applications, provide infrastructure, and amplify 
human resources in the field of technology to realise digital transformation, which has 
been accelerated by COVID-19. As cited by Sahoo et al. [1], the World Economic 
Forum has predicted that the COVID-19 crisis will force various changes that will 
accelerate innovation in education, foster partnerships, and create a digital divide.

During the pandemic, online learning grew in popularity. Online learning diminishes 
traditional methods such as face-to-face learning and encourages spending more time on 
both online and asynchronous interactions. Barrot et al. [2] identified learning challenges 

216

during the pandemic and divided them into seven categories: learning environment, 
self-regulation, learning resources, technological literacy and competency, technologi-
cal complexity, technological sufficiency, and student isolation challenges.

Online learning requires students to have high self-regulation skills. Self-regulated 
learners are students who are metacognitively, behaviourally, and motivationally involved 
in their learning process [3]. Currently, self-regulated learning (SRL) plays a strategic 
role in the education field and is key in the development of digital literacy skills [4]. 
According to Haron et al. [5], SRL skills are an important predictor of academic 
performance. Scott [6] states that SRL and digital literacy are among the most prominent 
skills for education and professionals. According to Ejubovic and Puška [7], SRL is an 
essential factor in the success of online learning. In the context of computer science, 
SRL has a positive impact on academic performance in programming courses [8, 9].

There are three waves of SRL measurements, each of which complements the other. 
Panadero et al. [10] stated that the third wave, which combines measurement and inter-
vention, needs to be given more attention. This study proposes and develops a learning 
diary as part of the third wave. Learning diaries are a platform that students can use to 
record what their goals are, what is important while studying, and how they feel after 
studying. Learning diaries are personal because they store and manage what students 
read, hear, feel, and think while they are studying, both inside and outside the classroom. 
Learning diaries are a form of personal learning environment (PLE). Based on the system-
atic literature review conducted by Cenka et al. [11], we define PLE as a socio-technical 
system that is fully orchestrated by students and integrates the collection of tools, ser-
vices, and resources according to students’ needs and preferences in formal, informal, 
and non-formal settings to promote educational and professional goals towards lifelong 
learning. Referring to this definition, we state that a learning diary is a form of PLE.

The learning diary was developed to fill the gaps in platforms that are currently used 
by students, such as the Learning Management System (LMS) and Massive Open Online 
Course (MOOC) platforms. At LMS and MOOC, the lecturer or instructor is in full con-
trol of orchestrating the student learning environment, whereas in the learning diary, 
students act as individuals and are given full control of managing their own learning 
environment according to their personal needs and preferences. Learning diaries can be 
used in formal, informal, and non-formal settings, which means that learning diaries help 
students to become lifelong learners. According to Mahajan et al. [50], the attributes of 
lifelong learning include metacognition skills, self-directed learning, reflective behaviour, 
and self-monitoring skills, and all these attributes are facilitated by a learning diary.

Based on the strengths of the learning diary and the weaknesses of current learn-
ing platforms, especially LMS and MOOC, there is an opportunity for the learning 
diary to become a promising platform for measuring, intervening, and training students’ 
SRL skills. The objective of this study is to develop a prototype of Diaria, evaluate 
its design, and conduct a preliminary investigation into the impact of learning diaries 
on students’ SRL skills. Therefore, we address the following three research questions 
(RQs) as our guidelines:

RQ1: What is the design of a learning diary that supports students’ SRL skills?
RQ2: How are the prototype’s design results evaluated?
RQ3: To what extent are the students’ learning strategies utilised, and what are their 

perceptions of the learning diary?

217

This article is organised into eight sections. The first section explores the importance 
of SRL and the use of learning diaries as a tool to measure and intervene in SRL strat-
egies. The second section summarises previous studies that elaborate further on SRL 
and learning diaries. The third section describes how the user-centred design (UCD) 
was used as a direction in prototyping and how the pilot study was accomplished. The 
fourth section describes the design research, which includes how designers identify the 
needs and features of learning diaries. The fifth section displays the results of the design 
in the form of information architecture, student journal maps, and mock-ups. The sixth 
section presents the results of the evaluation using the usability testing (UT) method. 
The seventh section describes the procedure and results of the pilot study. The discus-
sion and conclusions of this study are presented in the last section.

2	
Previous studies

This study aims to develop a learning diary that acts as a measurment and interven-
tion tool for students’ SRL skills. Therefore, a literature review of SRL research trends 
and learning diaries is necessary.

2.1	
Self-regulated learning

Over the past two decades, SRL has been at the centre of research in the field of 
education [12], and this discourse has extended to other domains, such as computer 
science. SRL can be interpreted as a process that is organised by individuals. It begins 
with setting goals, performing to achieve these goals, and evaluating the execution to 
guarantee that the goals are accomplished [13]. SRL has been scrutinised by different 
authors. Silverajah et al. [14] state that there are the following six SRL models: (1) a 
cycle phase model by Zimmerman; (2) a six-component SRL model by Boekaerts; (3) 
the SRL model by Winne and Hadwin that included motivation in their models; (4) the 
SRL model by Pintrich with greater emphasis on metacognition; (5) a metacognitive 
and affective model of SRL by Efklides; and (6) a socially shared regulated learning 
model by Hadwin et al.

Most authors presented the following three stages of SRL: forethought, performance, 
and self-reflection. During the forethought phase, students set goals and create plans. 
This phase involves a task analysis and self-motivated beliefs. During the performance 
phase, students use various strategies to improve their learning. This phase applies 
self-control and self-observation. During the reflection phase, students reflect on their 
performance and evaluate the process and learning outcomes. This phase combines 
self-assessment and self-reaction [15].

Panadero et al. [10] identified three waves of SRL measurements. In the first wave, 
measurements were driven by relying on self-reports, such as questionnaires and inter-
views. The most common instruments include the learning and study strategies inven-
tory, the motivated strategies for learning questionnaire, and the self-regulated learning 
interview schedule. In the second wave, measurements are delivered online, and the 
SRL is regarded as a collection of events. In this wave, think-aloud protocol, obser-
vation, and traces are the best options. In the third wave, Panadero et al. [10] declare 

218

that there is a demand to integrate measurement and intervention concurrently. One 
example of its enactment is the use of learning diaries by Schmitz and Wiese [16] and 
Schmitz and Perels [17].

2.2	
Learning diary

Learning diaries offer students possibilities for personal development and academic 
achievement and enable them to develop their metacognitive strategies [18]. They are 
valuable for reviewing students’ abilities to reflect and encourage them to forge new 
ideas, log their practical activities, and record how they learn. Learning diaries improve 
students’ SRL skills by enriching their awareness of what their current learning strate-
gies are. In addition, learning diaries improve students’ planning, self-monitoring, and 
self-reflection. Many researchers have found empirical evidence that learning diaries 
are advantageous in teaching and learning, and they report that learning diaries can 
improve metacognitive skills and attitudes, self-regulation, and self-efficacy [17, 19].

There are various formats for delivering a learning diary, such as the pen-and-paper 
method, online-based platforms, and mobile apps. Learning diaries can be operated as 
an SRL intervention tool for lecturers, where the interventions are usually administered 
in the classroom. Such traditional intervention methods are limited by space and time. 
For example, every teacher must measure and interact with every student in the class, 
which can be challenging because the students’ personal goals might be different. Fur-
ther, some students prioritise skills, whereas other focus only on grades. Moreover, they 
all have different learning strategies, and several students are more comfortable making 
summaries, whereas others prefer to create concept maps. In this setting, the interven-
tion method for them is also different. In brief, it is impossible for this intervention to 
be carried out in a one-to-many fashion, which consumes a lot of time and resources. 
Nevertheless, these interventions are confined to the limitations of time and space. With 
the growth of technology, the interventions can be delivered online, usually using the 
web and mobile platforms [20].

3	
Research methodology

The research methodology in the current study is outlined below.

3.1	
Formulating the research problem

The initial phase of this study functions to formulate research problems, namely 
using gap analyses, where we find that there are limited SRL tools that can measure 
and intervene in SRL strategies, especially tools that are fully controlled by students. In 
the first wave of measurements, researchers considered SRL to be static, thus measure-
ments using a questionnaire were the main choice at that time. In the second wave, SRL 
began to be considered as something dynamic, thus thinking aloud and observation 
were the most suitable choices as measurement methods. In these two waves, measure-
ment and intervention are viewed as separate things, even though they are interrelated. 

219

In the third wave, Panadero et al. stated that as SRL is a dynamic process, it is necessary 
to propose measurements and interventions at the same time. This is in accordance 
with Araka et al. [48], who state that a tool that can both measure and intervene in stu-
dents in the SRL context is necessary. This idea was developed because the purpose of 
measuring is to discover the SRL skill level, which then suggests the appropriate inter-
ventions according to that level. This idea is popular with the emergence of the use of 
Educational Data Mining to identify, model, and predict student behaviour. In addition, 
Matcha et al. [49] state that the limitations of the available SRL tools are that they are 
often inconsistent with existing SRL theories.

Meanwhile, researchers argue that the learning diary combines self-reporting and log-
ging, where it can record and explore a series of student activities over a certain period. 
In addition, the learning diary can be used to reflect on their activities. In this scenario, 
a learning diary is both a measurement and intervention tool [10]. Therefore, we have 
set out the objectives of this study to develop a prototype of a learning diary, evaluate its 
design, and investigate the impact of using a learning diary on SRL strategies and skills.

Fig. 1. Research methodology

220

In this study, UCD is used as a direction to lead prototyping. Garrett [21] depicts 
UCD as a method of designing an artifact that places the user at the centre of attention. 
UCD assists in the development phase to fulfil the users’ requirements and capabili-
ties, specifically for newcomers [22]. In the practice of UCD, Williams [23] states that 
designers have to create user profiles, identify behaviours and preferences, and drive 
decisions from that information. The UCD phases that are conducted in the current 
study are outlined below.

3.2	
Design research

Bødker [24] articulated that the initial phase of UCD is investigating stakeholders 
and users. With the interview method, designers identify user goals, constraints, and 
assumptions to grasp the user’s natural behaviour. This phase has two important activ-
ities, the first of which is choosing the target users of the learning diary and identify-
ing their characteristics. This activity is very important as a starting point for design 
research. In this study, the target users are undergraduate students at a large and reputa-
ble public university in Indonesia. The second activity is conducting a literature study 
related to which features users need in a learning diary. Several features have been 
identified, including goal setting, resources, notes, mind maps, self-generated questions 
(SGQs), and reflections.

In this study, the user interviews were not directly administered in the first iteration 
of design because the prototype of the learning diary was operated as an SRL tool. 
Therefore, it is critical to initiate a literature study to define SRL. Once the designer has 
gained initial knowledge of SRL, the user studies are activated. Initially, the target users 
did not have sufficient knowledge of SRL because the users were computer science 
students who did not receive special training on SRL. The students only acquire SRL 
knowledge if they enrol in computer-assisted learning courses. Designers and users 
must have equal knowledge of SRL for the development process to be driven effec-
tively and efficiently, and the designers must then identify user needs with a literature 
study and approve it for the target users.

3.3	
Design prototype

Bødker [24] states that design is the second phase of UCD. In this phase, designers 
initiate a discussion, create concepts, and make initial sketches. This phase delivers 
information architecture (IA), which can be employed to investigate how information 
is managed; the student journey map (SJM), which is very helpful to understand how 
students interact in learning diaries; and the prototype, which can be used to visualise 
the working model of the application. There are two types of prototypes: low-fidelity 
prototypes, such as paper prototypes, and high-fidelity prototypes, which tend to be 
interactive. This study resulted in a high-fidelity prototype.

221

3.4	
Design evaluation

Bødker [24] notes that design evaluation is the final stage in UCD. The evalua-
tion strives to ensure that the artifacts that are produced fulfil the requirements and 
objectives of the user. There are several evaluation methods, including UT, cognitive 
walkthrough, heuristic reviews, and satisfaction questionnaires. This study chose to use 
UT as an evaluation method. The steps in UT are as follows [25]:

First, a test plan must be built. Several items needed to be considered in the test plan, 
including the objectives of the test, RQs, participant characteristics, method, task sce-
narios, test environment, data collection and analysis, and report presentation. Second, 
the environment must be set up. The pandemic crisis forced us to accomplish the UT in 
an online environment. Therefore, several tools and devices, such as Zoom and Google 
Form, were required. Participants were authorised to employ their own personal com-
puter or laptop. Before the test, participants were requested to ensure that their device 
and internet connection were in good operation.

Third, the participants must be selected. The target users of the prototype were the 
undergraduate students at one a large and reputable public university in Indonesia. 
Thirty undergraduate students volunteered to be participants and were chosen randomly.

Fourth, the test materials must be prepared. Several documents were prepared to 
ensure that the test was directed according to plan, including guidelines for observers, 
task scenarios, recording consent, and questionnaires. Thirty participants required at 
least six observers for the test. The observers were teaching assistants of an interaction 
system course who had knowledge related to UT. Before starting the test, the researcher 
of the current study conducted a pilot study in which six observers became partici-
pants. A pilot study was necessary to assess whether the entire sequence of UT was in 
accordance with the plan or had failed. Meanwhile, for the observers, the pilot study 
was considered an orientation. In addition to observing user behaviour, the authors also 
collected data from the System Usability Scale (SUS) questionnaire, which is one of the 
most popular surveys used to evaluate usability.

Fifth, the test must be conducted. The test was separated into three sessions. In the 
first session, or before the test, the observer made sure that all the documents were 
complete. Then, the observer read the orientation document, the participants filled out 
the consent form, and the recording began. In the second session, the test took place, 
and the observer had to obey the dos and don’ts during the test. In the last session, par-
ticipants were invited to fill out the SUS questionnaire.

Sixth, the collected data must be analysed. The data that were successfully collected 
were examined based on the evaluation components that were explained in the test 
plan. The following four aspects were analysed: (1) issues and feedback; (2) task per-
formance; (3) SUS score; and (4) solutions and recommendations for improvement.

Seventh, a report must be generated. The UT results were presented in the form of a 
UT report, which consisted of a testing plan, issues and feedback, solutions, task per-
formance, and a summary.

222

3.5	
Pilot study

The pilot study aimed to gain an initial picture of the use of learning diaries. 
This experiment was carried out in the linear algebra course during the short semester of 
the 2021/2022 academic year. Students were asked to voluntarily use learning diaries. 
At the beginning of the semester, an orientation of how to compose a learning diary 
was provided. On a predetermined topic, the lecturer gave the students a reflection task 
that had to be accomplished using a learning diary. Then, semi-structured interviews 
were conducted to obtain students’ perceptions of the learning diary. The results of 
the reflection task were analysed using a rubric that had been determined by the linear 
algebra instructor, while the interview transcripts were analysed using thematic analy-
sis techniques. The result of this experiment was the initial findings about the impact of 
learning diaries on students’ SRL skills.

4	
Design research

The literature review was conducted to choose which features should be present in 
the learning diary. It is important to note that these features must support every phase 
of SRL. The features in the learning diary are listed in Table 1.

Table 1. Features of Diaria

4.1	
Goal setting

Locke and Latham [26] articulated that goals reflect the quantity, quality, and 
level of performance. The quantity of performance can be measured by how often 
students are involved in discussions and access the LMS and how long it takes them 
to understand the concept. For example, students with a mastery orientation usually 

223

spend a lot of time elaborating on a concept, while students with a performance 
orientation only allocate time to understand the concepts according to their needs. 
The quality of performance can be observed from how complete the contents of 
their notes are, how deep their knowledge of a topic is, and how correct their under-
standing of a concept is. Students with a mastery orientation will attempt to explore 
a concept more than what is required by the lecturer, while students with a per-
formance orientation feel that the learning resources provided by the lecturer are 
sufficient.

Goals are valuable for motivating individuals to exercise maximum effort 
to finish a task and drive individuals to focus on the task, choose the proper 
strategy, and monitor their progress. Researchers have found empirical evi-
dence of the relationship between goal setting and students’ academic success. 
The positive effects of goal setting include increased self-confidence, higher 
grade points, and a greater sense of learner autonomy [27]. Goal setting plays 
an important role in the forethought phase. In this phase, students are asked 
to set goals and choose fitting strategies that are in accordance with their goals. 
Both goal setting and strategic planning are affected by the self-motivation 
beliefs of each student. There is a reciprocal relationship between goal setting and 
self-efficacy [28]. Students who set goals and monitor their learning progress tend to 
have high self-efficacy. Personal goals are easier to achieve if students arrange each 
task that will guide them to accomplish their goals. Each task should have its own 
timeline so that the students stay on track and can predict when they can reach their 
goal. In brief, one of the enablers to fulfilling the goals is how students are talented 
in managing time. For this reason, several techniques for managing time emerged, 
such as the Pareto principle and the Pomodoro technique. Based on various available 
literature, which reveals the importance of goals in learning, we propose that goal 
setting is one of the features that must be available in Diaria.

4.2	
Mind map

At the end of 1960s, Tony Buzan popularised a mind-mapping method that strove 
to activate both hemispheres of the brain. The mind-mapping process begins with a 
topic in the middle and then adds a collection of ideas that are connected by lines; 
these ideas then branch off according to the needs of students. Mind maps are help-
ful for brainstorming; taking notes; consolidating information from various sources; 
resolving complex problems; presenting information in visual form; learning, storing, 
and remembering information; and improving innovative and creative thinking as a 
self-regulation strategy [29]. There is various empirical evidence on the usefulness of 
mind maps. As summarised by Tanriseven [30], mind maps have a positive effect on 
student understanding, retention, success, attitude towards courses, learning concepts, 
motivation, knowledge construction, metacognitive knowledge, and problem-solving. 

224

Mind maps can be operated throughout the SRL phase. For example, in the forethought 
phase, a mind map can serve as a tool to set goals. Then, each goal has a branch that 
contains the proper strategy to fulfil each goal. In the performance phase, mind maps 
can be utilised to monitor the progress of the task. In the reflection phase, the mind 
map acts as a supporting tool to evaluate the overall goals, selected strategies, and 
outcomes.

4.3	
Note-taking

Note-taking is an SRL strategy. Note-taking has two main functions. First, encoding 
is a cognitive activity that assists students to understand and remember the material. 
Second, it is external storage, which refers to the activity of taking notes as a support-
ing tool for reviewing or revising material [31]. Before the digital age, note-taking was 
a critical skill for students because information sources were very limited. For exam-
ple, a lecturer had only one textbook, so students were required to produce summa-
ries as part of external storage. However, nowadays, it is irrelevant because there are 
multiple sources and formats of information. In fact, this period is also known as the 
era of information saturation. Therefore, the encoding and external storage functions 
are no longer relevant for students. Castello and Monereo [32] state that note-taking 
is not only for encoding and external storage but also for transferring knowledge. Fur-
thermore, students need to know why they need note-taking skills; that is, in some 
situations, they will be requested to apply the lessons learned from the note-taking 
experience [33].

4.4	
Self-generated questions

The literacy ability of students can be recognised in their ability to generate 
questions [34]. SGQ is useful for stimulating critical thinking, curiosity, interest, 
and new ideas; providing a brief description of the misconceptions and knowledge 
gaps of students [35]; identifying diversity among students; discerning the depth of 
knowledge construction and cognitive involvement of students; and metacognitively 
monitoring student understanding. Further, SGQ is related to students’ motiva-
tional beliefs. The higher the motivation of students, the more they will persistently 
learn new things, and the more complex the concepts can be. This results in stu-
dents who can produce high-quality questions [36]. Bates et al. [37] and Jones [38] 
articulated that SGQ had a positive impact on students’ test scores. SGQ has been 
widely used in science and mathematics and plays an important role in meaningful 
learning and learning motivation. Chin and Osborne [39] state that questions are a 
fundamental component of research and problem-solving processes, and students 
involved in generating questions showed significantly higher cognitive strategies 
and metacognitive skills.

225

4.5	
Reflection

Turns et al. [40] define reflection as a process where students review certain expe-
riences and evaluate them from various perspectives with the aim of giving meaning 
to that experience, which will later be used to direct future actions. Hicks et al. [41] 
proposed the following two reflection activities: first, reflection on experiences such as 
games, simulations, service learning, or internships; and second, retrospective reflec-
tion, which strives to relate previously learned information or experiences to current 
circumstances and activities, such as mapping or self-evaluation [42]. Turns et al. [40] 
proposed various elements of reflection, such as experience, lens, meaning, action, 
intention, and dialectic. In the context of SRL, reflection is the final phase in which stu-
dents involve self-judgment and self-reaction. This phase is very important to observe 
whether the predetermined goals have been accomplished. Reflection is valuable in 
problem-based learning [43] and is used after students successfully solve the prob-
lem; they are then asked to retell their experiences, feelings, and knowledge gained 
from solving the problem. According to Salomon and Perkins [47], in the context of 
problem-based learning, self-reflection assists students with reviewing the group pro-
cess, understanding how learning and problem-solving strategies can be re-applied, and 
linking new knowledge to prior understanding [44].

5	
Design prototype

To answer the first research question, a prototype design was carried out. This phase 
begins with designing the IA to be defined as a model for the collection of information, 
and the model describes the rules for how the information is presented, accessed, and 
connected. The IA from the study diary is shown in Figure 2.

Fig. 2. Information architecture

226

Fig. 3. Student journey map

6	
Design evaluation

To answer the second research question, a design evaluation using UT was carried 
out. UT is a technique to assess a product or system to inform design, eliminate design 
problems and frustration, and enhance profitability [25]. UT mandates designers to 
understand the five components of usability quality: memorability, efficiency, errors, 
learnability, and satisfaction [45].

227

This UT involved 30 student participants from one a large and reputable public uni-
versity in Indonesia. These were second-year students and participants in the interac-
tion system class. The interaction system is a course that must be taken in the fourth 
semester, so they already had knowledge of design principles and UT. The participants 
were also accustomed to using technology and systems to support learning, such as 
LMS; in other words, their digital literacy was promising.

The task list comprises those tasks that the participants were asked to perform during 
the test. The list comprises tasks that would ordinarily be performed in the learning 
diary. The task list comprises the task number, task description, task scenario, and suc-
cess criteria, as shown in Table 2.

Table 2. Task list

228

To guarantee the task was accomplished according to plan, the performance of each 
task was assessed on the following three levels: failure if the participant terminated the 
task; success with obstacles if the participant finished the task but there were obstacles; 
and success if the participant completed the task without issues.

Table 3. Task performance level

As shown in Figure 4, the results of the task performance assessment show that Tasks 
5, 8, and 13 need attention because the average success score is less than level two. The 
finding is that participants always struggle when adding mind maps, rating answers 
from other participants, and interpreting the information available on the dashboard.

1
0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13

Fig. 4. Task performance

Grouping issues in task completion is critical to facilitating design improvement 
priorities. Issues are grouped into the following five categories: suggestion, strong sug-
gestion, minor issue, major issue, and blocker issue, as shown in Table 4.

Table 4. Issue categories

229

The issues identified during the test were Suggestion (45%), Strong Suggestion 
(45%), and Major Issues (10%), as shown in Figure 5. Suggestion means that the par-
ticipants provide suggestions for improvement, but it is of low importance to the par-
ticipants. For example, participants were asked about the use of start and end dates for 
courses. Strong Suggestion means that participants provide suggestions for improve-
ment because they feel disturbed by the problem. For example, participants were con-
fused about what a learning diary was. Meanwhile, in Major Issues, participants start 
trial and error; for example, the participants hesitated when there were questions where 
the replies will be rated. In this test, we did not discover any Minor Issues or Blocker 
Issues. This result is promising because it means that there are no obstacles that stop 
participants from completing the task.

45%

45%

0% 10% 0%

Suggestion
Strong Suggestion
Minor Issue
Major Issue
Blocker Issue

Fig. 5. Issue categories

The problem with Task 1 was that the participants were confused about what a learn-
ing diary was. Most of them were annoyed because there was no complete explanation 
of a learning diary, whereas others thought it was not very important. In Task 1, the par-
ticipants were asked about the use of start and end dates for courses. Most of the partic-
ipants did not think this was important. In Task 3, the participants stated that the button 
to add a new topic should not be placed at the bottom of the page. This is to prevent 
them from scrolling up. The problem in Task 4 was that the participants hesitated when 
changing status goals. This was because the icon that was used was unclear. In Task 5, 
participants were confused about how to add the first node, and some participants even 
started trial and error. In Tasks 6 and 12, the participants hesitated with a placeholder in 
the editor, so they struggled with adding questions and reflections. The problem in Task 
7 was that the participants were confused and were looking for questions to respond to. 
Therefore, some of them stated that this was quite disturbing, whereas others stated that 
it was of low importance. In Task 8, the participants hesitated when they were looking 
for the questions for which the replies must be rated, so they had difficulty assessing the 
questions that were already available. The problem in Task 9 was that the participants 
struggled when searching for questions that already had answers. A small number of 
participants started trial and error, whereas others felt this was not disturbing enough. In 
Task 10, most of the participants preferred the sticky notes to be draggable. In Task 11, 

230

the participants were confused by the maximum allowed file size and found it annoying 
because they had to trial and error. Meanwhile, in Task 13, most of the participants 
were confused about what performance meant. The grouping of issues for each task is 
arranged so that the priority of tasks that need to be refined is easy to schedule. As shown 
in Figure 6, the test results show that more than half of the participants gave suggestions 
on Tasks 1, 6, 7, 10, 11, 12, and 13. Meanwhile, major issues were found in Tasks 5, 6, 
8, 9, 10, and 12, and some participants used trial and error to complete the task.

Suggestion
Strong Suggestion
Minor Issue
Major Issue
Blocker Issue

1
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13

Fig. 6. Issues × tasks

At the end of the UT session, the participants filled out the SUS questionnaire. The 
questionnaire was used in Bahasa and was put through a series of tests by Sharfina and 
Santoso [46]. As shown in Figure 7, the SUS score of the learning diary is 73.2, which 
means the learning diary has good usability.

0
0.0

10.0

20.0

30.0

40.0

50.0

60.0

70.0

80.0

90.0

100.0

5
10
15
20
25
30

Fig. 7. Distribution of SUS score

231

Based on the task performance level, issues category, and SUS score, the recom-
mended solutions are arranged as shown in Table 5.

Table 5. Issues and solutions

7	
Design prototype

This preliminary experiment is a pilot study that aims to assess the impact of learn-
ing diaries on SRL skills and student performance. The pilot study did not aim to test 
the hypothesis. However, this experiment is important, as it warns researchers where 
the main study may fail. This experiment also aims to examine whether the prototype, 
methods, techniques, tools, instruments, and procedures that have been planned are in 
accordance with field conditions, needs, and research objectives. In addition, through 
this experiment, researchers can also determine the necessary time, cost, and human 
resources for the experiment.

232

This experiment was carried out in the linear algebra course for the short semester 
of the 2022/2023 academic year. Linear algebra is a mathematics course at a large 
and reputable public university in Indonesia. This course equips students with 
problem-solving skills related to vector algebra and sharpens their mathematical 
reasoning (logical, consistent, clear, thorough) with a disposition towards critical 
thinking skills. The participants of this experiment comprised 24 students in the linear 
algebra course and three teaching assistants. Nineteen students were retaking the 
course, and five students were new participants in linear algebra.

Experiments were carried out throughout the short semester lectures. As shown in 
Figure 8, at the first meeting, the students were asked to study the learning diary orien-
tation module in the lesson format available in the Student Centered e-Learning Envi-
ronment LMS. This module aims to provide students with an understanding of SRL and 
learning diaries. The module contains a description of the SRL concept, the phases in 
SRL, and a manual for using a learning diary. Each module section concludes with a 
quiz of one to two questions. Students were voluntarily asked to use learning diaries to 
support their learning process.

Fig. 8. Procedure

The lecturer gave a reflection task to the participants, in which they were required to 
use a study diary to complete the task. Descriptions and triggers are provided in Table 6.

Table 6. Reflection task and triggers

233

Qualitative data were collected through reflection tasks and interviews. Participants 
were invited to take part in an interview via a class group chat. Interviews were con-
ducted in a semi-structured environment with five course participants and three lecturer 
assistants either after the mid-term test or approximately a month following the orienta-
tion of the learning diary. Given the limitations due to the pandemic, the interview was 
conducted for around 30 minutes virtually using the Zoom application. At the begin-
ning of the interview, approval was given, including permission to record the interview, 
protection of the interviewee’s personal information, and incentives given for becom-
ing a participant. This interview consisted of six questions that elaborated on expecta-
tions and concerns during the lecture, strategies for clarifying concepts that were not 
yet understood, strategies for improving changes in knowledge, strategies for detecting 
misconceptions, and participants’ perceptions of learning diaries. The qualitative data 
that were produced were interview transcripts and the results of the reflection task. The 
interview transcripts were analysed using thematic analysis techniques that produced 
themes and sub-themes. This technique was assisted by QCAMAP web application to 
process manual coding. Meanwhile, reflections were analysed using a rubric that was 
prepared by the linear algebra course lecturers. A thematic analysis of the interview 
transcripts resulted in several themes and sub-themes, as shown in Table 7.

Table 7. Themes and sub-themes

(Continued)

234

Table 7. Themes and sub-themes (Continued)

(Continued)

235

The results of the thematic analysis showed that participants had hopes of getting a 
grade of A and obtaining skills in the field of linear algebra. Participants who wanted 
to earn a grade of A were motivated by the desire to become lecturer assistants. Mean-
while, participants who wanted to gain skills in the linear algebra field based this on 
their desire to work in the data field when they graduate from college. This finding 
is in accordance with the Achievement Goal Theory, which divides students into two 
groups: mastery, which focuses on skills, and performance, which focuses on grade.

Students also faced concerns at the beginning of the semester. First, the perception 
was that linear algebra is difficult to learn, as this course is considered a conceptual 
course and is more abstract compared with other courses. Second, students were con-
cerned that motivation during learning would fluctuate. Third, there was concern of not 
passing the course, particularly the students who did not pass the linear algebra class in 
the previous semester.

Table 7. Themes and sub-themes (Continued)

236

The results of the analysis show that students have several strategies for clarifying 
their understanding of a concept. First, if they do not understand a concept, students will 
independently review their notes, the material provided by educators, and textbooks; 
re-watch learning videos; and search other sources, such as YouTube. If independent 
students still face difficulties, the second step is to ask friends. Usually, students discuss 
face-to-face material either in or after class. If they still have problems after discussing 
them with friends, the third step is to ask the lecturer’s assistant. Students clarify their 
misunderstanding with the teaching assistant to find a solution to the problem. In the 
final step, if the lecturer assistant has not succeeded in helping students understand a 
concept, they will usually ask the educator directly, either in class, via online discussion 
forums, or via email.

Students have various strategies for detecting changes in their knowledge, the first 
of which is through discussion with friends. Some students independently create group 
learning initiatives. In group discussions, each participant will present their own under-
standing. In this way, participants can detect changes in their knowledge by paying 
attention to whether they are able to explain their knowledge fluently and whether they 
are able to answer their group’s questions confidently. If students are confident when 
presenting their understanding and can answer every other group participant, then they 
will independently assess that there has been a change in their knowledge. The same 
goes for doing the exercises. If students can answer every question in the exercise 
without any obstacles, then there has been a change in their knowledge. However, if 
students are not able to answer all the questions in the exercise, then there has not been 
a change in the student’s knowledge. Trigger questions given by educators in discus-
sion forums are also a tool to detect changes in students’ knowledge. Students who can 
answer trigger questions in both class and online discussion forums have experienced 
a change in their knowledge. Another way to detect changes in knowledge is to take 
notes. Students who take notes completely and efficiently without the help of other 
learning resources such as books and video recordings have experienced changes in 
knowledge. The last strategy is to answer all SGQs. When learning, students often ask 
questions about aspects that they do not understand. Students can detect changes in 
their knowledge by answering all the questions they have compiled. The more ques-
tions they can answer, the more knowledge they will have gained.

Further, students have various strategies to detect misconceptions. First, students 
will find misconceptions when doing the exercises. Students can see the solutions from 
the exercises and then compare them with their own solutions. In this situation, stu-
dents will detect whether they have experienced misconceptions. Second, students are 
encouraged to look at the discussion forums. Lecturers provide trigger questions in 
discussion forums, and students provide answers in these forums. Students can detect 
misconceptions when they see answers from classmates. Misconceptions can also be 
detected directly when discussing with friends face-to-face, namely by comparing the 
explanations from their peers with their own understanding.

The results of the analysis also show that learning diaries have various advantages. 
First, students think that a learning diary can be a platform in which they can set goals, 
manage learning resources, take notes, record questions, make mind maps, and create 
reflections. Second, it is very accessible; web-based learning diaries can be accessed 
anywhere and anytime via the internet. This ease of access allows students to use 
learning diaries spontaneously to support the learning process. Third, it makes it easier 

237

for students to review the learning material. It can be accessed anytime and anywhere 
and is consolidated into a single platform, making it easy for students to review the 
predetermined goals, summaries of each topic, learning reflections, mind maps, and 
questions that have not been answered by students.

The results of the analysis show that the features contained in the learning diary can 
support the learning process. The goal-setting feature allows students to set goals at 
the beginning of the semester for each topic. The note-taking feature can be used by 
students to make summaries, both when studying independently and when studying in 
class, making it easier for them to review the material they have learned. This feature is 
very helpful for students in clarifying concepts they do not understand. The mind-map 
feature will help students summarise notes in visual form and is very helpful for stu-
dents to detect changes in their knowledge. The SGQ feature allows students to record 
questions while studying independently and helps students detect misconceptions. The 
reflection feature allows students to reflect on the learning material and apply it to 
everyday life or other contexts.

8	
Conclusion and future direction

Researchers agree that SRL skills are essential to improve academic performance. 
The importance of SRL skills applies to all levels of education and educational settings. 
In the field of computer science, the topic of SRL is the centre of discussion. This study 
aimed to develop Diaria to enhance SRL skills. The learning diary also took part in 
the third wave of SRL measurement as a tool that played a role in both measuring and 
intervening in the SRL strategy.

Diaria had several features, including learning goals, resources, mind maps, SGQs, 
sticky notes, and reflections, and each feature represented each phase of the SRL. The 
resulting high-fidelity prototype was evaluated using the UT method. The result of the 
evaluation is the SUS score of 73.2, which indicates good usability with some sugges-
tions from participants for ways to enhance the prototype.

There were several findings in the pilot study. The students expected to get an A and 
improve their math skills. Meanwhile, they were worried that linear algebra would be 
difficult to learn or that they would fail, resulting in unstable motivation. We also found 
that students had strategies to clarify their understanding, such as self-study; asking 
friends, lecturer assistants, and lecturers; and looking for other learning resources. They 
also had various strategies for detecting changes in knowledge by engaging in both 
face-to-face and virtual discussions with classmates, completing formative assessments 
and SGQs, and note-taking. Students also had strategies for detecting misconceptions, 
again by engaging in both face-to-face and virtual discussions with classmates, com-
pleting formative assessments, and SGQs. Students stated that the learning diary was 
easily accessible, helped them to review material, was an all-in-one platform, and its 
features were very helpful in improving their understanding, detecting changes in 
knowledge, and highlighting misconceptions.

Based on these findings, the following is a proposed scenario for the use of Diaria 
that can be seen in several contexts. The first is synchronous and asynchronous methods. 
Learning diaries can be used in synchronous methods, such as in classrooms and virtual 
classes to take notes, save questions, or create mind maps. In asynchronous methods, 

238

such as watching recorded videos or viewing discussions in online forums, study dia-
ries can also be used to take notes, save questions, or create mind maps.

The second is the flipped learning method. Learning diaries can be used before face-
to-face classes or virtual classes take place by managing learning resource files, making 
initial notes, and answering questions that arise during self-study. Learning diaries can 
also be used when face-to-face or virtual classes are in progress by perfecting notes, 
managing questions related to learning materials, and clarifying confusion experienced 
during self-study. Further, learning diaries can be used after face-to-face classes or 
virtual classes take place by correcting notes, making mind maps of concepts that have 
been studied, reviewing learning materials, and making summaries.

The third is formal, informal, and non-formal education. Learning diaries can be 
used in various forms of education. In formal education, such as in universities, learn-
ing diaries can be used in face-to-face classes or virtual classes. Additionally, learning 
diaries can be used to take notes from lecturer presentations in the classroom, formulate 
questions about learning materials, and make summaries from discussion forums avail-
able on the LMS. In informal education, learning diaries can be used to take notes when 
watching learning videos on YouTube or to make summaries during group study. Fur-
ther, learning diaries can be used in non-formal education, such as making mind maps 
and creating summaries of learning videos that are available on the MOOC platform.

This experiment was only carried out in one class of linear algebra courses, so the 
findings cannot be directly generalised. Students in this course were also dominated by 
students retaking the course, and this warrants further study. The short lecture time and 
the motivation not to fail again inhibit the students from exploring the usefulness of 
learning diaries. In this experiment, it was found that there were technical limitations in 
the learning diary, which was related to the mathematical notation editor. The findings 
and constraints of this pilot study will be valuable for the main study.

9