Original Paper

An Intelligent Individualized Cardiovascular App for Risk
Elimination (iCARE) for Individuals With Coronary Heart Disease:
Development and Usability Testing Analysis

Yuling Chen1*, BSN; Meihua Ji1,2*, PhD; Ying Wu1, PhD; Qingyu Wang1, MSN; Ying Deng1, MSN; Yong Liu3, ME;
Fangqin Wu1, MSN; Mingxuan Liu1, BSN; Yiqiang Guo1, PhD; Ziyuan Fu1, BSN; Xiaoying Zheng4,5, PhD

1School of Nursing, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China
2Advanced Innovation Center for Human Brain Protection, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China
3Along Technology Inc, Beijing, China
4The Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation Health Science Academy, Peking University, Beijing, China
5Institute of Population Research, Peking University, Beijing, China
*these authors contributed equally

Ying Wu, PhD
School of Nursing, Capital Medical University
10 You-an-men Wai Xi-tou-tiao, Feng-tai District
Beijing, 100069
China
Phone: 86 83911766

Abstract

Background: 
Death and disability from coronary heart disease (CHD) can be largely reduced by improving risk factor
management. However, adhering to evidence-based recommendations is challenging and requires interventions at the level of
the patient, provider, and health system.
Objective: The aim of this study was to develop an Intelligent Individualized Cardiovascular App for Risk Elimination (iCARE)
to facilitate adherence to health behaviors and preventive medications, and to test the usability of iCARE.
Methods: We developed iCARE based on a user-centered design approach, which included 4 phases: (1) function design, (2)
iterative design, (3) expert inspections and walkthroughs of the prototypes, and (4) usability testing with end users. The usability
testing of iCARE included 2 stages: stage I, which included a task analysis and a usability evaluation (January to March 2019)
of the iCARE patient app using the modified Health Information Technology Usability Survey (Health-ITUES); and stage II
(June 2020), which used the Health-ITUES among end users who used the app for 6 months. The end users were individuals with
a confirmed diagnosis of CHD from 2 university-affiliated hospitals in Beijing, China.
Results: iCARE consists of a patient app, a care provider app, and a cloud platform. It has a set of algorithms that trigger tailored
feedback and can send individualized interventions based on data from initial assessment and health monitoring via manual entry
or wearable devices. For stage I usability testing, 88 hospitalized patients (72% [63/88] male; mean age 60 [SD 9.9] years) with
CHD were included in the study. The mean score of the usability testing was 90.1 (interquartile range 83.3-99.0). Among enrolled
participants, 90% (79/88) were satisfied with iCARE; 94% (83/88) and 82% (72/88) reported that iCARE was useful and easy
to use, respectively. For stage II usability testing, 61 individuals with CHD (85% [52/61] male; mean age 53 [SD 8.2] years) who
were from an intervention arm and used iCARE for at least six months were included. The mean total score on usability testing
based on the questionnaire was 89.0 (interquartile distance: 77.0-99.5). Among enrolled participants, 89% (54/61) were satisfied
with the use of iCARE, 93% (57/61) perceived it as useful, and 70% (43/61) as easy to use.
Conclusions: This study developed an intelligent, individualized, evidence-based, and theory-driven app (iCARE) to improve
patients’ adherence to health behaviors and medication management. iCARE was identified to be highly acceptable, useful, and
easy to use among individuals with a diagnosis of CHD.
Trial Registration: Chinese Clinical Trial Registry ChiCTR-INR-16010242; https://tinyurl.com/2p8bkrew

JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2021 | vol. 9 | iss. 12 | e26439 | p. 1

(JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2021;9(12):e26439) doi: 10.2196/26439

KEYWORDS
mobile health; health behavior; system; development; usability; coronary heart disease

Introduction

Coronary heart disease (CHD) is the leading cause of
cardiovascular death, accounting for 7.3 million annual deaths
worldwide [1,2], with about 130,000 being reported from China
alone [3]. Preventive interventions focusing on unhealthy
behavior (diet, physical activity, smoking) modification and
adherence to secondary prevention medications can reduce at
least 47% of CHD mortality and decrease 68% of CHD-related
major risk factors [3-7]. Although interventions facilitating
behavior change and medication adherence have been developed
and widely implemented, the prevalence of unhealthy behaviors
and medication nonadherence remained high among individuals
with CHD, including those who have already experienced
life-threatening cardiac events or underwent percutaneous
coronary interventions [6,8-11]. In large international studies
from Europe and China, such as the EUROASPIRE IV and the
Improving Care for Cardiovascular Disease in China-Acute
Coronary Syndrome (CCC-ACS) Project, over half of patients
with CHD had substantial unhealthy behaviors (50%-77%),
with a large proportion of patients not adhering to prescribed
preventive medications (45%-83%) [8,10,12-16].

Effective intervention targeting adherence to healthy behaviors
and medications requires strategies to be implemented in
addressing multiple CHD-related risk factors [17]. In addition,
as reported by previous studies, evidence-based interventions
with incorporation of real-time monitoring, person-centered
care, and tailored feedback are essential to ensure affordable
and sustainable long-term benefits [17-21]. However, it is
difficult for conventional interventions to provide real-time
monitoring; therefore, these interventions are unable to deliver
tailored feedback and person-centered care [13-15].

With the advancement in information and communication
technologies, 
mobile 
health 
(mHealth)–based 
health
management systems and apps have emerged [18-20]. These
have shown high potential in providing individualized
intervention and sending instant automatic feedback based on
real-time monitoring, therefore it might have promising effects
in impacting health behavior change and promoting medication
adherence [18-20]. Currently, many mHealth apps are designed
to promote physical activity [21], track diet intake [22], assist
with smoking cessation [23], remind patients to take medications
[24,25], and facilitate self-management of CHD risk factors
[26]. However, many of the existing mHealth apps are not
individualized; additionally, they are not inclusive of suggested
strategies and often have limited functions on tailored feedback,
especially automatic feedback, and inadequate information
updates [27]. None of the top 5 downloaded mHealth apps in
China incorporated multiple key health behaviors identified by
clinical guidelines [27]. A recent systematic review on health
behavior changes related to physical activity, diet, drug and
alcohol use, and mental health revealed that the majority of the
mHealth apps (40/52, 80%) for health behavior change only

focused on a single behavior, with the other 20% focusing on
2 health behaviors [18]. Meanwhile, studies suggested that
currently available mHealth apps, including those in the
management of CHD, failed to address users’ needs and
preferences, or consider their unique characteristics during the
app development phase [23-25]. Furthermore, health care
providers, such as nurses, are often not involved in the design
and development of the mHealth apps, despite them being
recognized as important for designing interventions that are
reflective of patients care needs [27,28]. In addition, currently
available mHealth apps were often not guided by a behavior
change theory in developing their interventions [24,29], and
they often do not sufficiently emphasize evidence-based
interventions [28].

In light of the imperative needs for health behavior modification
and medication management among individuals with CHD, we
developed an Intelligent Individualized Cardiovascular App for
Risk Elimination (iCARE) through facilitating healthy behavior
and medication adherence. iCARE was designed to address the
gaps in conventional interventions, in which multiple
CHD-related risk factors were managed through real-time
monitoring, person-centered care, and automatic tailored
feedback. Following clinical guidelines on CHD secondary
prevention [3,30,31], the interventions of iCARE were
developed based on the Intervention Mapping framework [32],
and the Contemplation–Action–Maintenance (CAM) model
[33,34], which was an integrated behavior change model
describing the roles of multiple moderators and mediators during
the motivation and volition stages that are essential for healthy
behavior change and behavior maintenance in individuals with
CHD (Multimedia Appendix 1). In our preliminary study, we
generated a set of iCARE interventions along with a set of
“IF–THEN” algorithms to improve patients’adherence to health
behaviors and medications, and conducted a needs assessment
on the use of an mHealth-based system among patients with
CHD [33]. The interventions developed in that preliminary work
were incorporated as a built-in intervention bank into the cloud
platform of the iCARE system during the development stage.
The findings from the needs assessment were used to guide the
design of the user interface of the iCARE system.

The purposes of this study were to describe the development
of iCARE and to evaluate its usability among individuals with
CHD. The effect of iCARE on facilitating adherence to actual
behavior change is out of scope of this study, and it will be
reported separately.

Methods

Development Process of iCARE

Overview

End users’needs analysis and the development of interventions
within iCARE have been published elsewhere and are

JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2021 | vol. 9 | iss. 12 | e26439 | p. 2

summarized as preliminary work (Multimedia Appendix 1)
[33]. Based on our preliminary work, we followed the
user-centered design principle [20] in developing iCARE, and
considered this principle as the main methodology for designing
person-centered care–delivering systems [35]. The development
process of iCARE consisted of 4 phases: (1) function design,
(2) iterative design, (3) expert inspections and walkthroughs of
prototypes, and (4) usability testing with end users. We
established a multidisciplinary team including health care
professionals (nurses specialized in cardiovascular care, nursing
informaticians, nursing researchers), project managers, software
engineers, software architects, and interface designers to develop
iCARE. Weekly meetings were held to discuss the issues raised
and advance the progress of system development among
multidisciplinary team members throughout all phases.

Phase 1: Functional Design of iCARE

iCARE consisted of 3 functional components: a patient app for
individuals with CHD and their families, a care provider app
for health care providers such as nurses and physicians, and a
cloud platform. The key functions and modules of each
component were first drafted in a mind mapping software
(XMind version 8; XMind, Ltd.) based on the results of the
needs assessment and the overall aims of the system. Through
brainstorming activities within the professional team, a detailed
contextual document that described the framework, modules of
each app and the cloud platform, functions, and design principles
were formulated to guide the development of iCARE. To ensure
the interventions are more effective and reflective of the care
management of individuals with CHD, the components and
schematic diagram of iCARE were designed following the
nursing process [35].

Phase 2: Iterative Design of iCARE

Overview of Stages
In this phase, the system architecture, database, protective
measures to secure individuals’
personal identification
information and health data, and user interface were determined.
The patient app and care provider app were developed to be
compatible with Android-based smartphones, as they are more
popular and affordable in China [27]. We will also develop
iCARE to be compatible on iOS-based smartphones once the
app is identified as being stable in Android-based smartphones.

Design Architecture of iCARE
To increase the scalability and ensure the reliability of the
software, developers need to respond to user’s needs and
consider continuous delivery to establish a culturally and
environmentally adaptive software [36]. Therefore, the
MicroService architecture [36-38], an emerging architectural
design, was applied in the development of iCARE. MicroService
is used for handling complex systems that require highly
repetitive and frequent changes and allows continuous delivery
of software in short circles; it was identified with increased
deployability and modifiability among researchers. Compared
with the monolithic approach, the MicroService architecture
allows us to organize iCARE into a set of small,
single-responsibility units, and self-contained services that can
be developed, operated, tested, and deployed independently

[36]. The MicroService architecture uses a continuous delivery
approach to handle data queries, which makes it easier to achieve
zero-downtime releases in responding to the rapid evolving
needs [35]. After the MicroService architecture is applied, a
majority of the services were allowed to use NoSQL databases
to capture, query, and administer data in iCARE. This greatly
reduced the time and effort in database migration, thereby
substantially improving the efficiency in system development.

iCARE involves transmission of sensitive data, such as personal
identification information, which makes the system subject to
external and internal threats. Therefore, to ensure system
security, protective measures were applied within iCARE. Based
on the MicroService architecture, access control was performed
through the User Account and Authentication service. The 2-way
authentication HTTPS was applied to ensure the security of
data transmission between the app and the back end services.
To ensure secured data transmission and storage, all sensitive
data in the apps were encrypted, and access to the data was
password protected with sophisticated protective mechanisms,
including verifying password strength, limiting number of login
errors, periodically changing password, etc. Meanwhile, the
system has built-in functions in providing database backup and
recovery. In this study, we utilized MongoDB, a document-based
database, and one of the leading NoSQL databases. MongoDB
is used in the MicroService architecture owing to its ability to
provide flexible schema, redundancy, automation, and
scalability. The security of the MongoDB database is mainly
achieved by strengthening the security of the operating system,
authentication, and database. The development of iCARE was
based on international and national data standards (Table S1 in
Multimedia Appendix 1).

User Interface Design and Visualization Design
To fully reflect end users’ needs and achieve the overall
objectives of iCARE, the health professional team initially
drafted the user interfaces of the patient app using Axure RP 8
software (Axure Software Solutions, Inc.). First, the user
interface of the patient app was designed with diet, physical
activity, smoking, and medication adherence as the main
functional structure. Second, as the interventions of iCARE
were developed based on the CAM behavior change model, the
user interface of the patient app was designed to consider the
characteristics of the interventions that addressed the major
moderators and mediators identified within the CAM model,
with patients’ risk perception, outcome expectation, action
planning, self-efficacy, social support, perceived enjoyment,
perceived effectiveness, and coping planning addressed within
the app designing process.

Based on the initial draft, the interface designer prepared a
mock-up (draft) of the planned user interfaces and their
interactions and workflow using Flinto version 26.0.5 [39]
following the 6 user-friendly design principles: structure,
simplicity, visibility, feedback, tolerance, and reuse [40]. To
ensure workflow efficiency, prevent information-entry errors,
and increase end users’ positive experience in using the app,
contrasting color, large font, distinctive graphical shapes, etc.
were utilized to indicate different functions and status, as well
as to increase the accessibility and effectiveness of the app.

JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2021 | vol. 9 | iss. 12 | e26439 | p. 3

Meanwhile, visualization (infographics, figures, and chart) was
used to enhance individuals’ perception on the risks of
nonadherence to health behavior, prescribed medications, etc.

Phase 3: Expert Inspections and Walkthroughs of the
iCARE Prototypes

iCARE was programed using Java and Nodejs, with Linux and
Docker as the operating environment. Following user-centered
design principles, and based on the functions, content, and
architecture of iCARE, the software engineers developed the
fully functional prototypes (alpha and beta versions) of the
patient app and care-provider app [41].

Following the agile approach [42], software engineers iteratively
identified and solved technical/implementational issues during
the development process. The alpha version was initially
developed, released, tested, and retested among technology
professionals. The Gitlab and Docker tools were implemented
for the release management throughout different stages and
environments. Meanwhile, to ensure testability of iCARE, we
used the test-first mindset and practices to define the acceptance
criteria for the system [36].

After resolving technical issues or bugs in the alpha version, a
full version of the app, the beta version, was formulated.
Multiple testing cycles of the beta version of the app were
applied among health care professionals in our team until a final
consensus was reached. The testing of the beta version lasted
for 3 months before the fully functional beta version was found
to be stable and ready for usability testing.

Phase 4: Usability Testing of iCARE With End Users

Overview of Stages
The usability testing of iCARE included 2 stages. Stage I
included 2 steps: a task analysis and a usability evaluation of
the patient app using the modified Health Information
Technology Usability Survey (Health-ITUES) [43]. Stage II
included a usability evaluation using the Health-ITUES among
end users who used the app for 6 months. The usability testing
was designed following the International Organization for
Standardization (ISO) standard 9241-11 [44]. In this study, we
only tested the usability of the patient app among individuals
with CHD. As iCARE was in the testing stage, and the main
focus of this study was to test the experience of patients and the
usability of the patient app, and therefore, we did not include
health care providers (such as nurses) to complete the
Health-ITUES.

Eligible patients who were hospitalized in 3 cardiac units of 2
university-affiliated hospitals in Beijing, China, participated in
stage I usability testing. Patients who had a documented
diagnosis of CHD and reported at least one unhealthy behavior
were included in this study. A more detailed description of study
participants and procedures is provided in Multimedia Appendix
1. The study was approved by the Institutional Review
Committee of the Capital Medical University (Approval No.
2015SY45) and the study hospitals (Beijing An-Zhen Hospital,
Approval No. 2015030; Beijing Chao-Yang Hospital, Approval
No. 20211224). All enrolled participants provided written
informed consent. Fully functional beta version 1 was used for

task analysis and first-step usability testing with the
Health-ITUES; beta version 2 was used for stage II usability
testing with the same questionnaire. As the usability study is
the preliminary work of our randomized controlled trial (RCT),
which tests the effects of iCARE, the entire study has been
registered with the Chinese Clinical Trial Registry (No.
ChiCTR-INR-16010242).

Task Analysis
To identify usability problems as suggested by Maramba et al
[45], individuals with CHD were asked to complete 8 tasks
regarding the main functions of the app (Table S2 in Multimedia
Appendix 1). Eight videos on how to complete the tasks were
made available to all participants (Multimedia Appendices 2-9).
All participants watched each video and practiced the exercises
on the patient app until they were fully confident in completing
each task. Based on the ISO standard 9241-11 [44], using
standardized evaluation forms, we described the usability of
the patient app in terms of the duration in completing each task,
the level of task completeness, usability error, and usability
problems. The duration in completing each task was recorded
using a timer. The level of task completeness (Table S3 in
Multimedia Appendix 1) was ranked on a scale of 1 (no
problem) to 4 (significant problem) [44]. The completeness
rates for each task were calculated by the proportion of
participants who successfully completed the tasks (scored as
“1”). Any usability-related problems were identified when
patients were not able to complete the task. The severity of
usability problems (Table S4 in Multimedia Appendix 1) was
ranked from 0 “I don’t agree that this is a usability problem at
all” to 4 “usability catastrophes: imperative to fix this before
product can be released,” to reflect the level of severity of the
identified problems [46,47]. The usability problem rates for
each task were reflected by the proportion of participants who
reported any problems when completing the tasks. Based on
the ISO standard 9241-11 [44], the effectiveness of the app
refers to the level of task completeness by the users; the efficacy
of the app is expressed by the time (in seconds) the end user
required in completing the tasks.

Usability Evaluation Using the Questionnaire
The usability evaluation was completed using the modified
Health-ITUES [43]. Stage I usability evaluation was conducted
among participants who completed the task analysis on beta
version 1 (January 2019 to March 2019). All participants were
given a small gift (around US $4) after they completed the
questionnaire to compensate for their time. The iCARE system
was then refined according to the results of stage I usability
testing, and the updated version was used in the RCT. Stage II
usability evaluation was performed in June 2020 among
individuals who enrolled in the RCT after they used the patient
app for 6 months. The RCT was a multicenter open-labeled
study that tested the effects of iCARE interventions on major
cardiovascular risk reduction and facilitation of adherence to
health behaviors and medication among individuals with CHD.
The RCT has 3 groups, including the intervention group
(received fully functional iCARE to provide person-centered
interventions that use multiple formats such as comics, videos,
pictures, words to address all the factors in the CAM model
plus routine care), control group 1 (received a person-centered

JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2021 | vol. 9 | iss. 12 | e26439 | p. 4

intervention presented in text format only but did not address
all factors in the CAM model plus routine care), and control
group 2 (received routine care). Participants who were
randomized into the intervention arm in the RCT and used the
app for at least six months were invited to complete the modified
Health-ITUES. Details of the RCT protocol and the results of
the trial will be published in the future. We also retrieved the
number of times patients accessed the app and analyzed the
patients’ preference by identifying the most commonly used
functions of the app over the past 6 months.

Measures

The English version of the Health-ITUES has a Cronbach α of
.85-.92 and a criterion validity of 0.46-0.70 [43]. To evaluate
the usability of the patient app, the questionnaire was customized
to address the type of tool (patient app), the user (individuals
with CHD), and tasks (for reducing cardiovascular risk factors)
of the target app. The Chinese version of the Health-ITUES in
evaluating the patient app was shown to be reliable and valid
among individuals with CHD in this study, with the Cronbach
α at .74-.90 and expert validity at 0.87-0.95. The Health-ITUES
comprises 4 dimensions with 20 items: impact (3 items),
perceived usefulness (9 items), perceived ease of use (5 items),
and user control (3 items). Each item was rated from “1”
(strongly disagree) to “5” (strongly agree) on a 5-point Likert
scale. Total scores ranged from 20 to 100, with higher scores
indicating better usability. In addition, iCARE was considered
satisfactory, useful, and easy to use if the score of patients’
responses was 4 or more on item 7 (using iCARE is useful for
self-management of CHD-related risk factors), item 9 (I am
satisfied with iCARE for self-management of CHD-related risk
factors), and item 14 (learning to operate iCARE is easy for
me), respectively.

Data Analysis

Statistical analysis was conducted using SPSS version 24.0
software (IBM, Corp). Categorical data were described as
frequencies and proportions. Continuous data were tested for
normality using the one-sample Kolmogorov–Smirnov test, and
was described as means and SDs, or medians and interquartile
ranges, as appropriate. Comparisons of participants’ responses
to the Health-ITUES between the first and second usability
testing groups, and comparisons between the usage in terms of
different groups (working status, educational levels, gender,
used the device or not) were performed with the Mann–Whitney
U test (scores of the Health-ITUES) and chi-square test (rates
of satisfaction, usefulness, and easy to use), as appropriate. A
P value <.05 was considered statistically significant. Regarding
the sample size for usability testing, according to a previous
study [43], the average score for each item in the Health-ITUES
is 4 points and the maximum SD for each item is 0.8. Based on
this information, considering 75% of the enrolled participants
could complete the questionnaire and following a 2-sided
1-sample t test (unpaired), we estimated that we would need a
total of 77 individuals in the first usability evaluation to achieve
80% power with α=.05, with an expected average score of 4.3
on each item of the Health-ITUES. As the second usability
testing was conducted among individuals who were enrolled in
the ongoing RCT, we did not calculate the sample size for that
test.

Results

Phase 1: Functional Design of iCARE

The functional components of iCARE illustrating the system
workflow are shown in Figure 1.

JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2021 | vol. 9 | iss. 12 | e26439 | p. 5

Figure 1. The components and schematic diagram of the iCARE. (A1) Initial and periodic assessment through daily monitoring via manual entry by
patients. (A2) Daily monitoring by wearable devices. (A3) Patients’ initial assessment data, follow-up data. (C1) Initial and periodic assessment by
cardiovascular nurses. (C2) Further evaluation, interventions, follow-up. iCARE: Intelligent Individualized Cardiovascular Application for Risk
Elimination; PA: physical activity; BP: blood pressure; CHD: coronary heart disease.

An initial health assessment was conducted by a nurse in our
research team before patients were discharged from the hospital.
The assessment included patients’ demographics (age, gender,
education, etc.), current health behaviors (daily diet, physical
activity, smoking status), preferences regarding health behaviors
(such as preferred fruits, vegetables, types of physical activities),
and medication adherence in the past 30 days before admission
if patients were on medication. Patients’ health information
including blood pressure, glucose level, lipid level, etc. was
also collected. After the initial assessment, a summarized health
report that described patient’s medical and nursing diagnosis,
unhealthy behaviors, and modifiable risk factors, along with
established goals for risk reduction, was generated for patient’s
easy access through the patient app. The tailored goals for risk
reduction were created based on the recommendations in the
cardiovascular 
secondary 
prevention 
guidelines, 
with
consideration of patients’ age, gender, preferences (such as
preferred time and types of physical activity), physical activity
levels, left ventricular ejection fraction, comorbidity, metabolic
status, musculoskeletal condition or disease, cardiac risk profile,

and the current level of habitual physical activity. When the
health care providers completed the baseline assessments on
the care provider app and uploaded the data to the cloud
platform, the recommended final goals for cardiovascular risk
reduction were generated based on the cardiovascular secondary
prevention guidelines and patients’specific health issues. They
were then displayed in patients’ health report and on the home
page of the patient app. Patients can personally modify their
goals to be achieved at different stages if they felt the goals sent
to the patient app were not achievable at the moment. When we
designed the algorithm for the goals of healthy diet, we
considered patients’ gender, age, and physical activity levels to
determine the requirement of daily energy intake. Health-related
data on physical activity, diet, blood pressure, lipid profile,
blood sugar, heart rate, and weight were entered by patients
either manually or through wearable devices. A smart watch
(Ustone) was used to count steps and patients’ heart rate, and
a sensor (Youyi Tang; only for patients with diabetes) was
connected to iCARE to record blood glucose, and the
information was uploaded to the cloud platform for analysis

JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2021 | vol. 9 | iss. 12 | e26439 | p. 6

after patients logged into the app and selected the corresponding
wearable device, which is to be synchronized, by clicking the
upload button. Patients can also upload a photocopy of their
laboratory results via the patient app if they prefer. Researchers
will check the uploaded information in the care provider app or
access it via cloud platform, and manually edit and send tailored
feedback based on the laboratory results. A reminder on daily
health data entry was sent to patients if they failed to enter data
for 3 days, and a call from nurses was made if no further action
was detected within 4 days after the reminder was sent. Instant
and individualized feedback and tailored recommendations for
changing behavior were automatically sent to the care provider
app for verification by cardiovascular nurses based on the
built-in algorithms (examples are shown in Multimedia
Appendix 1). The verified recommendations of interventions
were sent to the patient app for implementation by patients.
Patient’s health behaviors and medication adherence were
evaluated through daily monitoring and periodic assessment
(every 3 months).

The overall functional modules of iCARE are displayed in
Figure S1 in Multimedia Appendix 1. The patient app was
developed with functions allowing individual end users to input
personal data related to health behaviors, prescribed medications,
and physiological indicators, and to review individual health
data and health report, as well as to receive recommended

interventions. The care provider app was developed with the
functions allowing health care providers to view patients’health
data and health report, make health assessment, verify
recommended interventions, provide health consultation as
necessary, and manage follow-up visits. The cloud platform
was developed for health care providers and system manager
with authorized access rights to view patients’ overall health
behaviors, prescribed medications, and physiological indicators.
It was also structured to create and edit the intervention pool,
knowledge, rule, and algorism; assign roles of users; and conduct
data analysis. However, having access to the cloud platform
and care provider app does not allow nurses or physicians to
modify the data entered by patients.

Phase 2: Iterative Design of iCARE

Architecture Design

The MicroService architecture of iCARE is displayed in Figure
2. It included a set of microservices, such as services for the
platform DevOps, patient app, and care provider app, and
general and core services. Each individual microservice has its
separate database (MongoDB) with its own domain data. Instead
of calling services directly, the app and browser get access to
the different services through the application programming
interface gateway which will forward the request to the
appropriate services on the back end. All services were
connected with the JHipster registry.

Figure 2. The system architecture of the iCARE (Intelligent Individualized Cardiovascular Application for Risk Elimination). API: Application
Programming Interface; UAA: User Account and Authentication.

JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2021 | vol. 9 | iss. 12 | e26439 | p. 7

User Interface Design and Visualization Design

Following the user-centered design principle, the user interfaces
for all functional modules were generated by health care
professionals. The user interfaces of the patient app’s home

page are displayed in Figure 3, which included diet, physical
activity, smoking, and medication management with different
colors for easy identification. This arrangement allows easy
access of the selected modules without complicated
manipulation of the app.

Figure 3. The user interface of the home page of the patient app.

To address the major moderators and mediators identified within
the CAM model, techniques were applied to augment the
functions of the related features. For example, to increase
patient’s risk perception, we applied visual comics to increase
individuals’ awareness on potential cardiac events and the
severity of a risk (Figure 4A). Visualization was also used to
increase patients’ perception on the effectiveness of adhering
to healthy behaviors and medication treatment. As shown in
Figure 4E, if good adherence was identified on health behaviors,
medication adherence, blood pressure, blood glucose, and lipid
levels, the Cardiac Health Score will increase. To promote
positive outcome expectation, we also used videos, such as
visualization of their future life with or without modifying their
unhealthy lifestyles, to remind users about the positive effect
of following suggested interventions (Figure 4B). Individualized
action plans such as plans for physical activity were generated

based on patients’ assessment and their preferences, and they
were available on the home page for easy reference (Figure 4C).
In addition, as shown in Figure 4D, to increase patients’
self-efficacy, a peer rank was designed in iCARE to increase
patients’ confidence in maintaining healthy behaviors. We also
sent health promotion messages regarding the positive
expectations from changing unhealthy behaviors to the patient
app. When the patient was at the action stage of behavior
change, a predesigned questionnaire was sent to the patient app
and patients were asked to respond to the questionnaire to
understand their possible barriers. According to their response,
iCARE 
would 
automatically 
match 
the 
predesigned
countermeasures with identified barriers, and push a coping
plan to the patient. Patients can revise the coping plan according
to their personal features and preferences and form a final coping
plan.

JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2021 | vol. 9 | iss. 12 | e26439 | p. 8

Figure 4. Examples of user interfaces to reflect major moderators and mediators identified within the CAM (Contemplation-Action-Maintenance)
model. (A) Risk Perception; (B) Outcome Expectation; (C) Action Planning; (D) Self-efficacy; (E) Perceived Effectiveness; (F) Behavioral Enjoyment;
(G) Social Support; (H) Coping Planning. (B1) Video format; (E1) Visualization of iCARE Cardiac Health Score; (E2) Visualization of 10 years of
cardiovascular risk; (E3) Visualization of atherosclerotic plaque; (F1) Trend chart; (H1) Read-out mode. iCARE: Intelligent Individualized Cardiovascular
App for Risk Elimination; PA: physical activity.

Phase 3: Expert Inspections and Walkthroughs of the
iCARE Prototypes

The software engineers translated the user interfaces into
prototypes. The finalized alpha version of the iCARE prototype
was developed, tested, and discussed among technology
professionals to address technical issues throughout the
development process. The steps involved in testing the iCARE
alpha version are presented in Figure S2 in Multimedia
Appendix 1. To verify the basic functionality of the developed
modules, engineers tested each module independently with
simulated data 10-20 times. To verify the stability of each
module after they were finalized, a dedicated software evaluator
tested the module 5-10 times with simulated patients’ data.

The beta version of the iCARE prototype was released after the
technical issues or bugs identified in the alpha version were
resolved. The beta version of iCARE was released in March
10, 2019. An example regarding the logic of the interfaces on

medication management is displayed in Figure S3 in Multimedia
Appendix 1.

Phase 4: Usability Testing of iCARE With End Users

Overview of Stages

After the fully functional iCARE prototype was formulated, we
carried out a 2-stage usability testing of the iCARE patient app.
Stage I was conducted among 88 patients with CHD after
iCARE was released. Figure 5 shows the flowchart of participant
recruitment for the first-stage usability testing. A total of 159
patients were diagnosed with CHD during the study period,
among which 88 eligible patients participated in the study and
were included in the final analysis. There were 40 patients
eligible for the study but refused to participate due to various
reasons, such as lack of time, conflict of schedule, or simply
being uninterested. The basic characteristics of enrolled
participants for the first-step usability testing are presented in

JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2021 | vol. 9 | iss. 12 | e26439 | p. 9

Table S5 in Multimedia Appendix 1, and they were largely male
(72%, 63/88), with a mean age of 60 (SD 9.9) years.

Figure 5. The flow of patient recruitment for the first step usability evaluation study.

Task Analysis

Figure 6 shows the effectiveness and efficacy of the patient app.
Regarding the effectiveness of the app, the results showed that
a majority of participants (80%, 70/88) perceived the tasks as

easy to complete. The usability problems in completing the 8
tasks were rated from 0% (0/88) to 12.5% (11/88). In terms of
the efficacy of the patient app, the average time used to complete
tasks 1 through 8 ranged from 8 to 39 seconds.

Figure 6. The effectiveness and efficacy evaluation of the patient App based on task analysis.

Table S6 in Multimedia Appendix 1 summarizes the usability
problems that emerged from task analysis. A majority (6/17)
of the usability problems were related to “ease of input, screen

readability, and glanceability” (category 5), which most
frequently occurred while entering data for blood pressure,
blood sugar, blood lipids, or heart rate (task 6). Regarding the

JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2021 | vol. 9 | iss. 12 | e26439 | p. 10

severity of the identified usability problems, 4 were identified
as usability catastrophes. For example, regarding task 6 “to
record blood pressure, blood sugar, blood lipids, or heart rate,”
usability catastrophe was identified when patients reported that
the icon was not easy to manipulate in recording blood pressure,
as the distance between the 2 circles was too close and it was
hard to manipulate.

Usability Evaluation With the Health-ITUES

Table 1 illustrates participants’ perceptions on using iCARE in
the first-stage usability testing. The mean total score of the
Health-ITUES among participants was 90.1 (IQR 83.3-99.0),
with a mean score on each item at 4.5 (SD 0.50). The mean
scores of items related to the impact, perceived usefulness,
perceived ease of use, and user control of the patient app ranged
from 4.3 to 4.6. Meanwhile, based on patients’response to items
7, 9, and 14 of the Health-ITUES, 90% (79/88), 94% (83/88),
and 82% (72/88) of enrolled patients perceived iCARE as
satisfactory, useful, and easy to use, respectively.

After completion of stage I usability testing, the iCARE beta
version was updated and revised based on the results of initial
usability evaluation and task analysis. Such revisions included,
but not limited to, increase of font sizes, modification of icons
(ie, increasing the distance between the 2 circles of the icon for
blood pressure), and utilization of more colors for easy
identification in related user interfaces. The finalized iCARE
version was released and used in the RCT study. Stage II
usability testing was conducted among 61 (85% [52/61] male,
mean age 53 [SD 8.2] years) individuals in the RCT intervention
arm after they used the app for 6 months. The mean total score
of the Health-ITUES was 89.0 (IQR 77.0-99.5), with the mean
score on each item being 4.3 (SD 0.64). The mean scores of
items related to the subdimensions (impact, perceived

usefulness, perceived ease of use, and user control) ranged from
4.2 to 4.5. Among enrolled participants, 89% (54/61) were
satisfied with the use of the app, 93% (57/61) perceived the app
as useful, and 70% (43/61) as easy to use, based on patients’
response to related items (7, 9, and 14). In addition, 52% (32/61)
and 11% (7/61) reported using the patient app at least once a
week or every day, respectively.

As shown in Figure S4 in Multimedia Appendix 1, no significant
changes were found in terms of the total score of the
Health-ITUES (P=.25) as well as the 4 dimensions of the
Health-ITUES (P=.52, .68, .14, and .10 for impact, perceived
usefulness, perceived ease of use, and user control, respectively)
between participants in the first and second stages of usability
testing. There was also no significant difference identified in
terms of the rates of satisfaction (P=.85), usefulness (P=.86),
and ease of use (P=.12) between first and second usability
evaluations.

The number of times individuals accessed the patient app
showed that they used it for a mean of 33.5 (SD 75.3) times
over 6 months. The most frequently visited screens were related
to health recommendation, followed by daily monitoring of
health indicators, health behaviors, and medication adherence
(26179, 1649, and 942 times, respectively). There were no
significant differences in the usage of the patient app among
patients in terms of their working status (retired verses not
retired; P=.13), educational levels (P=.34), and gender (P=.97).
In stage II usability study, 38/61 patients used the smart watch,
and 23 patients did not use the smart watch. The mean usage
of the app among patients who used the smart watch was higher
than those who did not (97.7 vs. 12.5, P<.001) over 6 months.
As the blood glucose monitor was not distributed to patients
with diabetes (10/61 patients) in stage II testing, it was not
available for testing the differences in this regard.

JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2021 | vol. 9 | iss. 12 | e26439 | p. 11

Table 1. Summary of the Health-ITUESa questionnaire.

Second testing,

mean (SD)

First testing,

mean (SD)

Items

4.5 (0.76)
4.6 (0.62)
Impact (Cronbach α: .863)

4.4 (0.74)
4.6 (0.71)
1. I think iCAREb can be a positive addition for heart health for patients

living with CHDc.

4.6 (0.61)
4.6 (0.61)
2. I think iCARE can improve the quality of life of persons living with

CHD.

4.4 (0.96)
4.5 (0.76)
3. iCARE is an important part of meeting my information needs related

to self-management of CHD-related risk factors.

4.4 (0.63)
4.6 (0.51)
Perceived usefulness (Cronbach α: .901)

4.5 (0.67)
4.5 (0.70)
4. Using iCARE makes it easier to self-manage my CHD-related risk

factors.

4.5 (0.67)
4.6 (0.60)
5. Using iCARE enables me to self-manage my CHD-related risk factors

more quickly.

4.4 (0.88)
4.6 (0.60)
6. Using iCARE makes it more likely that I can self-manage my iCARE-

related risk factors.

4.6 (0.62)
4.6 (0.70)
7. Using iCARE is useful for self-management of CHD-related risk

factors.

4.5 (0.72)
4.6 (0.70)
8. I think iCARE presents a more equitable process for self-management

of CHD-related risk factors.

4.5 (0.74)
4.6 (0.68)
9. I am satisfied with iCARE for self-management of CHD-related risk

factors.

4.3 (0.83)
4.5 (0.77)
10. I self-manage my CHD-related risk factors in a timely manner because

of iCARE.

4.4 (0.74)
4.6 (0.63)
11. Using iCARE increases my ability to self-manage my CHD-related

risk factors.

4.3 (0.83)
4.4 (0.78)
12. I am able to self-manage my CHD-related risk factors whenever I

use iCARE.

4.2 (0.76)
4.3 (0.76)
Perceived ease of use (Cronbach α: .899)

4.3 (0.73)
4.3 (0.88)
13. I am comfortable with my ability to use iCARE.

4.0 (1.05)
4.3 (0.90)
14. Learning to operate iCARE is easy for me.

4.0 (1.06)
4.3 (0.95)
15. It is easy for me to become skillful at using iCARE.

4.2 (0.96)
4.5 (0.77)
16. I find iCARE easy to use.

4.3 (0.85)
4.3 (0.97)
17. I can always remember how to log on to and use iCARE.

4.2 (0.81)
4.4 (0.67)
User control (Cronbach α: .743)

4.2 (0.90)
4.3 (0.91)
18. iCARE gives error messages that clearly tell me how to fix problems.

4.2 (0.88)
4.4 (0.89)
19. Whenever I make a mistake using iCARE, I recover easily and

quickly.

4.2 (0.96)
4.7 (0.60)
20. The information (such as online help, on-screen messages, and other

documentation) provided with iCARE is clear.

aThe Modified Health-Information Technology Usability Survey was adopted from Schnall et al [43]. ©[2021] Capital Medical University, Beijing,
China. All rights reserved. Adapted with permission from the “Health IT Usability Evaluation Scale.”
biCARE: Individualized, Intelligent and Integrated Cardiovascular App for Risk Elimination.
cCHD: coronary heart disease.

JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2021 | vol. 9 | iss. 12 | e26439 | p. 12

Discussion

Principal Findings

In this study, we developed an intelligent and individualized
health care management system for individuals with CHD,
iCARE, following a 4-phase user-centered approach. iCARE
was designed to facilitate patients’adherence to multiple health
behaviors (diet, physical activity, and smoking) and preventive
medications. The design and development of iCARE were
realized through incorporation of individualized interventions,
which were developed through a theory-driven and
evidence-based approach and following the principles of the
nursing process. iCARE was developed to reflect designated
interventional strategies that target the mediators and moderators
of the CAM model by using an individualized approach and
visualization techniques. iCARE is an intelligent health
management system that has a set of “IF–THEN” algorithms
that trigger real-time monitoring, person-centered care, and
automatic tailored feedback, based on data from initial
assessment and health monitoring via manual entry or wearable
devices. iCARE includes functions in facilitating health
assessment and monitoring, health behavior and medication
management, 
intervention 
implementation, 
and 
health
counseling. The results of the 2-stage usability testing revealed
that iCARE has acceptable usability. The patient app was
perceived as highly acceptable among individuals with CHD,
with a majority perceiving that the app was satisfactory, useful,
and easy to use.

Comparison With Prior Work

Evidence has shown that lack of scalability in health care
management system can hamper system growth and prevent it
from providing person-centered care [48]. A health care system
adopting multiple services, such as iCARE, requires software
developers to build and deploy the system in a reliable and
timely fashion. Such system should be scalable to adapt to the
evolving needs of patients and health care professionals [48].
The key barrier to achieve this is the selection of a suitable
software architecture [36]. In this study, the MicroService
architecture [49], an emerging architectural style for developing
distributed apps, was applied in the development of iCARE.
With the application of this architecture, our system may have
the advantages in realizing availability, flexibility, scalability,
and allowing multiple services to be scaled up independently
[49,50]. Implementation of the MicroService architecture in
this study allowed us to develop, modify, and deploy iCARE
promptly based on the needs identified in the task analysis and
issues revealed during the first and second usability evaluations.

Overall, the iCARE patient app was perceived as useful and
satisfactory despite several commonly identified usability
problems that were determined to be similar to those of other
health-related self-management apps [51]. The 2-stage usability
evaluation revealed that the mean scores on each item of the
Health-ITUES were all above 4.0, and the end users commented
that iCARE had much better usability in terms of perceived
usefulness. There are multiple reasons for this: First, the
development of the iCARE interventions was evidence based
and followed a theory-driven approach. Second, iCARE was

designed based on the user-centered design principle, which
was shown to be effective in increasing user’s engagement,
thereby making the interactive system useful for targeted end
users [35]. In our preliminary work, we carefully assessed the
needs and preferences of individuals with CHD not only during
the user interface design phase, but also during the development
and modification phases. In addition, as suggested by Dawson
et al [28], to promote sustained and significant behavior change
among users, we encouraged nurses and other health
professionals to be actively involved in the inspections and
walkthroughs of the iCARE prototypes. Second, as outlined in
our previous work [33], to ensure the interventions of iCARE
are evidence based and compliant with clinical guidelines, we
structured them based on available cardiovascular secondary
prevention guidelines [3,30,31]. Meanwhile, an integrated
behavior change theory, the CAM model, was used to guide the
design of iCARE, to ensure interventions are empirically based
[33]. Third, based on a previous study [52], a systematic and
problem-solving approach along with a patient-centered and
goal-oriented method was used in designing our system. To
ensure the functions of iCARE are acceptable and useful, the
components and schematic diagram of iCARE were designed
following the principles of the nursing process, which are
identified as essential to ensure nurses deliver holistic and
patient-centered care [35]. These may have contributed to the
good functionality of iCARE in this study.

Meanwhile, the perceived ease of use of a system by users is
another essential element in developing useful tools [53].
However, achieving the balance between usefulness and ease
of use is challenging as these 2 components are often
contradictory during app development [54]. When designing a
system, some designers sacrifice usefulness to provide ease of
use, or vice versa [54]. For the health management of individuals
with CHD, comprehensive CHD prevention strategies were
recommended by the cardiovascular secondary prevention
guidelines [3,30,31]. Therefore, the system should be designed
with multiple functionalities to incorporate comprehensive CHD
prevention strategies to achieve its optimal usefulness. However,
increasing the amount of functionality in a system may also
increase the treatment-related burden on patients and affect
effective care delivery [55]. This is reflected in our case as well:
the multiple functionalities included in our system increased
the complexity of the system, which might have contributed to
the lower scores on the ease of use functionality of the patient
app during the first and second usability testing phases.

Strategies to address the ease-of-use functionality of the system
are vital to reduce unnecessary burden on individuals. As
identified by Tsopra et al [56], interfaces designed following
usability principles suggested by the Healthcare Information
and Management Systems Society [57], including effective
information presentation, consistency, efficient interactions,
effective use of language, and minimizing cognitive load, were
perceived as ease of use. In our system, we applied several
techniques to improve its ease of use, including the following:
(1) the use of larger font sizes and different colors to improve
readability; (2) the use of a read-out mode to minimize
individuals’ cognitive load; and (3) limiting the amount of text
message and replacing it with figures, infographics, and chart

JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2021 | vol. 9 | iss. 12 | e26439 | p. 13

to ensure effective and visual information presentation. These
techniques are also in agreement with a previous finding [58],
in which the use of color-coded visual layout improved end
user’s perceived ease of use for a system. The findings of the
usability testing in our study indicated that most participants
perceived the patient app as easy to use.

However, we are fully aware that some design and functional
elements of the app still need to be addressed to improve its
ease of use. For example, the number of interfaces on the patient
app should be reduced to promote efficient interactions; some
icons should be designed as simpler and meaningful as possible
to be easily recognized; and the system should provide more
guidance and assistance to end users to avoid human errors and
increase their perceived user control. In addition to the lessons
learned during our system designing and developing process,
future studies should pay more attention to maximize the
learnability component through minimizing cognitive loads
during the designing process, and improve the memorability of
the system that can assist users to reestablish proficiency after
a long period of inactivity [59].

Limitations

This study has several limitations. First, given the nature of the
study, participants who were willing to participate in this study
may be more motivated and more proficient in using the
mHealth apps than the general population. Second, this study
was conducted among patients who were admitted to hospitals
in Beijing, which is a technology-advanced city in China.
However, the 2 study hospitals are the most recognized hospitals
in cardiovascular disease care in China, and patients admitted
to these hospitals are from all over the country, including those
from rural and underserved areas. Third, in the second stage of
usability testing, we only subjectively evaluated the usability
of the patient app; therefore, some usability problems within
our system may not have been discovered adequately. Fourth,
although the needs assessment was analyzed among patients
with CHD, they were not actively involved in the interface
designing process, which might influence the usability of the

patient app. However, their response to stage I usability testing
was applied to modify the system, and the updated version was
used in the RCT and second usability evaluation. Fifth, the care
provider app only has a few basic functions in its current stage;
therefore, its usability was not considered in this study.
However, we will expand the care provider app to include more
fully functional components and evaluate its usability in the
future. In addition, in its current stage, the data from external
devices cannot be automatically uploaded to the patient app
which might influence its usability. Finally, the iCARE system
was developed to be only compatible with Android-based
smartphones, and thus patients who used an iOS-based
smartphones were excluded. Although iPhones are popular in
China, they are very expensive, and are considered as high-end
mobile phones that are similar to the high-end Huawei mobile
phones; besides, iPhone users are usually mid- or high-income
population that live in tech-developed cities, such as Shanghai
or Beijing. Moreover, after completing our RCT, we will
develop an updated iCARE system that will be compatible with
both Android and iOS versions, as many patients who used
iPhones expressed their interest and intention in using iCARE
to manage their diseases and health. Therefore, we will perform
additional usability testing in a more representative population.

Conclusions

This study developed the iCARE system with the aim to
facilitate patients’ adherence to multiple health behaviors and
preventive medications through incorporation of theory-driven,
evidence-based, individualized interventions and tailored
automatic feedback, following the CAM model and principles
of the nursing process. iCARE was demonstrated to be highly
satisfactory, useful, and easy to use among individuals with
CHD and had acceptable usability. We are currently evaluating
the effectiveness of iCARE in patients with CHD via a
randomized clinical trial to better understand the real-time
usability of the app, as well as patients’ experience in using the
app. In future studies, we will revise iCARE based on the
findings of this study and develop a version that is compatible
with iOS-based smartphones.