EDITED BY
Edith Talina Luhanga,
Carnegie Mellon University Africa, Rwanda

REVIEWED BY
Victoria Tiase,
The University of Utah, United States
Elena Vlahu-Gjorgievska,
University of Wollongong, Australia

*CORRESPONDENCE
Yu-Peng Chen

yupengchen@uﬂ.edu

RECEIVED 06 November 2023

ACCEPTED 05 April 2024

PUBLISHED 22 April 2024

CITATION
Chen Y-P, Woodward J, Shankar MN, Bista D,
Ugwoaba U, Brockmann A, Ross KM, Ruiz J
and Anthony L (2024) MyTrack+: Human-
centered design of an mHealth app to support
long-term weight loss maintenance.
Front. Digit. Health 6:1334058.
doi: 10.3389/fdgth.2024.1334058

COPYRIGHT
© 2024 Chen, Woodward, Shankar, Bista,
Ugwoaba, Brockmann, Ross, Ruiz and
Anthony. This is an open-access article
distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The
use, distribution or reproduction in other
forums is permitted, provided the original
author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are
credited and that the original publication in
this journal is cited, in accordance with
accepted academic practice. No use,
distribution or reproduction is permitted
which does not comply with these terms.

MyTrack+: Human-centered
design of an mHealth app to
support long-term weight loss
maintenance

Yu-Peng Chen
1*, Julia Woodward
2, Meena N. Shankar
3,
Dinank Bista
1, Umelo Ugwoaba
3, Andrea Brockmann
3,
Kathryn M. Ross
3, Jaime Ruiz
1 and Lisa Anthony
1

1Department of Computer and Information Science and Engineering, University of Florida, Gainesville,
FL, United States, 2Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of South Florida,
Tampa, FL, United States, 3Department of Clinical and Health Psychology, University of Florida,
Gainesville, FL, United States

A growing body of research has focused on the utility of adaptive intervention
models
for
promoting
long-term
weight
loss
maintenance;
however,
evaluation of these interventions often requires customized smartphone
applications. Building such an app from scratch can be resource-intensive. To
support a novel clinical trial of an adaptive intervention for weight loss
maintenance, we developed a companion app, MyTrack+, to pair with a main
commercial app, FatSecret (FS), leveraging a user-centered design process for
rapid
prototyping
and
reducing
software
engineering
efforts.
MyTrack+
seamlessly integrates data from FS and the BodyTrace smart scale, enabling
participants to log and self-monitor their health data, while also incorporating
customized questionnaires and timestamps to enhance data collection for the
trial. We iteratively reﬁned the app by ﬁrst developing initial mockups and
incorporating feedback from a usability study with 17 university students. We
further improved the app based on an in-the-wild pilot study with 33
participants in the target population, emphasizing acceptance, simplicity,
customization options, and dual app usage. Our work highlights the potential
of using an iterative human-centered design process to build a companion
app that complements a commercial app for rapid prototyping, reducing
costs, and enabling efﬁcient research progress.

KEYWORDS

mHealth apps, human-centered design, weight management, adaptive interventions,
self-monitoring, feedback, visualization, behavior change

1 Introduction

In recent years, there has been a growing interest in utilizing mobile health (mHealth)
applications (apps) to support and enhance various aspects of healthcare (1). Obesity
remains a substantial public health challenge in the United States (2), and extended
care programs have proven effective in supporting long-term weight loss maintenance
(3, 4). In the weight management arena, researchers have been using smartphone apps
that allow individuals to track weight and weight-related behaviors (e.g., dietary intake
and physical activity) to investigate novel adaptive intervention models, such that
intervention may be “triggered” by different patterns in individual behavior (5–7). To
provide extended-care support at times when individuals are at high risk for weight

TYPE Original Research
PUBLISHED 22 April 2024
|
DOI 10.3389/fdgth.2024.1334058

01

regain, our team has designed and developed an adaptive weight
maintenance
intervention
(8).
The
evaluation
of
such
an
intervention often requires development of an instrumented app
with customized functionalities. However, building an app from
scratch can be resource-intensive, especially when the main focus
is on intervention development and outcomes assessment rather
than comprehensive app development.
An alternative approach is to develop a companion app that
harnesses the capabilities of the main commercial app through its
open-source API. The commercially popular weight management
app FatSecret (9) offers an API (10), logging interfaces, and
comprehensive databases for tracking weight-related data; however,
further instrumenting was needed to meet our speciﬁc goals, such
as sending customized questionnaires. Thus, to support the
implementation of our intervention and its evaluation in a
randomized
controlled
clinical
trial
(8),
we
designed
and
developed a companion app, which we called the MyTrack+ app,
to pair with the FatSecret app. Our main goal was to create a
seamless logging experience for participants, ensuring smooth data
collection.
MyTrack+
integrates
data
from
FatSecret
and
a
BodyTrace smart scale (11), enabling participants to log and self-
monitor their health data, while also incorporating customized
questionnaires and timestamps to support our research aims.
These ecological momentary assessment (12) questionnaires allow
us to collect data necessary for implementing our intervention and
enabling future exploratory studies. As a supplementary objective,
we also integrated evidence-based behavior change techniques
aimed at increasing participants’ motivation, self-efﬁcacy, and app
engagement, thereby enhancing adherence to their health objectives.
To ensure the effectiveness and user-friendliness of MyTrack+,
we followed an iterative, user-centered approach. Initially, we
developed app mockups and created a high-ﬁdelity prototype
based on expert evaluations. Subsequently, we conducted a
usability study with 17 university students and reﬁned our app
based on user feedback and insights from our health experts.
Finally, we conducted
an
in-the-wild
pilot
study
with
33
participants from the target population: adults from the general
public who had reported recent weight loss and who were
interested in weight loss maintenance. This pilot study provided
valuable ﬁndings related to acceptability and usability, and we
further reﬁned our app based on these ﬁndings. This approach
facilitated rapid prototyping, iterative testing, and reﬁnement of
the app, while incorporating user feedback and the expertise
of health experts in weight loss maintenance. Currently, our
app has been deployed in an ongoing clinical trial evaluating
an adaptive intervention for supporting long-term weight
loss maintenance (8).
Our work contributes to the literature by presenting an example
of how user-centered design can beneﬁt mHealth research. We
document the iterative design process of a tailored mHealth app,
speciﬁcally designed for research purposes, and its seamless
integration with a commercial app. We discuss the implications of
our design process, highlighting the potential beneﬁts of leveraging
commercial
apps
for
rapid
prototyping,
thereby
reducing
implementation costs and enabling researchers to make efﬁcient
progress in their investigations for similar projects.

2 Related work

We present relevant prior work in the areas of (1) the design
and use of mHealth apps for health behavior change, and (2) the
use of user-centered design processes in mHealth apps in general.

2.1 mHealth apps for health behavior
change

Smartphone app-based interventions have gained signiﬁcant
attention in recent years (1). Researchers (13, 14) have identiﬁed
the beneﬁt of various behavior change techniques, such as goal
setting,
self-monitoring,
feedback,
and
social
support,
for
improving dietary intake and physical activity within app-based
interventions. Zhao et al. (13) conducted a literature review of 23
articles that focused on the use of mobile phone apps to promote
health behavior changes in peer-reviewed journals. The authors
found that out of the reviewed studies, 17 of them reported
statistically signiﬁcant outcomes indicating a positive inﬂuence
on
the
desired
behavior
change.
Notably,
self-monitoring
emerged
as
the
most
frequently
utilized
behavior
change
technique, being employed in 12 of the studies. Dounavi and
Tsoumani (14) also conducted a systematic literature review with
the speciﬁc goal of identifying the existing evidence on the
effectiveness of mobile health technology in promoting weight
management behaviors, such as physical activity and healthy
eating. Out of the 39 analyzed studies, the authors found that
high levels of engagement with a mobile health app led to
satisfactory treatment adherence, resulting in successful weight
loss and maintenance.
Nevertheless, there are systematic literature reviews that ﬁnd
only modest evidence in support of the effectiveness of mobile
apps in improving health behaviors or outcomes (15–17), in
contrast to the positive evidence mentioned earlier. Based on a
review of 27 studies, Schoeppe et al. (15) stated that multi-
component
interventions
seem
to
be
more
effective
than
standalone app interventions and emphasized the need for
further conﬁrmation through controlled trials. Furthermore,
current mHealth apps often provide extensive functionalities
and complex interfaces, which may not necessarily contribute to
their effectiveness (18–20). Lyzwinski et al. (18) conducted a
literature
review
of
qualitative
studies
focused
on
user
perspectives and experiences with mHealth for weight loss.
From their review of 20 articles, the authors identiﬁed that the
most preferred apps were those that were simple and easy to
use. Haggag et al. (19) performed an extensive analysis of
mHealth app user reviews by extracting and translating over 5
million user reviews for 278 mHealth apps. The authors’
ﬁndings revealed that providing users with more information or
functionalities than necessary can result in user frustration and
reduced app usage.
This background presents an opportunity for developing a
minimalist app that only focuses on key factors for behavioral
change, which we emphasize in our work. Together with
trained interventionists and behavioral health experts, we are

02

using
our
app
in
an
ongoing
clinical
trial
to
assess
adaptive interventions aimed at supporting long-term weight
loss maintenance.

2.2 User-centered design for mHealth apps

Previous research has emphasized the importance of user-
centered design1 processes in developing effective mHealth apps for
various health domains, such as self-management of chronic
conditions (21, 22), mental health (23), persons living with HIV
(24, 25), women in substance use recovery (26), and participants
with fall risk (27). Schnall et al. (24) conducted formative research,
which included focus groups, participatory design sessions, and
usability evaluations, to guide the development of a health
management app for individuals living with HIV. Their review of
15 existing apps meeting their inclusion criteria revealed that none
of them integrated all the functionalities identiﬁed during their
formative work, pointing to a signiﬁcant lack of clinically-backed
design choices in current mHealth apps. The authors further
utilized a user-centered model to iteratively develop and reﬁne
mock-ups, creating an mHealth app tailored for persons living
with HIV (25). Their ﬁndings demonstrated that a user-centered
approach offered a deeper understanding of their target users’
speciﬁc requirements and facilitated the creation of an mHealth
app that better aligned with user needs. Additionally, Eaves et al.
(26) applied user-centered design in developing an mHealth app
to support women in substance use recovery. Through an iterative
design process, the authors showed that users’ feedback helped
tailor an mHealth app to maximize usability, access, and safety for
this at-risk population. Lastly, Hsieh et al. (27) aimed to provide
personalized fall risk screening for clinical populations, including
older adults, individuals with Multiple Sclerosis, and wheeled-
device users, by utilizing mHealth apps. The authors developed
the interface of each app with a user-centered design approach
through iterative usability testing and semi-structured interviews.
The authors then tested their apps in real-world settings and
demonstrated the effectiveness of their apps in measuring fall risk
(comparable to clinical assessments) to enhance user safety.
To develop our minimalist weight management app, we
employed a user-centered iterative design process to understand
users’ mental models, focusing solely on essential features. This
approach enabled efﬁcient progress in our research investigation
and simpler data logging to support our research goals.

3 Designing MyTrack+: goals and
features

We present the initial set of design goals and app features,
brainstormed in concert with our behavioral health expert team

members to ensure the MyTrack+ app would meet all the goals
of the broader clinical trial.

3.1 Design goals

Our main goal was to support the implementation and
evaluation of an adaptive weight maintenance intervention. Prior
work had established that key data points required for such an
intervention include participants’ self-weighing frequency, self-
monitored dietary intake and physical activity, and self-rated
measures of weight-related variables (e.g., hunger) (28). Our
clinical trial (8) serves as a testbed for an automated “trigger”
algorithm which can detect when participants may be at risk of
relapse based on their logging or other lapses (29). Thus, our
overarching goal was to facilitate data collection during the
clinical trial by creating a seamless and effortless logging
experience for the participants. Additionally, we aimed to employ
behavior change techniques to support participants in achieving
their health objectives. By integrating evidence-based strategies,
we aimed to enhance motivation, engagement, and self-efﬁcacy,
supporting sustainable behavior change and promoting successful
long-term
weight
loss
maintenance.
Informed
by
guidance
provided by health experts in long-term weight maintenance and
prior work on applying behavior change techniques for health
behavior change (30), we formulated the following design goals
for our study.

3.1.1 Goal 1 (G1): enhance usability for effortless
logging
We aimed to minimize the effort required for participants to
log their data by designing an intuitive and user-friendly
interface that is easily accessible and navigable. By reducing the
effort needed to log data, participants are more likely to engage
with the app consistently (14). When the interface is intuitive
and user-friendly, it enhances the overall user experience and
encourages active participation (14).

3.1.2 Goal 2 (G2): deliver necessary instruments
We aimed to deliver research-oriented questionnaires to collect
data necessary for implementing the adaptive weight intervention
and enabling further exploration. The ubiquitous nature of mobile
devices enables low-effort self-reporting in real-time through
ecological momentary assessment (EMA) (31). In mHealth apps,
EMA measures (e.g., questionnaires assessing an individual’s
thoughts, feelings, and behaviors and the context in which these
occur) are usually delivered repeatedly over time, in the natural
environment (31). In our case, questionnaires prompt participants
to self-rate, on 7-point Likert scales, factors that had been
hypothesized previously to be associated with weight regain (28).

3.1.3 Goal 3 (G3): facilitate self-monitoring and
provide feedback
In addition to collecting essential research data, the previous
two goals serve the purpose of facilitating self-monitoring and
self-reﬂection. We further aimed to deliver personalized health
1Also referred to as human-centered design.

03

information to participants in the form of summary graphs,
providing tailored feedback on their progress. According to
Bandura’s social cognitive theory (SCT) (30), self-monitoring
increases the user’s awareness of their progress and feedback
provides an opportunity for them to adjust their strategy (30).
Self-monitoring refers to a person’s action of keeping a record of
details related to performance of the target behavior (e.g., logging
the
duration
and
intensity
of
performing
certain
physical
activities). Such action is a part of the self-regulatory mechanism
that is required for beneﬁcial behaviors to be achieved and
maintained (30). Moreover, for goals to be effective, summary
feedback on self-reported details is also crucial. Such feedback
provides an opportunity for individuals to adjust the level or
direction of their effort or to adjust their strategies to match
what the goal requires (30). Prior work showed that a system
that facilitates the user’s self-monitoring and provides feedback
can effectively increase physical activity (32) and motivate
healthy eating (33).

3.1.4 Goal 4 (G4): increase motivation and self-
efﬁcacy
Our secondary objective was to harness the power of behavior
change techniques inspired by the principles of goal-setting
theory to increase participants’ motivation and self-efﬁcacy.
Locke and Latham’s goal-setting theory (GST) (34) states that
having a goal is a crucial cognitive determinant of human
behavior and performance. According to the GST (34), there is
a positive, linear relationship between goal difﬁculty and levels
of effort and performance. The authors found that effective
goals should be challenging enough to induce effort for an
individual to be motivated but should not be so difﬁcult that
they cause repeated failures. Goal setting has been shown to be
an important factor in supporting behavior change in various
health ﬁelds (35, 36). Furthermore, Bandura’s social cognitive
theory
(SCT)
(30)
holds
that
self-efﬁcacy
is
a
major
determining factor for behavior change. Self-efﬁcacy is an
individual’s belief in their ability to execute a certain behavior
in a given situation. Repeated successes play a signiﬁcant role in
boosting self-efﬁcacy, as past achievements have a notable
inﬂuence
on
self-perception
(30).
Therefore,
the
keys
to
accomplishing
long-term
health
behavior
changes
involve
setting intermediate goals and making persistent efforts towards
their achievement. Individuals can enhance their self-efﬁcacy by
actively monitoring their own behavior and receiving feedback
that highlights progress towards goal attainment (34). Previous
studies have focused on increasing the user’s self-efﬁcacy to
motivate health behavior change (37, 38).

3.1.5 Goal 5 (G5): promote app engagement and
adherence to health objectives
To achieve this goal, rooted in behavior change theories
(30, 39), we aimed to encourage app engagement and adherence
to health objectives by incorporating notiﬁcations and expert
support into our system. The Fogg Behavior Model (39)
emphasizes the importance of providing triggers to increase app
engagement and adherence. Prior work has also pointed out

that mHealth app notiﬁcations can aid in behavioral change
through increasing user app engagement and adherence to
health
objectives
(40).
Additionally,
the
Supportive
Accountability model proposed by Mohr et al. (41) argues that
human
support
increases
adherence
to
electronic
health
interventions through accountability to a human coach. Social
persuasion provided by a human coach can also enhance an
individual’s self-efﬁcacy, thereby increasing motivation (30).
Being
encouraged
to
perform
certain
behavior
by
others
through suggestions can enhance an individual’s belief in their
capability of successfully executing such behavior (42). Previous
studies
found
that
users
consider
consultation
and
communication with health experts to be a crucial functionality
in mHealth apps (24, 43).

3.2 Initial design features

To achieve our design goals, we considered the following initial
design features in MyTrack+.

3.2.1 Interfaces for logging weight-related
behaviors
While this section primarily focuses on designing MyTrack+,
to achieve G1 and also streamline the software engineering
process, we utilized the existing features in a well-established
commercial
app,
FatSecret,
and
a
BodyTrace
smart
scale
(Table 1). FatSecret provides an interface for logging consumed
food
and
drinks,
including
portion
sizes
and
nutritional
information such as calories and macronutrient/micronutrient
composition. It also includes features that enhance its usability,
such as barcode scanning for food items and the “Recently
Eaten” and “Most Eaten” options, reducing logging efforts. Users
can also log exercises with duration and access a comprehensive
database
of
physical
activities.
Additionally,
our
system
incorporates the use of a BodyTrace smart scale that utilizes
cellular network connectivity to transmit participant weight data
to BodyTrace servers. This eliminates the need for participants to
manually log their weight data, as developers can directly request
the information from the servers.

TABLE 1 Our mHealth system incorporates three main components: (1)
our
MyTrack+
app,
(2)
the
FatSecret
commercial
app,
and
(3)
a
BodyTrace smart scale.

This system was designed to facilitate the self-monitoring of health data relevant to
weight management, including weight, dietary intake, physical activity, and weight-
related factors (via questionnaires).

04

3.2.2 Navigation
Achieving effortless logging (G1) requires an intuitive app with
easy navigation. We focused on facilitating both cross-app
navigation
(from
MyTrack+
to
FatSecret)
and
within-app
navigation (between different pages within our app).

3.2.3 Research-oriented questionnaires
To achieve G2, we utilized MyTrack+ to conduct EMA through
weekly and end-of-week check-in questionnaires. Questionnaire
content was developed by our team of health experts, while the
software engineering team dedicated their efforts to designing the
user interface. This feature also supports the achievement of G3 by
allowing users to assess their progress through rating various factors
that were previously hypothesized to be linked to weight regain (28).

3.2.4 Notiﬁcations
To achieve G2, we implemented notiﬁcations that appear both
outside the app (i.e., push notiﬁcations) and inside the app (i.e., in-
app notiﬁcations). These notiﬁcations serve as reminders for users
to reﬂect on their weekly progress while also accomplishing G5. A
survey found that designers use notiﬁcations as a way to facilitate
behavioral change by increasing user engagement with the app
and promoting adherence to health objectives (44).

3.2.5 Overall summary graphs
To achieve G3, we included summaries for calories remaining,
physical activity, and weight in the form of summary graphs, as
providing visual feedback on self-reported data is an effective
strategy for boosting physical activity levels and promoting
healthier
eating
habits
(14).
These
graphs
also
aid
in
accomplishing G4, as they enhance self-efﬁcacy by empowering
the user to visualize and review their past achievements.

3.2.6 Goal setting and monitoring
To achieve G4, we implemented features that enable users to
set their goals. We also implemented features that enable the
user to track their progress towards intermediate sub-goals,
contributing to both G3 in providing feedback on self-reported
data
and
G4
by
promoting
self-efﬁcacy
through
the
accomplishment of repeated small successes.

3.2.7 Expert support
To
achieve
G5,
we
created
a
support
page
that
facilitates
communication
between
users
and
health
experts,
as
accountability
to
a
human
coach
has
been
demonstrated to enhance adherence (41). This feature also
contributes to G4 by promoting self-efﬁcacy through social
encouragement (30).

4 Iterative design of MyTrack+

To achieve our design goals and determine how to support
the features we brainstormed, we followed a user-centered
approach
with
iterative
evaluation
of
prototypes
and
corresponding incremental changes, encompassing multiple
stages (Figure 1). The process involved ﬁrst developing app
mockups and designing the backend system. We developed the
ﬁrst version of a high-ﬁdelity prototype based on feedback
from health experts in our team and through internal pilot
tests with our human-computer interaction (HCI) researchers.
Subsequently,
we
conducted
a
usability
study
with
17
university
students
to
gain
insights
into
ease
of
use,
preferences, and technical issues. We reﬁned our app based on
feedback received from users and insights provided by our
health experts. Finally, we conducted an in-the-wild pilot
study involving 33 participants from the general public, and
then further reﬁned our app based on feedback from both
participants and our health experts.
Our
transdisciplinary
team
included
faculty,
staff,
and
graduate students with expertise in obesity treatment, clinical
psychology, computer science, and human-computer interaction
(HCI). The four-member health expert team comprised of a
faculty clinical psychologist with 17 years of experience in
obesity treatment, a registered dietitian with 21 years of
research experience, and two Clinical and Health Psychology
graduate students with training in obesity treatment. The six-
member computer science team comprised of two faculty
members with a combined total of 25 years of research
experience in HCI and 15 years of industrial experience in
software engineering, and four graduate students with training
in computer science and HCI.

FIGURE 1
Our user-centered design process involving iterative evaluation and incremental reﬁnement of app prototypes. The elements colored in blue indicate
stages where we conducted brainstorming sessions, evaluations, and/or studies. Speciﬁcally, (1) HCI researchers were recruited for internal evaluation,
(2) Computer Science students were recruited for the usability testing, and (3) the target users were recruited for the pilot study. We engaged our
health experts for each of these stages to ensure that the incremental changes we made were aligned with recommendations from the weight
management literature. The elements colored in white represent the result of the previous element.

05

4.1 Initial mockups and backend design

We designed the following mockup components based on our
design goals and initial features (Figure 2). We provide a detailed
explanation of each component in the same order as our initial
design features listed in Section 3.2.

4.1.1 Navigation
At the bottom of MyTrack+ (Figure 2-1), we implemented a
navigation
panel
that
includes
the
“Home”,
“Diary”,
and
“Support” tabs. These tabs allow the user to navigate to the
Home screen, FatSecret, and the Support screen from any screen.
We implemented the “Diary” tab to facilitate the navigation from
MyTrack+
to
FatSecret.
While
we
lack
control
over
the
implementation
of
the
FatSecret
app,
users
can
navigate
backward using the built-in back navigation feature on both
iOS and Android devices. We also implemented arrows within
in-app notiﬁcations and summary graphs to visually indicate
clickable components.

4.1.2 Questionnaires
We created a Questionnaire screen (Figure 2-2) that displays
questions developed by our health experts. We implemented a
7-point Likert scale slider for each question, allowing users to
self-rate the weight-related factors. Users can navigate to this
screen through in-app notiﬁcations (Figure 2-3).

4.1.3 Notiﬁcations
We
designed
notiﬁcations
based
on
empirically-derived
notiﬁcation design recommendations in mHealth apps, including
position, aesthetics, and content (44). We placed the in-app
notiﬁcation at the top of the Home screen (Figure 2-3) to ensure
that it is prominently visible and does not interfere with the
main content of the app. We also implemented a transient
warning message that appears at the bottom of the user’s current
screen and disappears after ﬁve seconds. This brief message can
capture the attention of users who may not be actively looking at
the top of the home screen or may be engaged in a different part
of the app’s interface. We included an arrow to indicate that the
notiﬁcation is clickable and a “warning” icon to indicate the
importance of clicking on the notiﬁcation. To create an effective
visual effect, we chose orange as the background color for the in-
app notiﬁcation, leveraging its complementary nature to our
main color theme of gray blue.

4.1.4 Summary graphs
Our summary visualization includes graphs for physical
activity and weight data (Figure 2-4). Our app displays data
summary on a week-to-week basis (Sunday to Saturday), while
providing the functionality for the user to monitor tracking
history of previous weeks. Regarding the type of weekly summary
graphs, we explored line graphs (Figure 2-4-1) and bar charts
(Figure 2-4-2). Additionally, for tracking physical activity, we
explored different units, including total duration in minutes or
total burned calories.

4.1.5 Dietary intake and goal indicators
Our app displays summary graphs for dietary intake (Figure 2-5).
To display daily calorie goal and the weekly calorie intake, we
considered two options: (1) display both graphs on the Home
screen (Figure 2-5-1) or (2) display the daily calorie goal on the
Home screen and link it to a separate screen for daily breakdown
and weekly summary (Figure 2-5-2). For the daily calorie goal, we
considered a balance equation, a circular progress bar, and a pie
chart. For visualizing the detailed breakdown of daily and weekly
calorie intake, we considered a bar chart and a pie chart, with text
information
displayed
below
and
alongside.
Additionally,
we
designed goal-monitoring features, including textual information in
a
daily
summary
indicating
the
calorie
goal,
total
calories
consumed, and remaining calories. In the weekly graph, a line
representing the calorie goal was incorporated.

4.1.6 Support screen
On the Support screen (Figure 2-6), the app presents the
message: “Fill out the form below and a specialist will contact
you.” We introduced a “specialist” character to indicate real
human support, which has been shown to be effective in
increasing engagement (40). Since our support is provided
through phone, we designed open text input for the user to
input their phone number and indicate their preferred call time.

4.1.7 Backend design
To ensure a seamless data collection process and smooth dual
app usage, the MyTrack+ app focuses on integrating data from
multiple
sources:
FatSecret
and
BodyTrace.
Speciﬁcally,
we
implemented three backend components for this feature. We
integrated the Firestore Database (45) into our system for data
storage.
We
built
Google
Cloud
Functions
(46)
for
synchronization between our app and FatSecret. Google Cloud
runs scheduled Cloud Functions to request data from FatSecret’s
server using the API they provide. We provided a “Diary” tab in
the navigation panel at the bottom of the Home screen. This
allows the user to navigate from MyTrack+ to FatSecret from any
screen.
In
addition,
the
FatSecret
API
does
not
include
timestamps for self-monitored weight, caloric intake, or physical
activity. However, the inclusion of timestamps is crucial for
supporting the implementation and evaluation of our adaptive
weight maintenance intervention, as well as for conducting
further exploratory study, such as developing novel models to
proximally predict weight change and supporting future adaptive
intervention development. Thus, in our backend system, we
appended timestamps to the data collected in FatSecret and
BodyTrace when requesting data from those applications’ servers.

4.2 High-ﬁdelity prototype 1

In our iterative process of improving the app to fulﬁll our
design goals, we ﬁrst sought guidance from our team of health
experts and performed internal pilot tests with our team of HCI
researchers. Based on feedback from these experts and researchers,
we developed the initial high-ﬁdelity prototype (Figure 3). We

06

FIGURE 2
The app mockup components. The labels correspond to the descriptions provided in Section 4.1: (1) The navigation panel. (2) The Questionnaire
screen. (3) The in-app notiﬁcation. (4) The summary graphs for physical activity and weight data with two design options: (4-1) a line graph and
(4-2) a bar chart. (5) The calorie intake summary with two design options: (5-1) display both daily and weekly summaries on the Home screen and
(5-2) display the daily summary on the Home screen and link it to another screen for weekly summary. (6) The Support screen.

07

detail
our
iterative
improvement
process,
highlighting
our
design goals.
To facilitate effortless logging (G1) through intuitive navigation
and user-friendly interfaces, we reﬁned navigation and questionnaire
components, following suggestions from our HCI researchers who
drew upon previous studies in the mHealth ﬁeld (14). We integrated
icons into the tabs of the navigation menu, providing visual cues for
easy navigation (Figure 3-1). Additionally, we highlighted the
keywords within the questions in the questionnaires to draw
attention (Figure 3-2), aiming for G2. For example, we emphasized
the “hungry” keyword using bold text in the question that prompts
the participant to rate their hunger: “How hungry were you during
the past week?” Lastly, we introduced shading to the arrows in
summary graphs (Figure 3-3) to indicate whether the user can
navigate and review data from past weeks (G3).
To enhance self-awareness (G3), boost motivation (G4), and
increase engagement (G5), we incorporated feedback from our
health experts to reﬁne components such as summary graphs,
dietary intake detail, and the Support screen. For the physical
activity summary graph (Figure 3-4), we used minutes instead of
“calorie burned” as the unit because our intervention goals are
set in minutes, based on guidelines issued by both the American
College of Sports Medicine (ACSM) (47) and the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) (48). For the weight
summary graph (Figure 3-5), we selected the line graph because
it effectively shows the change of weight over time. For dietary
intake summary (Figure 3-6), our app displays only the daily
calorie goal summary on the Home screen to avoid redundancy.
We opted for a balance equation format because it was perceived
as more easily understandable and preferable at a glance, while a
circular progress bar received unfavorable feedback. Clicking on

the balance equation redirects the user to the dietary intake
detail screen, which features two tabs at the top (Figure 3-7). For
daily breakdown, based on feedback from our health experts, the
pie chart was deemed confusing. Thus, we opted for a vertical
subtraction expression to enhance clarity (Figure 3-8). This
design presents the total calories consumed for the day at the
top, followed by a breakdown of calories consumed by meals
(e.g., breakfast, lunch, dinner, snacks) listed below, and concludes
with the remaining calories at the bottom. For the weekly dietary
intake summary, we opted for a bar chart representation, as it
effectively
emphasizes
the
line
indicating
the
calorie
goal
(Figure 3-9). Supplementary numerical values are included below
the bar chart, displaying the calories consumed and the deviation
from the goal (i.e., daily calorie goal - calorie consumed) for each
day of the week. Lastly, our health experts provided feedback
indicating that incorporating an open text input for users to
express the topics they would like to discuss is beneﬁcial for both
the user and the health professional (Figure 3-10).

4.3 Usability study

To iteratively assess and enhance the high-ﬁdelity prototype of
the MyTrack+ app, we performed a lab usability study involving 17
students majoring in Computer Science from our local university.
Our goal is to evaluate MyTrack+’s general usability and identify
basic bugs and major usability ﬂaws. Although Computer Science
students were not our main target users, according to Nielsen
(49), involving students in the domain of interest from a local
university in usability testing can still yield valuable feedback. We
chose to recruit students as convenience samples (50) because (1)

FIGURE 3
The ﬁrst high-ﬁdelity prototype. The leftmost screenshot displays the Home screen, with the components arranged from top to bottom following the
same order as in the actual app. The labels’ order follows our description in Section 4.2: (1) Navigation panel with icons. (2) End-of-week questionnaire.
(3) Shading of the arrows in summary graphs. (4) Physical activity summary graph. (5) Weight summary graph. (6) Daily calorie goal. (7) Tabs for
selecting types of details. (8) Daily dietary intake details. (9) Weekly dietary intake details. (10) Open text input for topics on the Support screen.

08

they are easier to reach and more readily available and (2) they
could also be potential users of weight management apps. We
listed our study in the Computer Science department’s Research
Participation System to recruit students enrolled in Computer
Science classes. We excluded one participant due to missing data.
The mean (SD) age of the 16 participants was 21.7 (3.3) years
and 3 participants (19.8%) were women.
To address potential limitations in our lab study, which may
not reﬂect real-world stress, and because we recruited university
students who may not have a weight maintenance goal after
weight loss, we used four task scenarios in the usability study to
evaluate our prototype:

• Scenario 1 (G1, G3, and G4). We explained the context of use
for this app being to help people manage their weight after
weight loss. Our ﬁrst scenario asked the participant to explore
the Home screen with summary information and the dietary
intake detail screen with this in mind.
• Scenario 2 (G5). We described a scenario where the user was
having trouble staying on track with their weight management
program and would like someone to contact them in order to
talk about it.
• Scenario 3 (G2). We described a scenario where the user was
experiencing a real-world stress (e.g., promotion at work) that
demanded extra hours and attention. Participants were asked
to ﬁll out the end-of-week questionnaire, which is a part of
their weight management program every Sunday. The end-of-
week questionnaire includes two questions prompting the
participant to rate two weight-related factors, which are
necessary for our adaptive intervention.
• Scenario 4 (G2). We then asked the participant to ﬁll out the
weekly check-in questionnaire, under the same circumstance
(i.e., experiencing a real-world stress that demanded extra hours
and attention). The weekly check-in questionnaire includes 12
questions prompting the participant to rate 12 weight-related

factors, which are also necessary for our adaptive intervention.
In our clinical trial, this questionnaire is sent on a random day
between Monday and Saturday (with participants unaware of
the day that the questionnaire will be asked).

We showed the participants the MyTrack+ app and read the
description of our scenarios. They were then asked to perform
tasks in our app and answer questions about the usability of the
app while thinking aloud (51). They then completed a System
Usability Scale (SUS) questionnaire (52) and received extra
course credit as compensation. Our study protocol was approved
by our university’s Institutional Review Board (IRB).

4.4 High-ﬁdelity prototype 2

The average SUS score was 84.53 (min ¼ 60; max ¼ 100; SD ¼
10.92), surpassing the widely accepted SUS score benchmark of 68
(53). Based on feedback from the usability study and our health
experts, we further reﬁned our app and developed the second
high-ﬁdelity prototype (Figure 4). Throughout this process, our
main focus remained on achieving established design goals.
In the usability study, students noted their needs to input or
change their calorie goal, mentioning that, “I was not sure how
to input my target goal.” (P17) and, “It feels like you should be
able to click on the section headers and get taken to a
conﬁguration screen.” (P05). Aligned with our design goal on
providing goal-setting functionality to increase motivation (G4),
we implemented a “gear” icon (Figure 4-1) on the Home screen
and linked it to the Settings screen (Figure 4-2). Additionally,
researchers have increasingly emphasized the importance of
ﬂexibility and customizability in mHealth apps to support user
autonomy (54). Previous studies have found that customizable
apps can increase users’ engagement by providing a sense of
control (55). Together with feedback from our health experts, we

FIGURE 4
New features or changes in the second high-ﬁdelity prototype: (1) The “gear” icon for navigating to Settings. (2) An input space where the user can set
and change their calorie goal. (3) Notiﬁcation preferences. (4) In-app notiﬁcations. (5) Unanswered question on the Questionnaire screen and radio
buttons. (6) An open-response text box for the hours-of-sleep question. (7) Displaying numerical values when bars are clicked. (8) The values are
calculated based on “consumed  goal”. (9) The term “your coach” for tailored personiﬁcation. (10) The “phone” icon for the Support tab.

09

implemented options for the user to specify their notiﬁcation
preferences (Figure 4-3), effectively achieving G2 and G5. Based
on the speciﬁed times, in-app notiﬁcations appear at the top of
Home screen (Figure 4-4). The notiﬁcation content was decided
based on discussions among our HCI researchers and health
experts, drawing from our expertise and prior work. Our goal
was to deliver a motivational message (“How was your day/
week?”)
with
a
sense
of
urgency
in
responding
to
the
questionnaire, employing an assertive tone emphasized by an
exclamation mark (“Complete a self check-in now!”), following
the established recommendation (40).
Clicking on the in-app notiﬁcations redirects the user to a
separate Questionnaire screen. Since the questions are critical for
our research purposes, our app displays a warning if there is
more than one unanswered question and changes the color of
the unanswered question to red (Figure 4-5). Based on feedback
from the students, mentioning that, “Sometimes, when I would
try to scroll, my ﬁnger would accidentally move the sliders on
the responses.” (P05), which is consistent with the “fat ﬁngers”
issue for touchscreen gestures (56), we replaced the sliders with
radio buttons. We also added an open-response text box to the
hours-of-sleep question based on feedback from our team of
health experts (Figure 4-6).
For summary graphs on the Home screen, students expressed
difﬁculty in reading the chart, mentioning that, “If I was not
paying attention I may not read the chart correctly.” (P03). Our
health experts also provided similar feedback, which prompted us
to implement a feature wherein numerical values are displayed
when bars or points in the graphs are clicked (Figure 4-7). This
feature
aims
to
facilitate
self-reﬂection
for
increasing
self-
awareness (G3). For the numerical values on the weekly dietary
intake
screen
(Figure
4-8),
we
changed
the
direction
of
subtraction from “goal  consumed” to “consumed  goal”
based on feedback from our health experts, stating that negative
signs should be used when someone is below their goal.
Interestingly, students expressed confusion about this particular
change, mentioning that, “At ﬁrst sight the negative values
seemed a little tricky to me. Only because thinking of something
in
the
negative
might
ignite
a
feeling
of
inadequate
performance?” (P08). Thus, we implemented visual indicators by
marking values that exceeded the calorie goal in red, aiming to
strike
a
balance
between
user
preferences
and
health
expert suggestions.
Lastly, students expressed confusion about the purpose of the
Support screen, stating that, “[I’m] confused if the purpose of

Support is supposed to connect you with someone to encourage
you to reach your goals or if it’s general support for the app
overall.” (P09). Our health experts supported this feedback and
recommended replacing the “support buoy” icon with a “phone”
icon (Figure 4-10). We also changed the term “specialist” to
“your
coach”
(Figure
4-9),
aligning
with
the
established
recommendation of incorporating tailored personiﬁcation (40).

4.5 Pilot study

To iteratively assess and improve the second high-ﬁdelity
prototype of the MyTrack+ app, we conducted an in-the-wild
pilot study involving 33 target users from our local community
who had lost at least 5% of body weight during the past two
years. We excluded two participants due to missing data. The
mean (SD) age of the 31 participants was 40.1 (15.6) years and
21 participants (67.7%) were women. The following are details of
our two-week pilot study procedure (Figure 5).

4.5.1 Recruitment
Participants were recruited using ﬂyers, outreach to local
employers/businesses, and newspaper ads; all such materials were
approved by our IRB.

4.5.2 Orientation and informed consent process
Participants who met initial eligibility criteria as assessed via the
phone screen were invited to attend an in-person orientation visit.
The orientation visit included a discussion of the pros/cons of
taking part in research and speciﬁc details of the current study.
Potential participants were given the opportunity to privately ask
study staff any remaining questions and then, if they remained
interested, were asked to provide written informed consent.

4.5.3 Initial visit
Participants who met study eligibility criteria were provided a
study smart scale developed by BodyTrace, Inc. (11). Study
team members reviewed the MyTrack+ smartphone application
and assisted participants with smartphone setup. Participants
were
asked
to
use
the
study smart
scale
and
MyTrack+
application for the following two weeks before returning for a
follow-up
feedback
visit.
Participants
were
asked
to weigh
themselves each day, ﬁrst thing in the morning after using the
restroom but before eating/drinking, in nothing more than light
indoor clothing (57).

FIGURE 5
The procedure of our two-week, in-the-wild pilot study involving 33 target users.

10

4.5.4 Pilot study period
During the two-week study period, participants were asked to
(1) use study smartphone apps to track weight, caloric intake, and
physical activity each day, (2) use smart scale to measure weight
each day, and (3) complete questionnaires when prompted via
study smartphone app. MyTrack+ pushed two questionnaires to
participants each week: one 12-item questionnaire (Weekly
MyTrack+ Questionnaire) delivered on a random day each week,
ranging from Monday through Saturday and one 2-item end-of-
week check-in (“End of Week MyTrack+ Questionnaire”).

4.5.5 App feedback visit
Participants were asked to return two weeks after their initial
study visit to complete SUS questionnaires and provide feedback
regarding the usability/acceptability of the MyTrack+ smartphone
application.
Study
staff
measured
participant
weight,
and
completed a semi-structured interview to assess participant
perception
of
usability
and
acceptability
of
the
MyTrack+
application. Audio recordings of the semi-structured interviews
were
collected
to
document
suggestions
for
further
app
development. Participants were provided with a $30 honorarium
for completing this study visit.
Our study protocol was approved by our university’s IRB.

4.6 Final design

As the last phase of our iterative design process, we integrated the
insights from the pilot study and gathered additional input from our
health experts. The average SUS score of the second high-ﬁdelity
prototype was 70.48 (min ¼ 27.5; max ¼ 97.5; SD ¼ 16.89), which
remained higher than the typical SUS score benchmark of 68 (53).
Focusing on our design goals, we continued to reﬁne our app and

created the ﬁnal design of the MyTrack+ app (Figure 6), which is
now in use in our ongoing clinical trial.
For the weight summary graph (Figure 6-2), our pilot
participants expressed the need for more noticeable weight
changes
to
enhance
their
motivation.
Suggestions
included
providing a zoom-in functionality or reducing the unit range on
the y-axis. To address the issue, we prioritized addressing the
main range of weight changes while avoiding investing signiﬁcant
engineering effort in handling extreme edge cases. This was
based on the understanding that in realistic scenarios, signiﬁcant
weight changes do not typically occur in a short period of time.
For dietary intake details (Figure 6-4), we included tailored
feedback based on the total calories consumed, as suggested by
our health experts. For example, if total calories consumed are
too low below the goal, the page displays the message, “Based on
your total calories consumed, you are likely not eating enough.”
Notably, nearly all participants expressed concerns regarding the
delay in data synchronization between MyTrack+ and FatSecret.
To address this issue, we modiﬁed our Cloud Functions to
request data from FatSecret’s server whenever the companion
app is refreshed, effectively achieving G1.

5 Findings

We present four general themes identiﬁed throughout our
design process.

5.1 Personalized preferences

Design preferences for an mHealth app tend to be highly
personalized, varying from one user to another. Some users
preferred the simplicity of MyTrack+, ﬁnding it effective in

FIGURE 6
Main screens of our ﬁnal design: (1) The upper part of our Home screen and the Settings screen. (2) The lower part of our Home screen with summary
graphs. (3) Daily dietary intake summary. (4) Weekly dietary intake summary. (5) Questionnaires.

11

presenting relevant information clearly, stating that, “As it
[MyTrack+]
stands
now,
while
there
isn’t
much
on
the
homepage, it’s easy enough to navigate with a couple taps to any
of the other information that someone would want to look at. So
I think it’s simple enough as it is now too jumbled to put too
much on the home screen.” (P418). Others, however, felt it
lacked features and complexity compared to the FatSecret app,
stating that, “The goal of [MyTrack+] is to show me that this is
how many calories you’ve eaten during the day. It doesn’t appeal
to me. FatSecret is going to show me my macro breakdown for
the day.” (P427). Some users suggested adding more functionality
to MyTrack+ based on their previous experiences with health-
related
technologies,
such
as
providing
detailed
nutrition
information for speciﬁc dietary restrictions and incorporating
features like BMI tracking and water intake monitoring.

5.2 Effectiveness of behavior change
techniques

Users found the process of setting a calorie goal and tracking
their progress toward that goal to be highly beneﬁcial. They
appreciated visual representation of their performance, as it
showed variations in calorie intake on different days, motivating
them to be more mindful of their eating habits. Additionally,
users emphasized the positive impact of the daily weight and
weekly activity tracking features on their self-awareness. They
also
stated
that
these
features
empowered
them
to
stay
accountable by remembering whether they had achieved their
exercise targets, leading to a positive impact on their adherence
to their health goals. Furthermore, users found the in-app
notiﬁcation helpful in reminding them to answer questionnaires,
which provided an opportunity for reﬂecting on health-related
factors. Notably, some users extended their usage of the app and
integrated it as an assistive tool in their daily lives. For example,
one user made connections between their daily weight changes
with their menstrual cycle.

5.3 User agency

Many users expressed their desire for control over how data is
displayed and their need for ﬂexibility to log for previous days. For
example, when asked about the weight graph, one user mentioned
that, “The increments are so minuscule that it looks like I have
effectively no progress when I know I have.” (P457). They then
mentioned, “I did try to see if I could adjust the increments, but
I didn’t see a setting for that.” (P457).

5.4 Expectations in apps and connected
devices

Nearly
all
users
expressed
frustration
with
delays
in
synchronization and inaccuracies in data from different sources.
A common practice among many users was to immediately

verify the accuracy of their recorded weight and ensure that data
was correctly synced between MyTrack+ and FatSecret after self-
weighing or logging data.

6 Discussion

We discuss the implications derived from user’s mental models
and reﬂect on our design process.

6.1 Implications derived from users’ mental
models

Our studies and iterative design process enabled us to not only
gather information about the usability of the app and make design
decisions, but also revealed insights into potential target users’
mental models of how mHealth apps like these should work.
Our observations highlight the individualized nature of user
preferences in mHealth app design, emphasizing the fact that
there is no one-size-ﬁts-all solution (58). This underscores the
importance of adopting a user-centered design approach to
understand the speciﬁc needs of the target users. We also
observed that our app design has effectively enhanced users’
motivation, self-efﬁcacy, self-awareness, app engagement, and
adherence to health goals. This echoes previous work on
effectively applying behavior change techniques in mHealth apps
to support users’ health goals (13).
A noteworthy observation is that some participants extended
the use of certain features, incorporating them as assistive tools
in their daily lives. This action of adding ﬂexibility to the use of
MyTrack+ indicates the need of user autonomy for mHealth
apps. In fact, researchers have emphasized the signiﬁcance of
user autonomy in mHealth technologies (54). Customizable
apps have been shown to enhance user motivation and
engagement by offering a sense of control (55). For example,
systems that allow the user to manually add, edit, or delete
personal
health
data
can
promote
self-awareness
and
accountability (54). Customizable apps can also allow users to
tailor app content to ﬁt personal preferences and goals.
Engaging in such customization can enhance user agency and
increase the consumption of the customized content (55). As
mentioned in our ﬁndings, participants expressed their desire
for control over how data are displayed and their need for
ﬂexibility to log for previous days.
In the health IoT domain, interconnected smart devices form a
cohesive system that empowers users to effortlessly achieve their
health goals within their daily living environment. In this
context, it becomes especially important to preserve human
agency by helping users understand and giving them control
over their AI-powered devices. This aligns with the primary goal
of prioritizing issues of fairness, accountability, transparency, and
ethics
(FATE)
for
human-AI
interaction
(59),
speciﬁcally
highlighting
the
importance
of
providing
transparency
to
enhance users’ trust in AI-powered health applications. Our
system design, including a companion app, a main commercial

12

app, and a smart scale, resembles interconnected smart devices,
offering potential applications in the health IoT ﬁeld. Users’
expectations for a smooth connection between the two apps and
instant synchronization of data from different sources highlight
their needs for a seamlessly integrated system. More importantly,
trust remains a signiﬁcant concern for users transitioning from
traditional devices to smart devices, emphasizing the importance
of prioritizing FATE in AI-powered mHealth apps.
While prioritizing users’ speciﬁc needs and ensuring human
agency in AI-powered apps, it is equally crucial to evaluate the
cost-effectiveness of additional implementations. Our observation
uncovered users’ legacy bias (60) from their experiences with
other mHealth apps, leading them to expect our research-grade
app to incorporate the comprehensive functionality and aesthetic
of a commercial app. Not meeting these expectations may impact
the app’s usability, but trade-offs were necessary to achieve our
main design goal: effectively supporting the implementation of
our team’s speciﬁc adaptive weight intervention and prioritizing
the progress of our clinical trial aimed at evaluating the
intervention’s
effectiveness.
Constantly
revisiting
the
main
research purposes of the app and involving domain expertise in
the design process are essential to balance this trade-off.
Overall, the implications derived from users’ mental models
emphasize the signiﬁcance of understanding target users’ speciﬁc
needs,
applying
behavior
change
theories,
providing
user
autonomy, ensuring seamless integration and trust in AI-powered
devices, and recognizing users’ legacy bias.

6.2 Reﬂection on our human-centered
design process

Prior work (61) has demonstrated the effectiveness of including
trained and seasoned experts throughout the design process of an
mHealth app. By incorporating domain experts into the design
process, designers can tap into specialized knowledge, gain deeper
insights into the domain, and create solutions that effectively
address
user
needs
while
also
meeting
domain-speciﬁc
requirements.
Our
ﬁndings
highlight
the
importance
of
acknowledging that user preferences may not always align with
optimal design choices, particularly when target users may not
possess the expertise in the speciﬁc ﬁeld that the designer aims to
contribute to. In our case, user preferences could have been
inﬂuenced by their prior experiences with applications lacking
clinical
and
behavioral
health
motivation.
Therefore,
while
prioritizing the alignment of our design with user needs, we also
consulted with our health experts to maintain adherence to the
current best practices recommended in the weight maintenance ﬁeld.
The iterative nature of a human-centered design process
facilitated
continuous
improvement
of
our
app.
Through
incremental small changes, we targeted speciﬁc aspects of the
app, allowing us to closely identify and address user needs, gauge
the impact of each update, and make necessary reﬁnements. In
our early usability study, we worked with students from our local
university to gather general usability insights and make iterative
improvements before progressing to testing with the target users,

who are more costly and difﬁcult to recruit. We aimed to wait
until basic bugs and obvious usability ﬂaws were ﬁxed before
going to our target user population. Although testing with a
target audience is ideal, testing with students in the domain of
interest (e.g., Computer Science) can still uncover high-level
usability issues that are common across different user groups and
provide valuable insights into the general user experience early in
the design process (49). Speciﬁcally, pilot study participants
appreciated the in-app notiﬁcations, the ability to access detailed
information by clicking on the graphs, and the numerical data
highlighting calorie differences.
It is important to note that this convenience sampling approach
involves challenges to generalizability. It can be prone to high
sampling
bias
and
hence
reduce
representativeness
(50).
Speciﬁcally, since our major goal is to enable efﬁcient research
progress, we adopted Nielsen’s concept of discount usability
engineering (49) by creating real-world scenarios, instead of
conducting an in-the-wild testing. However, a laboratory-based
study may still not fully replicate real-world stress. Furthermore,
when compared to our target user group, the students we
recruited were younger and were not necessarily aiming to
maintain their weight after a certain amount of weight loss. These
differences in demographics and objectives could potentially
introduce biases. As Nielsen (49) pointed out, when testing with
students, researchers should consider whether the system is also
intended to be used by older users. Also, prior work has indicated
that when mHealth services are perceived as personalized, younger
consumers tend to be more receptive to adopting them (62). This
highlights the importance of continuously reassessing our design
goals and critically evaluating whether speciﬁc features align with
our objectives. We mitigated potential biases in our design process
by engaging health experts to conduct heuristic evaluations that
follow recommendations from the weight management literature
for each incremental reﬁnement.
Overall, the reﬂection on our human-centered design process
emphasizes
the
importance
of
involving
domain
experts
throughout the design process because user preferences may not
always align with optimal design choices. We also highlight the
value of working with a non-target population, which is less
difﬁcult to recruit, in the early design phase to address obvious
issues,
while
considering
potential
biases
stemming
from
contrasting preferences between user groups.

7 Limitations and future work

There are several limitations to our work. First, as mentioned
previously, we recruited local university students instead of the
target user group for the initial usability stage. While this decision
had advantages (rapidly advancing the design process), it also
carried the risk of falling to a local optimum without feedback
from target users. To mitigate this risk, we employed mental
walkthroughs of target scenarios during the usability study and
actively engaged health experts in the decision-making process for
reﬁning our design. Future work can consider involving target
users at earlier stages to better tailor designs to their needs.

13

Second, it is important to note that we did not perform a
comprehensive analysis of the conversations in our semi-
structured
interviews
and
measures
of
usability
from
questionnaire responses. However, the focus of our work was
to
effectively
utilize
an
iterative
human-centered
design
process to implement a companion app that supports the
implementation
and
evaluation
of
our
adaptive
weight
maintenance
intervention,
rather
than
developing
a
comprehensive mHealth system for weight maintenance for all
cases. Thus, we decided to prioritize the advancement of our
clinical trial for evaluating the adaptive weight intervention.
Future work can conduct a comprehensive analysis of the
conversations
in
our
semi-structured
interviews
and
incorporate measures of usability from questionnaire responses
to
establish
generalizable
design
guidelines
on
weight
management app implementation, speciﬁcally for dual app
use cases.

8 Conclusion

This paper presents the results of a user-centered design
process with iterative evaluation and incremental reﬁnements of
prototypes to develop a companion app for supporting a weight
loss and weight maintenance clinical trial. Our process included
initial design brainstorming with our team of HCI and health
experts, a basic usability study with 17 university students, and a
2-week pilot deployment with 33 target users. Overall, our
project aimed to accelerate the implementation of our clinical
trial on adaptive weight maintenance interventions by leveraging
existing commercial apps and developing a secondary app to
meet our speciﬁc research requirements, such as instrumentation
needed to collect relevant data. Our primary focus was on
facilitating effortless activity, food, and weight logging by the
target users. We have also explored strategies to enhance
motivation, self-efﬁcacy, self-awareness, app engagement, and
adherence to health goals, drawing upon behavior change theory
as a guiding framework. We demonstrated the effectiveness of
utilizing
an
iterative
human-centered
design
process
to
implement a companion app for supporting the implementation
and evaluation of our adaptive weight maintenance intervention.

Data availability statement

The raw data supporting the conclusions of this article will be
made available by the authors, without undue reservation.

Ethics statement

The studies involving humans were approved by University of
Florida Institutional Review Board. The studies were conducted in
accordance
with
the
local
legislation
and
institutional
requirements. The participants provided their written informed
consent to participate in this study.

Y-PC:
Conceptualization,
Data
curation,
Investigation,
Methodology, Software, Visualization, Writing – original draft,
Writing – review & editing; JW: Writing – original draft, Writing –
review & editing, Conceptualization, Data curation, Investigation,
Methodology, Project administration; MN.S: Writing – original
draft, Writing – review & editing, Conceptualization, Data curation,
Investigation, Methodology, Project administration; DB: Writing –
original draft, Writing – review & editing; UU: Writing – review &
editing,
Conceptualization,
Data
curation,
Investigation;
AB:
Writing – review & editing, Conceptualization, Data curation,
Investigation; KM.R: Funding acquisition, Resources, Supervision,
Writing
–
original
draft,
Writing
–
review
&
editing,
Conceptualization,
Data
curation,
Investigation,
Methodology,
Project
administration;
JR: