Friends, Family, and Food:
Development of a Food Allergy Intervention,
F3-App, for Children

Barbara N. Jandasek1, 2, 3, Sheryl J. Kopel1, 2, 3, Cynthia A. Esteban1, 3, Susan A. Rudders3,
Josh S. Spitalnick4, Margo Adams Larsen4,
Grace K. Cushman1, 2, and Elizabeth L. McQuaid1, 2, 3

1 Bradley Hasbro Children’s Research Center, Rhode Island Hospital, Providence, Rhode Island, United States
2 Department of Psychiatry and Human Behavior, Alpert Medical School of Brown University
3 Department of Pediatrics, Alpert Medical School of Brown University
4 Virtually Better, Inc., Decatur, Georgia, United States

Objective: Despite a marked increase in the prevalence of pediatric immunoglobulin E-
mediated food allergy (FA) in recent decades, there is a dearth of age-appropriate manage-
ment education and support tools for youth with FA. The purpose of this report is to detail
our methods for intervention design and reﬁnement of an interactive educational software
program for school-aged children with FA. Method: Development of the “Friends,
Family, and Food Application (F3-App)” employed an iterative, user-centered design
approach with input from children with FA, their caregivers, and other key experts.
Phase 1 (prototype development/pilot evaluation) involved family input on key themes
and educational messages, development of a prototype, and pilot testing. Phase 2 (full
F3-App development/open trial) included reﬁnement and expansion of the prototype
per advisory panel and end-user recommendations, followed by an open trial with addi-
tional iterative reﬁnement. Results: Acceptability and credibility of the F3-App were rated
highly by most participants. Relatively few technical challenges arose with F3-App instal-
lation or use. Follow-up interviews with children and caregivers suggested that the F3-
App was generally well received, families found the content useful, and that it prompted
family discussion about the child’s FA management. Conclusions: User input is critical
to developing family-friendly software to support management of pediatric chronic con-
ditions. Interactive educational software can be a useful channel for children to practice
skills and build conﬁdence in disease self-management and to facilitate family commu-
nication regarding the stresses of FA management.

Implications for Impact Statement
This study describes the development of the Friends, Family, and Food Application
(F3-App), with a focus on the community partner-driven design process. The F3-
App was credible and highly accepted and recommended by families and promoted
family communication around food allergy management. The F3-App that was devel-
oped was used in a subsequent randomized, controlled trial.

Editor’s Note.
Christina L. Duncan served as the action
editor for this article.—CLD.

This article was published Online First January 8, 2024.
Barbara N. Jandasek
https://orcid.org/0000-0001-
9217-9287

Elizabeth L. McQuaid
https://orcid.org/0000-0001-
9573-3781

Susan A. Rudders is now at the Division of Immunology,
Boston Children’s Hospital, Department of Pediatrics,
Harvard Medical School, and Josh S. Spitalnick is now at
the Anxiety Specialists of Atlanta.
Preliminary data from this study were presented at the

American Academy of Allergy, Asthma, and Immunology
(AAAAI) Annual Meeting in 2015. This project was supported
by R43 HD075524-01 (Elizabeth L. McQuaid and Josh
S. Spitalnick, Principal Investigators) and R42 HD075524
(Elizabeth L. McQuaid and Margo Adams Larsen, Principal
Investigators). The study was registered with ClinicalTrials.gov
(ClinicalTrial Identiﬁer NCT05093114). The authors have no
conﬂicts of interest to disclose.
Correspondence
concerning
this
article
should
be
addressed
to
Elizabeth
L.
McQuaid,
Bradley/Hasbro
Children’s Research Center, Rhode Island Hospital, 1 Hoppin
Street, Suite 204, Providence, RI 02903, United States. Email:

Clinical Practice in
Pediatric Psychology

© 2024 American Psychological Association
2024, Vol. 12, No. 2, 143–156
ISSN: 2169-4826
https://doi.org/10.1037/cpp0000513

143

Keywords: food allergy, user-centered design, disease management, intervention,
interactive software

Pediatric food allergy (FA) affects nearly six mil-
lion children in the United States (Dyer & Gupta,
2013) with steady increases in prevalence over the
past
three
decades
(Loh
&
Tang,
2018).
Immunoglobulin E (IgE)-mediated FA is character-
ized by an immune response caused by an
allergen-speciﬁc IgE antibody when exposure to a
speciﬁc food occurs. These allergic reactions may
be severe: food-related anaphylaxis, a multisystem
reaction, can be life threatening and is growing
more common (Jackson et al., 2013; Robinson
et al., 2021). Currently, there is no cure for
IgE-mediated FA; it must be managed through
avoidance of the allergenic food and prompt treat-
ment of symptoms. Although new therapies are
emerging to promote food tolerance (e.g., oral
immunotherapy), they can be burdensome, have
limited uptake by clinical practices, and are not cov-
ered widely by health insurance (Licari et al., 2019).
Diagnosis and management of FA is associated
with increased parental distress and anxiety (Ravid
et al., 2012), lower child quality of life (King et al.,
2009), impact on daily activities and social events
(Bollingeret al., 2006), and increased psychosocial
(Rubeiz & Ernst, 2021) and economic burden
(Gupta et al., 2013). These challenges may be par-
ticularly salient for youth learning to balance FA
management in the context of increasing indepen-
dence (e.g., in school and social events with peers).
FA knowledge, skills, and self-efﬁcacy are all
likely required in self-management, yet few pediat-
ric FA management interventions exist to build
these skills.
Existing FA interventions typically target care-
givers, are educational (Sugunasingha et al.,
2020), and are not tailored to youths’ needs. To
date, interventions for youth include educational
videos to improve peers’ knowledge in school set-
tings (Jiang et al., 2019; Reddy et al., 2018), smart-
phone
apps
that
are
either
educational
or
skills-based focused, not both, and are focused
on psychosocial functioning rather than disease
management (Cuervo-Pardo et al., 2015). Recent
reviews of apps to support FA management have
focused on tools to ﬁnd acceptable foods (e.g., res-
taurant choices and ingredients) and indicate most
existing apps (a) do not adequately differentiate
between food intolerances and IgE-mediated FA
and (b) are not geared speciﬁcally toward youth
(Mandracchia et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2022).

Most resources available to support families
with FA are parent oriented, with some excep-
tions (Ramos et al., 2021; Vreeken-Ross et al.,
2022). Food Allergy Research and Education
(FARE), a nonproﬁt organization for FA educa-
tion and advocacy, hosts moderated virtual talks
for youth with FA and webinars for caregivers
(e.g., school advocacy) and youth (e.g., navigat-
ing college and dating). Online, video-based
information is increasingly available via plat-
forms such as YouTube, although a 2018 review
concluded that much of the information is mis-
leading or controversial and does not represent
IgE-mediated reactions (Reddy et al., 2018).
The purpose of this study was to design a novel
interactive educational software program through
a partnership of an academic research team and a
small-business-based technology team (Virtually
Better, Inc. [VBI]). This collaboration facilitated
the use of highly relevant intervention develop-
ment technology that was advanced for the
study time period (2013–2016).
Intervention development focused on both edu-
cation and skills acquisition to enhance pediatric
FA self-management. Consideration of FA man-
agement challenges most salient to the targeted
developmental level was selected based on the
review of the literature and consultation with an
expert panel, caregivers, and youth. Following
the Pediatric Self-Management Model framework
(Modi et al., 2012), the development phases of
this intervention considered FA self-management
inﬂuences, processes, behaviors, and contexts
most developmentally relevant to the targeted
age group and targeted modiﬁable inﬂuences pri-
marily within the individual (e.g., knowledge,
self-efﬁcacy, and skills) and familial (e.g., com-
munication and planning) levels. The F3-App
was designed as a behaviorally based multicom-
ponent intervention containing strategies targeting
challenges to FA management. It incorporated
educational and skills development strategies
with supported efﬁcacy to promote effective man-
agement (Kahana et al., 2008; Lemanek et al.,
2001). The interactive capability of the F3-App
integrated a skills training approach involving
instruction, modeling, behavioral rehearsal, feed-
back, and reinforcement.
The purpose of this report is to describe our
methods for development and reﬁnement of the

144

F3-App.
Consistent
with
recommendations,
this pilot/feasibility study focuses on feasibility,
acceptability, and credibility, and the methods
used to enhance these aspects of the F3-App,
rather than on preliminary efﬁcacy (Hilliard
et al., 2021). An iterative, user-centered design
approach was employed throughout intervention
development and reﬁnement to ensure represen-
tation of relevant aspects of FA management;
each study phase included qualitative input for
program
development
and
reﬁnement
and
mixed method assessment of feasibility, credibil-
ity, and acceptability.
Phase 1 involved child and caregiver input on
key themes and educational messages, develop-
ment, and pilot testing of the prototype. Phase
2 included prototype reﬁnement and expansion
based on an advisory panel’s recommendations
and input from end-users, followed by an open
trial (McCurdie et al., 2012; Figure 1). This iter-
ative multimethod process was designed to elicit
perspectives from multiple community partners
(researchers, medical providers, patients/caregiv-
ers) to optimize content accuracy, material
usability, and appropriateness for elementary
school-aged children with FA. We describe the
development and evaluation of the feasibility,
acceptability, and credibility of the “Friends,
Family and Food Application (F3-App),” focus-
ing on the design and reﬁnement process. We
expected that the F3-App would be a feasible
approach for children with FA, and that it
would be acceptable and credible to families.
This study was registered with ClinicalTrials.gov
(ClinicalTrial Identiﬁer NCT05093114). All activi-
ties were approved by the Institutional Review
Board of the academic medical center where the
study took place. Families for all development
and testing phases of the F3-App were identiﬁed
via electronic medical records of the Allergy and
Asthma Clinic of a local children’s hospital based
on child age and diagnostic criterion and through
targeted mailings to a local FA support network.
Families were compensated forcompleting research
sessions.

Phase 1: Prototype Development and Pilot
Evaluation

Phase 1 involved development of the F3-App
prototype and initial evaluation of feasibility
and credibility (see Figure 1 for diagram of
phases).

Method for Phase 1A: Prototype Development

Procedures

After enrollment, families completed demo-
graphic and medical history questionnaires and
participated in focus groups, which were recorded
and transcribed. Focus groups were implemented
by our team, which included a facilitatorand note-
taker trained in qualitative methods. Groups were
audio recorded, and a debrief form was completed
by the study staff. Using a deductive, rapid ana-
lytic approach (Nevedal et al., 2021), executive
summaries were created for each focus group by
careful, independent review of the notes, audio
recording, and debrief form by at least two
doctoral-level members of the research team
with experience in qualitative methods, pediatric
psychology, and food allergies. Discrepancies
were discussed and resolved by the qualitative
team. Executive summaries were then presented
to the other research and technology team mem-
bers for intervention development. These same
procedures were followed to analyze all subse-
quent sources of qualitative data.

Participants

The F3-App prototype developed during this
phase focused exclusively on peanut allergy and
was guided by national guidelines (Boyce et al.,
2011) and input from participants. Nine families
of children with FA participated in parallel child/
caregiver focus groups. Children were 8–12 years
old (M = 8.8; SD = 1.2); slightly more than half
were male (56%; 44% female). All had allergies
to tree nuts and/or peanuts, and two thirds (67%)
had experienced an anaphylactic reaction. The
majority of participants identiﬁed as non-Latino
White
([NLW]
56%;
22%
Black/African
American; 11% Native American; 11% mixed
race) and one identiﬁed as Latino. Families’ educa-
tional levels were as follows: 44% of mothers and
55% of fathers had a college education or higher.
All participating caregivers were female. Only
one caregiver per family participated.

Results for Phase 1A: Prototype Development

During separate parent and child focus groups,
respondents described critical areas to include in
the F3-App, feature preferences, and feedback on
preliminary materials. This feedback was key to
developing a prototype incorporating aspects of

DEVELOPMENT OF A FOOD ALLERGY INTERVENTION
145

FA management that children found most chal-
lenging, such as resisting foods offered by adults
and responding to teasing/bullying (Table 1).
Feedback
also
informed
elements
of
the
F3-App design (e.g., visual features, methods
of sustained engagement, and user interface).
The prototype included one experiential context
(school cafeteria) and three social vignettes illus-
trating skills for (a) food avoidance, (b) FA reac-
tion management, and (c) social pressures. Two
interactive games addressed skills related to read-
ing food labels and recognizing symptoms of FA
reactions. Children received reinforcement for
progressing through the F3-App by earning
points for completed tasks, redeemable for
items to decorate a virtual aquarium (Figure 2).

Method for Phase 1B: Prototype Pilot
Evaluation

Participants

Feasibility, acceptability, and credibility of
the F3-App prototype were assessed with 32

families of children 8–12 years old (Table 2)
who had physician-documented FA to pea-
nuts/tree nuts. Additional inclusion criteria
were ability to read and speak English and
access to a computer and the internet to down-
load the program. Participants from Phase 1a
were excluded.

Procedures

Conﬁrmation of FA diagnosis was obtained
from the child’s healthcare provider via a
Physician Query form, summarizing (a) history
of FA reactions; (b) diagnostic testing (i.e.,
allergen-speciﬁc IgE testing blood test ﬁndings
and skin prick testing), and/or (c) oral food chal-
lenge results (all past 2 years). Informed consent
and assent were obtained at a home visit after
which research staff initiated an email prompting
the F3-App log-in process. Families completed a
preassessment survey and used the F3-App at
home for up to 4 weeks, playing through the
experiential contexts until they had completed
the game.

Figure 1
Study Phases of the Iterative, User-Centric Design Approach Used to Develop the F3-App

Note.
See the online article for the color version of this ﬁgure.

146

Table 1
Community Partner Feedback Incorporated Into Intervention

Phase
Method
Themes/feedback
Corresponding intervention adaptation

Prototype
development
Child and
caregiver
focus groups

Provided information regarding aspects of FA
management families ﬁnd most
challenging, including social and family
events, bullying or taunting by peers, and
resisting food offered by adults.

Added speciﬁc content in social scene
about responding to teasing and
bullying.
Identiﬁed additional content and social
scenes to create for the full App,
including children’s birthday party and
family BBQ gathering.
Children articulated confusion about which
child had FA in one of the scenes given the
visual perspective of the player.

Changed illustration of characters and
added game narrators for ﬁnal full F3-
App.
Gauged children’s comfort with showing a
child experiencing a FA reaction.
Children validated importance of the
scene and were open to including
ambulance in scene as long as story
included the child being safe at the
conclusion.
Solicited feedback and ideas on parental
involvement in game. Parents requested
links for FA information and tips on
communication with child.

Identiﬁed need and relevant content of
Parent Dashboard for full F3-App,
including parental updates on child
game progress and parental tip sheets
addressing topics of interest.
Food pantry game feedback: children wanted
more food items to choose from, options
with more challenging food labels.

Added items with labeling “May contain
peanuts.”
Added more varied food choices.
Prototype pilot
Child and
caregiver exit
interviews

Children provided feedback on visuals and
wording in FA reaction scene.
Edited wording and visuals to address
feedback.

Parents reported the F3-App prompted
discussions with their child regarding the
social pressures of FA, including bullying
and overall FA management.

Validated importance of inclusion of this
scene. Feedback used to build content
for the Parent Dashboard tip sheets.

Full app
development
Advisory panel
Provided information on variety of strategies
families use to manage social gatherings
and importance of empowering family
choice.
Emphasized importance of children
developing self-advocacy skills and
various strategies families use to facilitate
this.
Provided information relevant to markers
of child readiness for carrying and
administering epinephrine autoinjector.

Feedback used to develop out two new
experiential contexts: Arcade and a
Family Barbecue.
Feedback used to build content for the
Parent Dashboard tip sheets.

Child and
caregiver
focus group

Caregivers highlighted importance of
addressing fear about epinephrine
autoinjector and conducting practice
administrations, as well as communication
about epinephrine autoinjector with other
parents in social situations.
Caregivers shared markers of readiness
parents they use to gauge child readiness
for carrying epipen.

Feedback used to develop epinephrine
autoinjector education included in a
social scene and epinephrine
autoinjector tip sheet on Parent
Dashboard.

Parents stressed importance of and discussed
strategies to achieve balance of teaching
children self-advocacy and checking in
with parent.
Emphasized child being prepared to
manage interactions with adults who view
food allergies as a nuisance and are
uneducated about food allergies.

Feedback used to develop content for new
scenarios and inclusion of characters
representing these perspectives with the
scenarios.

(table continues)

DEVELOPMENT OF A FOOD ALLERGY INTERVENTION
147

Caregiver postintervention surveys assessed
treatment feasibility (i.e., ability to access and
use the software program), acceptability (i.e.,
perceived appropriateness and value), and credi-
bility. An a priori benchmark of 80% of

caregivers reporting favorable outcomes was
used (e.g., .80% reporting they would refer
other families). Semistructured exit interviews
conducted with families assessed acceptability
and credibility (e.g., feedback about the accuracy

Table 1 (continued)

Phase
Method
Themes/feedback
Corresponding intervention adaptation

Parents shared feedback on Parent Dashboard
such as details regarding child level
completion and performance.

Features added to parent dashboard.

Families shared preference for platform.
PC and Tablet versions developed.
Children provided positive feedback on new
teen “coach” avatars (in lieu of narrator
format used in prototype) and appreciated
updated visuals.

Retained these features in the F3-App.

Open trial
Child and
caregiver exit
interviews

Like It or Lose It Cafeteria experiential
context: recommended more food options
for children with egg allergy, fewer
“whole/organic” foods, and more
representation of snack foods.

Expanded food options.

Location of epipen injection was unclear in
Cafeteria scenario.
Improved visual to clearly demonstrate
correct injection site.
Parents and children provided feedback on
wording of narration, ease of game
features, and clarity of game instructions.

Changed wording to match family
preferences, improved game features,
and clariﬁed instructions.

Note.
FA = food allergy.

Figure 2
Key Aspects of the F3-App, Including the (1) Main User Interface, (2) An Example of an Avatar Used to Help
Children Navigate Through the Game, (3) Sea Life Spectacular, and (4) Label Learning Game

3. Sea Life Spectacular

2. Example of One Coach
1. Main User Interface

4. Label Learning

Note.
Images used with permission from Virtually Better, Inc. (2016). See the online article for the color version of this
ﬁgure.

148

and representation of the experiential contexts),
overall impressions (e.g., family discussion gener-
ated by participating), and child FA knowledge
acquisition. Quantitative and qualitative data on fea-
sibility, acceptability, and credibility were reviewed
prior to proceeding to the next development phase
to identify areas needing reﬁnement. Information
from interviews was reviewed and integrated to fur-
ther improve the F3-App.

Results for Phase 1B: Prototype Pilot
Evaluation

Feasibility

Several indicators were used to examine feasi-
bility: families’ ability to access and use the
F3-App.
After
a
baseline
assessment,
the
F3-App was loaded onto the family’s home com-
puter (PC or Mac) with few installation difﬁcul-
ties (two cases; 6.4%), which were resolved
through consultation with VBI. Families used
the F3-App at will for 2–4 weeks with little to
no prompting. Caregivers’ survey ratings indi-
cated the program was easy to use (Table 3).

Questions from families occurred at 11% of 64
total scheduled visits or phone calls, and through
three unsolicited contacts. Data indicated 100%
of children completed all components of the caf-
eteria experiential context at least once; most
revisited various cafeteria vignettes, and all
revisited the Social Pressure/Bullying vignette.
All participants spent earned points in the
Aquarium, purchasing an average of 12 items,
and often 15 or more (31.3%), indicating that
all participants used and frequently returned to
this optional feature, which was designed to pro-
vide positive reinforcement for engaging with the
F3-App.

Acceptability

Caregivers consistently provided very positive
ratings of the overall quality of the App, comfort
with the presented content, likelihood of recom-
mending it to other families, and helpfulness for
children in learning about FA in general and man-
agement in the school setting (Table 3). In exit
interviews, families provided positive feedback
and some suggestions (Table 1). Qualitative data

Table 2
Demographics and Characteristics of Sample for Pilot and Open Trial

Characteristic
Phase 1
Pilot (n = 32)
Phase 2
Open trial (n = 39)

Female/malea (%)
44/56
46/54
Child age in years, M (SD)
9.8 (1.3)
9.6 (1.3)
Grade range
2–7
2–6
Race (%)
White
81
74
Black/African American
9
13
Native American
0
0
Asian
3
3
Mixed race
3
8
Latino ethnicity
0
10
Caregiver 1 education (%)
≥Completed college
53
69
Caregiver 2 education
≥Completed college
41
74
Financial strain (%)
Live “very well” or “comfortably”
84
77
Live “paycheck to paycheck”
16
18
“Almost poor” or “poor”
0
0
Type of common IgE FA (%)
Peanut
94
74
Tree nut
69
74
Egg
28
36
Milk
22
23
History of anaphylaxis (%)
53
53.8

Note.
FA = food allergy.
a Child sex was collected as female/male only.

DEVELOPMENT OF A FOOD ALLERGY INTERVENTION
149

from exit interviews enriched caregiver percep-
tions of the F3-App’s value: many caregivers
articulated the unique ability of the F3-App to
cater to a child’s learning style (e.g., “the software
program provides different ways of learning about
how to manage food allergies that a health care
professional cannot provide”) and to provide a
new channel of learning (e.g., “children…don’t
want to listen to parents, doctors, etc. It’s impor-
tant to have another way to communicate with
them.”).

Credibility

Surveys and exit interviews evaluated the
degree of realism of the virtual environment,
such as represented locations and dialogue, and
audio and visual features. Overall, caregivers
provided very positive ratings for each category
(Table 3). All but one rating (quality of the
visuals, 78.9%) exceeded our benchmark of
.80%. Follow-up interviews revealed speciﬁc
suggestions to improve credibility (e.g., “A real
cafeteria would be more packed with people”).

Additional Feedback

In exit interviews, children were queried
about what they had learned relevant to each
skill (e.g., food avoidance: “What ideas do you
remember about how to handle when someone
offers you food?”). Children’s responses con-
ﬁrmed that educational messages were absorbed
as intended (e.g., “I learned you have to be care-
ful about what someone offers you and that you
have to read the ingredients before you eat some-
thing that you get.”). Many caregivers (62%)
reported that using the program prompted dis-
cussions
regarding
FA’s
social
pressures,
including bullying, for example, “… the game
was incredible. It opened the dialogue between
my son and I regarding how to deal with situa-
tions at school.” Some caregivers also expressed
that the F3-App could reinforce or enhance
child–physician communication, “The best-case
scenario for my daughter is to have a conversa-
tion regarding the issues and then to use self-
guided software to help formulate her thoughts
and questions.”

Table 3
Parent-Completed Feasibility, Acceptability, and Credibility Data Across
Phases

Intervention aspect assessed

Phase 1:
percentage
endorsed

Phase 2:
percentage
endorsed

Feasibility
Ease of movement through the programa
89.5
91.7
Conﬁdence in understanding the
software’s directions accuratelya
94.7
97.2

Acceptability
Overall quality of programa
94.7
88.9
Would recommend the program to other
familiesb
89.5
86.1

App would be helpful for children
learning about FA in generalc
94.7
94.4

App would be helpful for children
learning about FA management in the
school settingc

100
91.7

Comfort with the experiential contexts/
vignettes presenteda
94.7
97.2

Credibility
Quality of the audio/soundsa
94.7
91.7
Quality of the visualsa
78.9
80.6
Quality of the realism of locationsa
84.2
86.1
Quality of the dialoguea
84.2
88.9

a Percentages
reﬂect
endorsement
of
ratings
ranging
from
“good”
to
“excellent.”
b Percentages reﬂect endorsement of ratings ranging from “probably”
to “deﬁnitely.”
c Percentages reﬂect endorsement of ratings of “very likely” to
“extremely likely.”

150

Phase 2: Full F3-App Development and Open
Trial

Phase 2 incorporated feedback from the pilot
evaluation of Phase 1 to create a fully developed
version of the F3-App. Changes included expan-
sion to include the four most common food aller-
gies (peanut, tree nut, milk, and egg). Based on
Phase 1 feedback, (a) teen “coach” avatars were
developed in lieu of a narrator (see Figure 2),
(b) child voice actors provided narration, (c)
graphics were improved, (d) increased opportuni-
ties for parental involvement were created, and
(e) the program format was transitioned to an
App with two versions (computer or tablet).
Increased opportunities for parent involvement
included a “Parent Dashboard,” with ongoing
feedback about child progress through the game
and tip sheets with overviews of child knowledge
and skills targeted (e.g., label reading), how to
support skill development (e.g., how to teach
your child about label reading), and comple-
mentary information and resources (e.g., laws
governing food labeling). Finally, a joint care-
giver–child
activity
was
developed
(“Game
Plan”) to facilitate communication and decision
making around planning for social gatherings.
Parents and children, together, selected from sev-
eral strategies to create a personalized family plan
for these situations (e.g., pack food ahead of time).

Method for Phase 2A: Full F3-App
Development

Participants and Procedures

An advisory panel and a second set of focus
groups were conducted to gather feedback on
this new version, which was then revised and
evaluated in an open trial.

Advisory Panel

An advisory panel provided feedback and input
on areas critical to F3-App reﬁnement. Panel mem-
bers participated in one of two groups. Group 1 was
composed of a board-certiﬁed allergist and a pedi-
atric psychologist with experienceworking with FA
patients and families. Group 2 was comprised of
another psychologist of similar background and
experience, two staff from the local chapter of the
Asthma and Allergy Foundation of America
(AAFA), and the former leader of a FA support
group. The groups included an orientation to the

project and the F3-App, as well as questions target-
ing speciﬁc areas, including management chal-
lenges not yet represented and ways to enhance
family discussion and caregiver involvement.
Procedures for conducting advisory panel discus-
sions and analyzing the generated qualitative data
were parallel to focus group procedures described
above.

Focus Groups

Another set of parallel child and caregiver
focus groups provided additional feedback on
new and adapted content. Phase 1 participants
interested in continued involvement in the project
and families of children 8–12 years old with
IgE-mediated FA were recruited, resulting in
seven families of children diagnosed with FA.
Following the informed consent/assent process,
participants completed demographic and medical
history questionnaires.

Results for Phase 2A: Full App Development

Feedback from the advisory panel was used to
build content for the Parent Dashboard and to
develop two new experiential contexts: Arcade
and Family Barbeque. In the Arcade experiential
context, players navigate FA management at a
peer-focused
birthday
party.
Vignettes
in
Arcade emphasize preparedness, describing FA
to others, and food refusal skills. An interactive
true/false
quiz
about
epinephrine
is
also
included. In the Family Barbeque experiential
context, vignettes reinforce FA management
skills and navigating FA communication and
self-advocacy with adult relatives and an option
for children and caregivers to jointly construct a
“Game Plan” to prepare for family gatherings
(as described above).
Children who participated in the focus group
were 10–12 years old (M = 11.14), predomi-
nantly male (86%; 14% female) and slightly
less than half were NLW (43%; 29% Black/
African American; 14% Asian; 14% mixed
race). Families’ educational levels were as fol-
lows: all mothers and 58% of fathers had attained
a college education or higher. Of the participat-
ing caregivers, ﬁve were mothers and two were
fathers. All children had an allergy to peanut
and/or tree nut; the other most reported allergy
was milk (28%). Forty-three percent had experi-
enced anaphylaxis.

DEVELOPMENT OF A FOOD ALLERGY INTERVENTION
151

During focus groups, caregivers highlighted
additional content to include (see Table 1), such
as illustrating correct use of self-injectable epi-
nephrine, and strategies and challenges regarding
family communication and coordination around
FA management. Caregivers also voiced prefer-
ences regarding information they would like to
receive from the F3-App. Child feedback cen-
tered around further improvement of visuals and
preferences about game features.

Method for Phase 2B: Open Trial

Participants

Thirty-nine children with IgE-mediated FA
and their caregivers were recruited to provide
feedback on the new and revised components
of the F3-App (see Table 2 for demographics).
Phase 2 inclusion criteria were similar to Phase
1, with slightly broader child age range (inclu-
sion of 7-year-olds) and additional inclusion of
milk and/or egg allergy. FA diagnosis was veri-
ﬁed through identical procedures described in
Phase 1. Participants from Phase 1a, Phase 1b,
and Phase 2a were excluded.

Procedures

Families were enrolled in the open trial in one
of three staggered cohorts to allow for iterative
waves of feedback. Informed consent and assent,
baseline questionnaires, and F3-App installation
on the family’s device(s) were completed during
a home visit. Families were instructed to use the
F3-App at their leisure for 2 weeks. A research
assistant called the family after 1 week to main-
tain contact and problem solve any issues. A
follow-up home visit occurred 2 weeks after
baseline
to
readminister
survey
measures.
Families provided feedback about the new expe-
riential contexts and vignettes through a semi-
structured interview. Interview content was
reviewed by the research and technology teams,
and changes were incorporated for the next
cohort. Feedback directly informed the content
and format of the ﬁnal product and the evaluation
measures to be used in the implementation of a
future randomized controlled trial (RCT).

Results for Phase 2B: Open Trial

Feedback from Phase 1 participants, our advi-
sory board, and focus groups was utilized to

develop the Phase 2 version of the F3-App
(Figure 1). Once initial changes were made to
the games and the Cafeteria experiential context,
the research team began collecting data with
Open Trial participants (n = 39). First, the
revised Cafeteria experiential context and new
games versions were tested with 12 participants;
feedback was collected throughout. Then, once
developed, the F3-App including the Cafeteria
and Arcade experiential contexts and the further-
developed games were tested with 11 partici-
pants. Lastly, the fully developed prototype,
with Cafeteria, Arcade, and Family Barbecue
experiential contexts, plus multilevel, tailored
versions
of
Reaction
Action!
and
Label
Learning, was evaluated with 16 participants.
Most families had the software program installed
on a laptop (43.6%; 38.4% desktop computer;
17.9% tablet).
Thirty-six families completed posttest surveys
and interviews evaluating F3-App feasibility,
acceptability, and credibility. Given that Phase
2 involved a substantial expansion of content
and features, feasibility, acceptability, and credi-
bility were evaluated with regard to this speciﬁc
version.

Feasibility

Caregiver survey responses indicated the pro-
gram was easy to use in terms of ease of move-
ment through the program and conﬁdence in
understanding software’s directions accurately
(see Table 3).

Acceptability

Most caregivers provided very positive ratings
about the overall quality of the software program,
the likelihood of recommending the program to
other families, comfort with the vignettes, and
the likelihood the F3-App would be helpful for
children learning about FA in general and about
FA management in the school setting (see
Table 3). In feedback interviews, children and
caregivers described the game as “great,” “enjoy-
able,” and “fun” and reported that it reduced
stigma related to FA: “It’s okay that I have a
food allergy.”

Credibility

With respect to credibility, caregivers posi-
tively rated the quality of the fully developed

152

F3-App’s audiovisual qualities and realism of
locations and dialogue (see Table 3).

Additional Feedback

Interviews gathered caregiver and child feed-
back for further improvement of all content,
visuals, and instructions (see Table 1). For exam-
ple, participants provided constructive criticism
of visuals and suggested additional choice
options (e.g., adding a strategic option of “Bring
something to share with everyone” to the family
barbeque). Examination of children’s responses
related to key strategies and information they
remembered conﬁrmed that new content con-
veyed
the
intended
skills
and
knowledge.
Interview feedback was further integrated into
the ﬁnalized F3-App for use in the RCT.
Caregivers described the ability of the game and
the new caregiver features in prompting family
communication. As one caregiver stated, “[The
App] helped me see what I need to reinforce. I
thought she understood things and obviously she
didn’t because she got those questions wrong, but
then we were able to talk about it so that was very
helpful. It deﬁnitely starts conversations, much
needed, or necessary conversations.” Finally, care-
givers reported that the F3-App exposed them and
their children to new potential challenges and strat-
egies to manage them; for example, “I deﬁnitely
saw things [strategies for managing FA in social sit-
uations] that we usually do in real life, and things
that I never even thought of before.”

Discussion

This feasibility study describes an iterative,
user-centered design process to develop and reﬁne
a novel intervention delivered via interactive soft-
ware for elementary school-aged children with
physician-diagnosed IgE-mediated FA. The pur-
pose of this intervention is to provide support, edu-
cation, and skill acquisition to children with FA
and their caregivers to help them manage their
FA. Ultimately, participants rated the F3-App as
acceptable and credible, found the content useful,
and reported the F3-App prompted family discus-
sions about managing their child’s FA.
Reviews of existing apps marketed for FA reveal
that feware speciﬁc to IgE-mediated FA, many lack
adequate education and medical guideline-focused
recommendations, many focus on identifying
safe foods/restaurants, and collaborations with

community partners are needed (Cuervo-Pardo et
al., 2015; Mandracchia et al., 2020; Matricardi et
al., 2020). Development of this interactive educa-
tional software program focused on IgE-mediated
FA included perspectives of medical providers
critical to ensure consistency with medical guide-
lines, and educational material and skills appropri-
ate for this developmental age group. Caregiver
and child input also informed formulation of expe-
riential contexts and vignettes, including manag-
ing social situations (e.g., resisting foods offered
by adults), and responding to teasing and bullying.
Feedback also provided valuable input into visual
presentation and user features, including the user
interface and methods of sustained engagement
throughout the program. Finally, caregiver feed-
back indicated that increased communication
about social issues relating to FA management
was a key beneﬁt of using the F3-App. This
aided in further development of intervention ele-
ments promoting caregivers’ involvement and
family discussion of FA management.
Findings indicate that this iterative, user-centered
design process was effective in creating an interven-
tion for elementary school-aged children with FA
with acceptability and credibility. Use of quantita-
tive metrics and qualitative input from key partners
throughout development helped to identify and pri-
oritize areas for targeted change and further devel-
opment. The F3-App was described as enjoyable
and a helpful learning and communication tool.
Apps are recognized as a valuable tool to sup-
port self-management in chronic conditions
(Ackerman et al., 2010) and use of this interven-
tion method could inform design of future apps
targeting pediatric self-management. This study
supports the use of interactive educational soft-
ware programs for pediatric populations includ-
ing FA given their highly engageable format. In
addition to potentially enhancing knowledge
and management self-efﬁcacy, interactive educa-
tional software programs can facilitate exposure
to social scenarios that require unique skills for
FA management, facilitating parent–child com-
munication and planning for effective manage-
ment. This last point is particularly critical;
while successfully navigating social situations
is critical to FA management, it is often not
addressed in FA clinical care. Interactive educa-
tional software programs also have the capability
to tailor intervention content to children’s aller-
gies, which is important given the diversity of
this condition and the fact that children’s

DEVELOPMENT OF A FOOD ALLERGY INTERVENTION
153

allergies may change over time. Finally, this for-
mat allows families to revisit experiential con-
texts to refresh their knowledge and practice
management of different situations as children
mature (e.g., explaining FA in social situations).
These study ﬁndings support progression to the
next phase of behavioral intervention development:
pilot testing of the F3-App using a randomized
design (Czajkowski et al., 2015). This RCT will
examine the efﬁcacy of the F3-App versus
Standard Care (SC; brief ofﬁce visit and educa-
tional handouts) using a crossover design to evalu-
ate the combined effects of SC and the F3-App
(e.g., is the greatest efﬁcacy found after a physician
refers family to use the F3-App after an ofﬁce
visit?). We will assess changes in children’s FA
knowledge and FA self-efﬁcacy and changes in
parent–child communication regarding FA man-
agement. Intervention outcomes will be presented
in a separate article. We plan to disseminate this
product for wide availability to families through
VBI’s pediatric health product suite supported
with marketing sponsorships and advertising part-
nerships. Distribution will be supported through
self-promotion, national patient support groups,
and
professional
medical
organizations.
The
F3-App has the potential to signiﬁcantly impact
families of children with FA who beneﬁt from
enhanced education and skills practice via engag-
ing, easily accessible formats.

Study Limitations

A few key limitations bear mention. Our study
samples were primarily NLW and overrepresented
higher socioeconomic status. Including children
from diverse racial, ethnic, and socioeconomic
backgrounds is important given likely disparities
in FA management (e.g., epinephrine access/use,
access to medical care, and food access/security)
(McQuaid et al., 2016). More diverse samples
would promote broader inclusion of culturally
based FA beliefs and family management practices
and is an important consideration prior to dis-
semination of this intervention. Use of speciﬁc
recruitment strategies (e.g., community events,
organization, and locations) and translation of the
intervention into Spanish could enhance diversity.
Additionally, most participating caregivers were
mothers. A broader representation of family
members would incorporate different perspec-
tives involved in FA management. While we
assessed family preferences and sought to make

the F3-App available across multiple platforms
and operating systems, there may be families
with limited access to these resources. Use of the
F3-App in settings outside of the home (e.g., phy-
sicians’
ofﬁces,
public/school
libraries)
may
improve access and uptake of this intervention
and enhance or reinforce both child-caregiver
and family-provider communication regarding
FA management. While our methods integrated
community partner feedback and an iterative
design, incorporation of an organizational frame-
work speciﬁc to intervention development, such
as the ORBIT model (Czajkowski et al., 2015),
would have further strengthened study design.
The app content could be adjusted to reﬂect
updated approaches to FA management since
its development (e.g., food choices based on
precautionary
labeling).
The
technological
methods used to create the F3-App were also
highly relevant during the study time period
(i.e., 2013–2016), yet future research could
incorporate the ever-progressing technological
advancements for intervention development.

Conclusion and Future Directions

Interactive educational programs have increas-
ingly become important adjunctive disease manage-
ment tools (McCurdie et al., 2012) and can enhance
children’s conﬁdence in FA management and fam-
ily communication regarding the stresses and chal-
lenges of disease management. Yet, future work is
needed to promote diversity, equity, and inclusion
(DEI) in intervention development and implemen-
tation. Given racial and ethnic disparities in
FA-related outcomes (Warren et al., 2021), success-
ful dissemination of educational programs to the
diverse group of patients with pediatric FA is criti-
cal. Once educational programs, like the F3-App,
have demonstrated efﬁcacy, research and clinical
care teams should consider how to incorporate
these interventions into existing care models (e.g.,
appointments with allergists, other specialists, pri-
mary care providers, school settings) or to have
interventions be available through the internet to
increase accessibility. Including individuals from
diverse backgrounds from the intervention develop-
ment through implementation stages is essential to
promote health equity. Moving forward, DEI efforts
will remain central as our team begins pilot testing
of the F3-App using an RCT to evaluate the impact
on FA management, adjustment, self-efﬁcacy,
knowledge, and family communication.

154