A technical solution to improving palliative and hospice care

Michael A. Kallen & DerShung Yang & Niina Haas

Received: 30 September 2010 /Accepted: 3 January 2011 /Published online: 16 January 2011
# Springer-Verlag 2011

Abstract
Purpose This project sought to help palliative and hospice
care practices improve patient care quality and operational
efficiency by improving patient symptom status reporting
and symptom management, reducing associated provider
documentation workload, and enhancing patient–provider
and provider–provider communication. We developed a
user-friendly, electronic medical record-compatible, soft-
ware prototype that allows typical clinical data and patient-
reported outcomes (PRO) to be entered and stored. This
data is immediately available during the clinical encounter
with graphically depicted summaries for patient history and
PRO assessments, a trending feature that links symptom
behavior to interventions and the Edmonton Labeled Visual
Information System.
Methods A user-centered design approach allowed for
iterative cycles of needs/usability feedback from providers
and patients/caregivers to be incorporated into the devel-
opment of our prototype’s technical structure and features.

To determine the needs and initial usability of the project’s
prototype, we interviewed eight providers and 18 patients/
caregivers. Another usability test, consisting of patient/
caregiver (n=18) and provider (n=9) interviews, assessed
the functioning prototype’s design, usability, and usefulness.
Results Patients/caregivers (n=18) reported that the proto-
type was usable (100%), it would facilitate patient–provider
communication, shared decision making, and self-
management (100%), and they would be willing to try the
system and recommend it to their providers (100%). The
providers (n=9) felt that the prototype encouraged better
use of patient assessments in decision making and patient
care (100%) and improved identification of cause/temporal
relationship between care events and outcomes (100%),
monitoring of patient status (100%), communication in a
multi-disciplinary team (100%), and operational efficiency
and patient care quality (88.9%).
Conclusions Quality of patient care and operational efficiency
can be improved with an effective assessment, evaluation, and
communication tool. This project developed an electronic
version of such a tool. Future efforts will hone its usability and
integration across multiple hospice/palliative care settings.

Keywords Hospice . PRO . EMR . Usability.
Communication . Software

Introduction

As of July 1, 2007, 37.9 million people in the USA, some
13% of the total population, were 65 years or older. By
2050, this age group subpopulation is projected to expand
in number to 88.5 million people and account for 20% of
the total US population. Chronic diseases such as cardio-
vascular disease, cancer, and cerebrovascular diseases
(stroke) are already the leading causes of death in the

This paper is based on a presentation given at the Supportive Care in
Cancer MASCC/ISOO 2010 International Symposium in Vancouver,
Canada on June 24-26, 2010.

M. A. Kallen (*)
Department of General Internal Medicine,
The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
P.O. Box 301402, Houston, TX 77230-1402, USA

D. Yang: N. Haas
BrightOutcome,
1110 Lake Cook Road Ste 167,
Buffalo Grove, IL 60089, USA

D. Yang

N. Haas

DOI 10.1007/s00520-011-1086-z

USA and are increasingly prevalent as the American
population becomes more overweight and ages. These
aging and disease patterns are replicated across countries
in the developed world and show signs of emerging in
developing countries as their health and living standards
improve. Numerous studies [1–10] have demonstrated
international deficiencies in meeting the needs of seriously
ill and dying patients, including inadequate pain control and
medical care and poor communication with healthcare
providers. Palliative care is thus rapidly emerging as a
critical component of patient care and management.

Current practice and its challenges

The Department of Palliative Care and Rehabilitation Medi-
cine at The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center
(UT MDACC) has long adopted a patient-reported outcome
(PRO)-based palliative care practice. Their use of PRO-related
assessment tools includes measures such as the Memorial
Delirium Assessment Scale (MDAS) [11, 12], the Edmonton
Classification System for Cancer Pain (ECS-CP) [13, 14], the
Cut down, Annoyed, Guilty, Eye-opener (CAGE) Question-
naire [15, 16] for chemical dependency, the Edmonton
Symptom Assessment System (ESAS) [17, 18], the Palliative
Performance Scale, version 2 for overall performance, and
the Faith, Importance/Influence, Community, Address/Appli-
cability Instrument for spirituality. Such assessments com-
prise an integral part of their palliative care practice and are
used frequently and extensively in patient care.
Currently, however, this PRO-based palliative care
practice is managed mostly in a paper-and-pencil environ-
ment in spite of a hospital-wide electronic medical record
(EMR) system, known as ClinicStation. Although Clinic-
Station is an EMR system, its present status requires it to
function more as an “electronic file cabinet” than as a true
electronic medical “record” system. A majority of clinical
documents must be scanned into the system and exist
therein as scanned documents. As a result, a significant
proportion of “captured” clinical data cannot be electroni-
cally extracted for further processing or analysis. Further-
more, clinical workflow itself can be impeded and become
inefficient and prone to error, as patients’ paper forms and
questionnaires (both new and past history) have to be
printed, completed, scanned, and threaded in a complex
cycle of documentation to maintain ClinicStation as a
paper-based paperless environment.
In this project, we sought to address issues identified by
palliative care practitioners concerning workflow ineffi-
ciency, data inaccuracy, difficulty in data interpretation, and
challenges to patient–provider and provider–provider com-
munication that a sophisticated and multi-disciplinary
palliative care environment can engender.

Purpose/Aims

The PRO-Based Palliative and Hospice Care Management
System is a project designed to use computer software to
help palliative and hospice practices improve their patient
care quality and operational efficiency by improving patient
symptom status reporting and symptom management,
reducing associated provider documentation workload,
and enhancing patient–provider and provider–provider
communication. Our project’s specific aims were to: (1)
define a PRO-based palliative/hospice care model for use in
developing the prototype software and (2) evaluate the
prototype software in terms of the system’s usability and
usefulness.

The prototype

The prototype software system is designed to improve
multiple aspects of palliative care and to be either integrated
with an EMR system or as a stand-alone product. The
interface was created to be sophisticated in its functionality
but simplistic and intuitive in its usability.
The prototype interface begins with a simple provider
login page, which requires a unique username and
password. Upon entering the system, the provider can
access patient records (lab results, PRO assessments,
medical history) via the navigational tabs positioned at the
top of the page (Figs. 1, 2, and 3). These tabs include
Assessments, Support, Notes, Summaries, and Trends. The
Assessments tab allows the provider to access blank PRO
assessments in order to have them filled out by the patient/
caregiver/provider. These assessments provide symptom
and quality of life data that populate the prototype’s
Summary and Trends tabs. The Support page provides
immediate electronic access to an Opioid Converter, a
Physician Handbook, and a Nurse’s Handbook.
Upon accessing records for a specific patient, a “Notes”
tab will open and present information from prior visits with
the patient, including a summary of past clinical events, a
patient’s assessment results, and any additional clinical data
added by other healthcare providers. New information, such
as a patient’s medical history, current condition, or other
assessment data, can also be added with this feature.
While healthcare professionals are using the program, they
can also employ a unique array of features that aid
communication between doctors and patients. One such
feature is Walker’s interactive visual tool, the Edmonton
Labeled Visual Information System (ELVIS) [19, 20], which
can be used by healthcare professionals to document
complex cancer burden and treatment information and
visually convey such information to other providers, patients,
and their caregivers. ELVIS (Fig. 1) has demonstrated
superior ability over text to help providers memorize such

168

information more quickly (4 mins vs. 13 mins), with the
memory lasting much longer (83% recall vs. 60% immedi-
ately after and 65% recall vs. 43% after 18–24 h) [19].
Another feature aimed at improving overall care is the
“Summaries” tab, which can be clicked to visually display
relevant information from multiple sources simultaneously—
including PRO assessments, patient history, and healthcare
notes (Fig. 2).

Finally, perhaps the most powerful tool of the software is
found in the program’s “Trends” tab. In this tab, a user will
find visual representations of data placed on a timeline
(Fig. 3). This feature depicts the charted data (top portion)
over events (middle) and date ranges (bottom). These trend
charts provide instant access to a large amount of data for
healthcare providers. Furthermore, the overlap of outcomes
data and clinical events along the same timeline can

Fig. 1 Electronic ELVIS tool

Fig. 2 Prototype summaries
feature

169

facilitate detection of temporal and potentially causal
relationships that could be hard to detect when analysis is
conducted using multiple paper or even electronic reports,
thus improving quality of care.
Overall, the prototype software is designed to store and
convey large amounts of information quickly and in a
manner that benefits both patient and doctor. Specifically,
patients are presented with information in a fashion that
allows for better understanding of their situation while
doctors are presented with information in such a way as to
improve their ability to understand and thus care for the
patient.

Methodology

The aforementioned aims of this study were achieved
through the implementation of several different yet com-
plementary research methods, including: provider and
patient interviews, prototype design and development, and
provider and patient usability evaluations. In addition, to
achieve these aims, the project utilized input and feedback
from palliative care providers/patients/caregivers at UT
MDACC.

Physician/nurse interviews

Feedback was solicited from clinicians and care providers
to understand their needs and requirements as to the use of

a computer system to help them manage their daily clinical
activities, especially regarding the use of PRO assessments in
patient care. Eight individual interviews were conducted with
four physicians and four nurses at the Palliative Care Clinic of
UT MDACC. Interview sessions lasted up to 30 min each and
addressed the perceived requirements for the prototype
system from the care provider’s perspective, as well as
feedback on how such a system could be integrated into the
daily routines of clinical practice. The interviews for both the
physician/nurses and patients/caregivers (described below)
were recorded, transcribed, and analyzed to identify common
themes from the results. [20–22]

Patient/caregiver interviews

11Nine cancer patients receiving palliative care at UT
MDACC and nine caregivers of such patients were inter-
viewed. Interview sessions lasted up to 30 min each and were
divided into three sections of approximately equal time length
(i.e., 10 min). Each section had its own primary task: task 1, to
review the measurement domains and questionnaires pro-
posed for the care model; task 2, to review the proposed user
interface design and work flow; and task 3, to express
expectations of the measurement system.

Quantitative evaluations

Twenty seven participants were divided into provider,
patient, and caregiver subgroups. Subjects first used the

Fig. 3 Prototype trends feature

170

prototype system to complete several PRO assessments as
they would typically complete on paper per usual care
practice at UT MDACC. The exact assessment measures to
be completed per participant depended on participant study
status (i.e., provider, patient, or caregiver) and are described
below.
Providers: used the prototype system to complete two
assessments, MDAS [11, 12] and ECS-CP [13, 14].
Providers completed these two assessments acting in their
normal role of providing patient care, while focusing on a
fictitious patient as the target of assessment. Providers then
completed two typically scheduled PRO assessments:
ESAS [17, 18] and CAGE alcohol abuse assessment tool
[15, 16], on behalf of their fictitious patient, as though
assisting the patient to complete such PRO assessments.
Patients and caregivers: used the electronic PRO system
to complete the ESAS and CAGE assessments. The ESAS
and CAGE are standard PRO assessments, an established
part of current UT MDACC practice, and are regularly
scheduled for palliative care patients to complete. Patients
completed these two assessments acting in their normal
patient role, while caregivers completed them for their
patients as though assisting them. Patients and caregivers
focused on, as their target of assessment (a) their or their
patient’s actual current status, (b) a previously experienced
status, or (c) a fictional status.
Providers, patients, and caregivers then viewed assessment
results, which were immediately available for all measures
completed and presented both numerically and graphically.
Additionally, hypothetical longitudinal ESAS data, which
incorporated assessment results from the current implemen-
tation session, were viewed. Participants also had the
opportunity to explore other prototype solutions. Lastly,
provider, patient, and caregiver participants were asked to
complete a general and a task-specific usability questionnaire
following their use of the prototype computer system to
evaluate the usability of the interface design.
The usability evaluation measure employed was the
System Usability Scale (SUS). The overall evaluation
measures were project-developed instruments, customized
for providers and for patients/caregivers to reflect the
differing uses to which providers and patients/caregivers
would typically put the computer system. These measures
are as follows:
Usability evaluation: The SUS [23, 24] is designed to assess
the usability of a system’s user interface design. Questions
focus on ease of learning, efficiency of use, memorizability,
and subjective satisfaction with the user interface design.
Overall evaluation (usefulness): We evaluated our
prototype solution’s overall performance, in particular
usefulness, with a project-developed instrument with
provider and patient/caregiver versions. The instrument
includes both fixed-response and open-response items.

Because this was a pilot study with a constrained sample
size, the usability evaluation data were analyzed descrip-
tively at the item level and, for SUS data, at the scale total
score level. Means, medians, standard deviations, and
response ranges were determined for the total sample and
per study group (i.e., provider, patient, and caregiver).
In the study, usability was considered as an incorporation
of system effectiveness and efficiency and user satisfaction.
Usability was defined in the context of the assessment and
review tasks assigned to study participants. Usability was
measured via the SUS and a project-developed scale, both
of which employ numeric response option sets ranging
from 0 (strongly disagree) to 4 (strongly agree). The study
was considered a success if average ratings of these two
questionnaires were both greater than or equal to 3,
indicating a firm endorsement of the usability and useful-
ness of the system.

The results

Objective no. 1: define a PRO-based palliative/hospice care
model

The PRO-based palliative/hospice care model was developed
based upon feedback from interviews with physicians/nurses
and patients/caregivers, which are described below.

Physician/nurse interviews

Healthcare providers felt that the prototype improved their
ability to communicate with patients. They cited the ability
to visually show data as being a key component of patient
understanding. Of particular usefulness was the ELVIS
feature, which could be used by patients to show where
pain was being felt, or, more commonly, by doctors to
explain what was going on inside a patient and how a given
procedure or treatment might help that patient.
Barriers to using the prototype were largely related to the
way certain aspects or features of the program meshed with
real-world clinical scenarios. The bulk of such critiques
were accompanied by suggestions for how to solve the
problem. Concerns were also present, although limited,
about the ability to have the necessary computer access for
the system to function at its peak usefulness and whether all
patients would benefit from its usability.

Patient/caregiver interviews

Patient feedback largely revolved around three thematic
areas: improved comprehension, improved communication,
and improved patient peace-of-mind. Many patients saw the
prototype as a means for them to learn more about their

171

own condition. Patients enjoyed being able to review their
own medical history and lab results and to peruse this
documentation and reporting independently. Not only did
this allow them to learn more about their own status, but it
also allowed them to have more informed discussions with
their healthcare providers, in particular helping them to
know what questions to ask about their own condition.
There were few barriers mentioned in the patient inter-
views; multiple patients said they had trouble understand-
ing all the medical vocabulary found in the prototype and
suggested that a glossary be added.

Objective no. 2: evaluate the prototype in terms
of the system’s usability and usefulness

Quantitative feedback

Usability evaluation: Providers, patients, and caregivers
evaluated the usability of the interface design after completing
their specific assessment and review experiences during the
prototype solution implementation. The general evaluation
measure used was the SUS [24]. Results from the general
system usability evaluation are presented below. Subjects
were considered to “agree” with an item if their responses
were either 3 (“agree”) or 4 (“strongly agree”; Table 1).
The average SUS item rating of 3.35 (which translated to
an overall SUS score of 83.85) was greater than the
criterion target of 3.00, indicating that, as a whole,
physicians, nurses, patients, and caregivers endorsed the
usability of our system.
Usefulness evaluation: All subjects completed usefulness
questionnaire. Providers and patients/caregivers each had
their own user-specific evaluation questionnaire. For both

of these questionnaires, the scale was 0 (strongly disagree)
to 4 (strongly agree), with a rating of 3 or above indicating
an endorsement of the value of this system. As shown in
the following two tables, all items were rated on average 3
(“agree”) or higher (Table 2).
Patients and caregivers overwhelmingly agreed with all
statements in the questionnaire. Item nos. 1, 2, and 6 re-
affirmed the usability of this system. Item nos. 3, 4, and 5
confirmed the “usefulness” of the system in facilitating
patient–provider communication, shared decision making,
and self-management (Table 3).
Similarly, the providers also had high ratings for the
usefulness of this system, endorsing unanimously four out
of eight “usefulness” items, including the better use of
patient assessments in decision making and patient care, the
identification of cause/temporal relationships between care
events and outcomes, the better monitoring of patient
status, and the better communication in a multi-
disciplinary team. The ratings for items “improve opera-
tional efficiency” and “improve quality of patient care”
were also high at 88.9% agreement. The ratings for the
remaining two “usefulness” items on workflow and
communication improvements were at an agreement level
of 77.7%, which is still considered satisfactory.

Qualitative feedback

A total of nine patients, nine caregivers, five nurses, and
four doctors were interviewed in the Palliative Care Clinic
post-prototype implementation. While their feedback was
predominantly positive, their thoughts on the future
development of the software included suggestions that the
following adjustments would be beneficial: a side-by-side

Table 1 System usability scale

SUS items
Total
Phys/Nurse
Pt/Caregiver

Mean
%Agree
Mean
%Agree
Mean
%Agree

1. I think that I would like to use this system frequently.
3.43
85.7
3.67
100.0
3.00
60.0
a2. I did not find the system unnecessarily complex.
3.21
85.7
3.22
88.9
3.20
80.0
3. I thought the system was easy to use.
3.50
100.0
3.56
100.0
3.40
100.0
a4. I did not think that I would need the support of a technical
person to be able to use this system.
3.36
92.9
3.33
88.8
3.40
100.0

5. I found the various functions in this system were well integrated.
3.62
100.0
3.67
100.0
3.50
100.0
a6. I did not think there was too much inconsistency in this system.
3.43
85.7
3.56
100.0
3.20
60.0
7. I would imagine that most people would learn to use this system very quickly.
3.14
78.6
3.11
77.7
3.20
80.0
a8. I did not find the system very cumbersome to use.
3.64
100.0
3.56
100.0
3.80
100.0
9. I felt very confident using the system.
3.50
92.8
3.33
88.8
3.80
100.0
a10. I did not need to learn a lot of things before I could get going
with this system.
2.93
71.5
2.89
77.7
3.00
60.0

SUS total (0–100)
83.85
84.72
81.88

a Item has been reverse worded and scored for this table to reflect usability

172

comparison of current and previous ESAS results in the
Summaries–Assessments section, additional lab values to
track, arranging lab values in topic-based panels, showing
only the summary scores for CAGE and MDAS and
making them expandable when necessary, and adding
Medication Administration Records to the system to track
medications.
In addition, their positive feedback included: a patient’s
comment indicating that the computer-administered ESAS
was better than the paper-based ESAS, a physician’s
comment that the software could be a great teaching/
decision-aid tool for fellows who are new to the clinic, and
an assessment by the Clinical Administrative Director that
this system, when fully developed and integrated, could
save at least 20% of nurses’ time.

Conclusion

Palliative care is rapidly emerging as a critical component
of patient care and management. Improving modalities for

health delivery that facilitate patient and family communi-
cation with the medical team has been identified as
imperative. PRO assessments have thus increasingly be-
come accepted in the palliative care setting to provide
standardized measurements of subjective physical and
psychological issues and concerns, as complementary to
objective laboratory data. However, the use of PRO in
palliative care settings, when practiced, is still largely
paper-based, which is time-consuming, costly, and error-
prone.
Our project developed software to help palliative and
hospice care practitioners improve their patient assessment
practices. Although the sample size in this study was small,
both of our goals were successfully achieved by this
project. To evaluate the prototype in terms of its usability
and usefulness, interviews with nine patients, nine care-
givers, and nine providers were conducted. The average
usability item rating of 3.35 was greater than the criterion
target of 3.00, representing a strong usability endorsement
of the system. In summary, the prototype evaluation results
from patients, caregivers, and providers all strongly

Table 2 Patient/caregiver usefulness evaluation

Patient/caregiver evaluation items
Total

Mean
%Agree

1. I enjoyed using this system to report symptom status.
3.40
80.0
2. It is easy to complete patient assessments using this system.
3.60
100.0
3. This system can help me better use patient symptom status reports to communicate with healthcare providers.
3.60
100.0
4. This system can help me better use patient symptom status reports in decision making about patient care.
3.40
100.0
5. This system can help in the monitoring of patient status to better serve patient needs.
3.80
100.0

6. It will be easier to use this system to complete patient assessments than to complete assessments using paper-and-pencil.
3.60
100.0
7. I would like to be a beta-tester of this system when it is ready.
3.80
100.0
8. I would likely recommend patient care providers adopt this system when it is fully developed.
3.60
100.0

Table 3 Physician/nurse usefulness evaluation

Physician/nurse evaluation items
Total

Mean
%Agree

1. This system could improve our operational efficiency.
3.67
88.9
2. This system could help us improve our quality of patient care.
3.56
88.9
3. This system could help us better utilize patient assessments in clinical decision making and patient care.
3.78
100.0
4. This system could help us identify important causal/temporal relationships between care events and outcomes
that can aid our clinical decision making.
3.56
100.0

5. This system could help us monitor patient status and better serve their needs.
3.67
100.0
6. This system will work well with our existing workflow.
3.22
77.7

7. This system will improve patient–provider communication.
3.00
77.7
8. This system could facilitate communication among members of a multi-disciplinary team.
3.67
100.0
9. I will recommend our practice to adopt this system when it is fully developed.
3.67
100.0
10. I will recommend other practices to adopt this system when it is fully developed.
3.56
88.9

173

supported the usability and the usefulness of this PRO-
Based Palliative and Hospice Care Management System.
Future plans involve an in-depth system’s model evalua-
tion of the risks and benefits of this prototype versus the
current standard of care including the impact on operational
efficiency, integration into clinical treatment, and time and
financial cost/savings involved with learning and using the
system. Once completed, this system will be available to other
hospice and palliative care facilities, starting with those
associated with MD Anderson Cancer Center.

Acknowledgment
This project has been funded in whole with Federal
funds from the National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health,
Department of Health and Human Services, under Contract No.
HHSN261200800050C and NCI Control No. N43CO-2008-00050.

Authors Yang and Haas are the developers of
this product and work for BrightOutcome.