A Mobile App for Illiterate and Semi-illiterate
Pregnant Women- A User Centered Approach

Jane Katusiime1,2(&) and Niels Pinkwart1

1 Humboldt Universität zu Berlin, Unter den Linden 6, 10099 Berlin, Germany

2 Mbarara University of Science and Technology,
P.O. Box 1410, Mbarara, Uganda

Abstract. Mobile technology is utilized in health care to improve service
delivery, but researchers and developers have mainly focused on developing
applications that are usable by people who can read and write. While it is relatively
easy for literate women to access maternal health information via mHealth apps
and search engines like Google, it is almost impossible for their illiterate coun-
terparts to enjoy such privileges. We present an android based mobile health
application designed for illiterate and semi-illiterate women, that provides per-
sonalized maternal health information, a reminder functionality and a call func-
tionality. To get user requirements for the application, we conducted a ﬁeld study
in form of semi-structured interviews and focused group discussions with illiterate
and semi-illiterate pregnant women and health practitioners in maternal health
care from Uganda, and designers/developers of applications for low resource
settings. The design of the application follows a user centered iterative process.
The application was tested for functionality and usability by the pregnant women.

Keywords: Maternal health  Mobile health  Illiteracy  User centered design

1
Introduction

Mobile technology continues to gain popularity globally. There were 4.57 billion
mobile phone subscribers in 2018 which is estimated at 63.5% of the global population
[1]. There is a high number of mobile phone subscribers observed in developing
countries as well [1]. The popularity of mobile phones has created opportunities in
health care. There have been mHealth interventions developed for maternal health.
Some of these interventions have indeed been successful, for instance Mobile Moms
and MomConnect [2] but despite these interventions, maternal mortality remains a big
challenge especially in developing countries [3]. Maternal mortality is the death of
women during pregnancy, childbirth or within 42 days after delivery due to pregnancy
related complications. Maternal mortality is estimated at 216 deaths per 100,000 live
births globally and the highest maternal mortality rates are in developing countries [4].
There are various indirect factors that contribute to high maternal mortality rates in
developing countries such as scarcity of health workers, limited access to health
information and high illiteracy levels [5, 6]. Illiteracy prohibits illiterate women from

© IFIP International Federation for Information Processing 2019
Published by Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2019
D. Lamas et al. (Eds.): INTERACT 2019, LNCS 11749, pp. 617–620, 2019.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-29390-1_48

accessing available text-based interventions such as Mobile Moms and MomConnect,
yet it is illiterate women that are prone to maternal mortality mostly.
Despite global reduction of illiteracy, gender-based illiteracy persists and this is
evidenced by higher levels of illiteracy among women compared to men [7]. Some
cultures are characterized by male dominance which puts females at a disadvantage in
attaining education. Illiteracy contributes to maternal mortality by limiting illiterate
women from accessing maternal health information and using the available text based
digital artifacts that support maternal health care. Therefore, there is a need to empower
illiterate and semi illiterate women with interventions that support maternal health care,
are secure and usable by them.
We propose a multimedia (video, audio) based mobile app that provides person-
alized maternal health information to pregnant women based on the maturity of their
pregnancy. It also has a reminder functionality for appointments and a call functionality
for the pregnant women to contact their health practitioners.

2
Method

To gather user requirements, we conducted a ﬁeld study in form of semi-structured
interviews and focused group discussion (FGD) with 25 illiterate pregnant women, 10
health practitioners in maternal health care and 10 designers/developers of applications
for low resource settings. The pregnant women and health practitioners were recruited
from the department of Obstetrics and gynaecology of Mbarara Regional Referral
Hospital in Southwestern Uganda while the designers/developers were recruited
through referrals of those who already knew about the study. Areas discussed in the
interviews and FGD included access to digital technologies and health information, and
user requirements for the app. The user requirements were used to design the app which
was tested for functionality and usability by 10 pregnant women following an iterative
process. The women were given phones with the app pre-installed, trained on how to
login in and access videos and audios. They were then allowed to use the app for not
more than one hour. This was followed by an FGD about the app.

3
App Design

The android app is designed based on four core requirements, following a user centered
design approach, which emphasizes involvement of users in all design phases.
(1) Multimedia based: The app should enable users to retrieve multimedia (video and
audio) maternal health content. (2) Have a reminder functionality to remind the women
to go for their antenatal appointments. (3) Have a call functionality to enable women
contact their health practitioners when they are away from the hospital. (4) Easy to use
and secure: (4) The app should protect the information in the app from unauthorized
access and should be easy to navigate.

3.1
App Functionalities and Challenges Faced

The login: The user taps a combination of four images (pictorial password) to login
(Fig. 1). Provision of a wrong password triggers a vibration. Pictorial password was
used because the illiterate users are unable to use the conventional text-based username

618

and password. Biometric mechanisms such as face and voice recognition were also not
possible because the users have low processing phones that are unable to process
biometric information. It is important to note that the login was crucial because most of
the users reported that they share the mobile phones.
Multimedia messages: During the ﬁrst antenatal visit, the maturity of the woman’s
pregnancy and due date are determined. The pregnancy begin date is then set in the app
calendar. The app counts down and pops up a video and/or audio tailored to the current
maturity of her pregnancy every month. Tapping the watch button takes the user to the
saved videos which are presented as scrollable thumbnails for easy accessibility
(Fig. 1). Tapping the Listen button takes the user to the list of audio ﬁles which are
saved with emojis to indicate the content of each ﬁle. Each video or audio is one to two
minutes long. Messages were inbuilt in the app and pre-installed on the mobile phones
because the users had no internet to dynamically download them.
Appointments and reminders: During the antenatal visit, the next appointment date
is decided and input into the app by the health practitioner via the calendar module. The
day before the appointment date, the app triggers an audio reminder reminding the
woman to go for her appointment. This reminder is an audio voice in the local language
stating, “Your next antenatal appointment is tomorrow, please do not forget to go to the
hospital.” The reminder was designed this way to enable illiterate women differentiate
it from other reminders that may be set in the shared phone
The call functionality: The app has a call icon which the woman can tap, and her
call is directed to the health care provider’s pre-set phone number. If the call is not
picked, the woman can leave an audio message for the health provider. The call button
appears on all app screens for easy access because the illiterate women are unable to
navigate to the contact list and choose the desired number or text-based contact.

3.2
App Workﬂow

After starting the app, the user is prompted to input a pictorial password. Upon suc-
cessful login, the user has access to three options: watch video, listen to audio, or set
pregnancy begin date and appointment date (Fig. 2). Choosing any of the options takes
the user to the respective menu displays. The user can terminate the application by
navigating away from it.

Fig. 1. Login and multimedia screen
Fig. 2. App workﬂow diagram

A Mobile App for Illiterate and Semi-illiterate Pregnant Women
619

4
Discussion and Lessons Learnt

We found that designing for illiterate people follows the same design guidelines but
presents a unique set of requirements such as exclusive use of multimedia. Artefacts for
this category of users require constant user involvement. Participants in the design
process of the app felt they owned the app and readily accepted it. However, engaging
other stakeholders such as spouses and community leaders is also paramount.
Participants who were HIV positive or had sensitive conditions, and shared mobile
phones were more concerned about privacy of the information and their communica-
tion with the health practitioners compared to those without.
There is a need to create a balance between the design trade-offs when designing for
the illiterate. We faced two major trade-offs: (1) The conﬂict between allowing the
illiterate users to be in control of the app and the need for prescriptive guidance/training
on how to use the app. (2) The conﬂict between making the app easy to use versus
keeping it secure. The more usable the application got, the less secure it became.
The strength of this intervention is that it is based on participants’ contributions and
needs, who are the end users, and this makes it acceptable to a similar category of users.
Also, the requirements, design perspectives and procedures from this study are trans-
ferrable to other similar cases of designing for illiterate users.
In conclusion, Illiterate people can utilize mHealth systems, but they need to be
involved in all the design phases if secure and usable systems are to be developed for
them. Our next step is to roll out the intervention in real life settings and do more
empirical studies to determine its impact on maternal healthcare. We also intend to add
a sharing functionality to the app where the users can share their experiences.