Procuring a Usable System Using Unemployed Personas 

Erik Markensten 
Interaction and Presentation Laboratory 

Royal Institute of Technology 

100 44 Stockholm, Sweden 

Henrik Artman 
Interaction and Presentation Laboratory 

Royal Institute of Technology 

100 44 Stockholm, Sweden 

METHOD 
The case study was conducted as a participatory 
observation field study where the first author participated as 
a usability consultant from the usability company 
throughout the user research and design phase of the overall 
project. Therefore, this phase is described mainly based on 
the first author’s experiences of participating in the project. 
This is complemented with reflections of the process by 
other project members, both before and after this phase. 
The interviews were conducted both with the project leader 
from the usability company and with members of the 
procurement project group (hereafter called PPG). The 
interviews were conducted by both authors in a project 
room at the interviewee’s workplace. The second author 
was lead interviewer. All interviews were recorded.  

We 
have 
analysed 
the 
project 
as 
it 
uncovered 
chronologically. We have triangulated the observations 
with documentation and with opinions and reflections from 
the interviews.  

RESULTS 
This case study describes a pre study that was conducted to 
gather requirements for a new version of the Swedish 
National Labor Market Administration’s website. The goal 
of the pre study was to gather information for making a 

management decision of whether to invest in a new website. 
In large the project consisted of three phases, as described 
in Figure 1. 

The first author participated as a usability consultant during 
the gathering of user requirements. Before that the agency 
had gathered organizational requirements and they 
continued to prepare the decision material and anchor the 
results in the agency after the user research and design 
phase was finished.  

 

Figure 1. The project as it was planned in relation to the 
previous and following internal activities.  

Project Background 
The Swedish National Labor Market Administration 
(AMV) is a very important government agency in Sweden. 
It’s role is to monitor the employment market and decrease 
unemployment. When Internet became widespread in the 
late nineties the agency was one of the first to use the new 
medium to offer services to the citizens. The website has 
since grown with more services and information. Although 
successful, it has with time become difficult to use. One 
reason is that the organic growth of the site has created an 
information structure that is not developed from a usage 
perspective. One of the procurers conclude that: 

“We have not been able to design with the users interest in mind 
but everyone sees to their department and their own interests” 

Figure 2. The website as it is presented today  

There are three major user groups of the website: 
employers, unemployed and various users that seek 
information about the work of the agency. Since they all 

have to share the same top navigation much important 
information has today been pushed downwards in the 
structure, which make services and information difficult to 
find. Furthermore the website is in general heavy on 
information which also adds to the difficulties. Figure 2 
gives a snapshot of the current website. It has six main 
sections that are directed to different user groups. 

The agency’s mission is to match employers and 
unemployed. This has traditionally been handled by 
assistants in the local offices around the country. The 
website has, until now, mostly been seen as separate from 
the local offices, and it has been managed and developed by 
a specific department within the organisation with much 
authority of its own. During the last year, with up to 
700.000 visitors every month, the management wanted to 
create a new organisation in which the website would have 
a more central role. In the new organisation the website 
would be the main channel for the matching process and 
employers and unemployed would handle the process 
themselves. A new call centre and the local offices would 
mainly deal with those that need more support and that can 
not get by on their own. In this way it was envisioned that 
the organisation’s resources could be used more effectively.  

To accomplish this, the general director ordered a pre study 
to define the business and user requirements for a new 
version of the website. This project had been initiated once 
before but had crashed due to internal disagreements: 

“There had been a project like this earlier to define a new 
information structure for the website but it collapsed since there 
were internal disagreements and conflicts about which perspective 
one should use and how the user groups looked like and so on.”  

The new project leader employed two major strategies to 
succeed with the project. One was to make the website a 
management issue rather than a department issue. Hence 
the project group was put together to represent all major 
departments and was organised in direct contact with the 
management. The first months of the project were spent 
gathering 
organizational 
requirements 
from 
various 
documents and statements from the Director General. This 
work resulted in some central summarizing directives. 
Since these were based on speeches by the Director General 
and general documents they were quite abstract, such as: 

“The tools on the website shall above all be an effective support 
for the visitors’ own matching activities”, “The website shall 
communicate our mission and clarify our assignment” and “The 
website shall be developed from a usage perspective and adapt to 
the citizens and companies needs and conditions.”  

The second strategy was to “disarm” the question of the 
users’ perspective. There had not been any research done 
about the users’ needs in the previous project. This had 
been one reason for its crash since everyone had claimed 
that they knew what the users actually needed, as a support 
for their own ideas.  

“Everyone claimed to have the user’s perspective and I claimed 
that no one could have it. The only way to get it was to work very 
systematically with the users” 

Hence, when the PPG had nailed down the business 
requirements as detailed as they could they decided to 
conduct a study with the users to define the user 
requirements. They explained this to the usability 
consultants that they had a framework agreement with and 
they had got to respond with a proposal of how they would 
like to run the project. After a selection process the PPG 
chose a small usability firm, mainly because of their 
methodology: 

“What was attractive was that it was not this kind of “we are the 
experts on the user’s opinions” but a methodological base to 
stand on that was very clear.”  

The usability company provided two consultants, one 
responsible project leader and the first author, as assisting 
consultant. We suggested a process with contextual 
interviews to create personas and scenarios, followed by an 
iterative design and evaluation phase to create a prototype. 
Since the scope of the project was to define a new 
information structure the interviews would not be used so 
much to gather new functional requirements as to 
understand current usage and the segmentation of the user 
population. An abstract representation of the work process 
is provided in Figure 1.  

The project group had worked for five months nailing down 
the organizational requirements and their time was running 
out. They planned to prepare and anchor the results of the 
project in the organisation through a review process before 
the end of the year. Therefore the UCD process could not 
take more than eight weeks. At the same time they wanted 
two iterations and a thorough interview phase. Hence, the 
schedule for the UCD process was very tight. However, the 
project was important and prestigious for the usability 
company and it was judged that we would be able to deliver 
on time by working with two consultants on top speed.  

User Requirements and Prototype Design – a Usability 
Consultant’s Perspective 
The user research and design project was initiated with a 
workshop in which the PPG presented what they had done 
so far in gathering the business requirements. All relevant 
documents were also handed over to the usability company. 
Apart from going through the organizational requirements a 
persona hypothesis [8] was formulated. Several contextual 
interviews [3] were planned for each user group in the 
hypothesis. The hypothesis was based on the agency’s 
existing information and knowledge about the segmentation 
of the users of the website.  

We provided the project group with a list of the planned 
interviews and asked them to participate in as many as 
possible to gain a first hand insight into the results, as well 
as of the process. The members of the PPG were very 
engaged and interested and one of them participated on 
almost all of the 21 interviews that were conducted. In 

order to not interfere too much with the actual interviews 
only one member of the PPG was allowed to attend on each 
interview session. When the interviews were completed we 
analysed them qualitatively and transformed the data into 
personas covering the different user groups, their goals and 
needs. Although the scope was on an information 
architecture level the needs analysis resulted in several 
usage scenarios for the new website with new functionality 
to support the discovered and as yet unmet needs.  

This was all completed in about nine days, Even though this 
was evidently a very fast tempo we felt that we were in 
control of the work. Although they were active and 
engaged, the members of the PPG, on the other hand, only 
participated occasionally in the hands-on work, such as on 
an interview or in a design session and then got the results 
presented to them in a weekly workshop. Thus, they did not 
get the same insight into the details of the results as we got. 
Although this was not discussed it seemed to make them 
uncomfortable. In the following interviews one of them 
comments this as: 

“Things happened very fast. And I don’t think we were prepared 
on that. (…) So we felt that we were maybe not really involved in 
all the details of the work, which we may have wanted to be. But at 
the same time we had decided to follow this time plan to be able to 
do all the things we needed to gather the user requirements. But 
when you look back at it we should have spent more time in the 
project and been more involved.”  

When the personas were discussed the PPG noticed that 
two categories of users seemed to be missing. The selection 
of respondents had not included these user groups. 
Therefore, one of the members of the PPG complemented 
the personas with two more, based on discussions with 
assistants in the local offices. 

After the personas were completed and presented for the 
PPG we moved on to work with the design and the 
information architecture of the first prototype. Card-sorting 
exercises were planned with the two most important user 
groups, but only one could be performed. Again, only one 
member of the PPG was allowed to attend in order not to 
disturb the exercise, but the information architecture was 
worked through with the whole group in a workshop shortly 
after this. Alongside with the information architecture we 
created a first draft prototype. A graphical designer added a 
first idea of form and visual design to it. The prototype and 
the fundamental design ideas were presented and discussed 
with the PPG. Since the members had varying experiences 
of working with design the discussion was not always 
smooth and concepts such as navigation levels had got to be 
explained.  

After the workshop the prototype was made “testable” by 
making it possible to interact with it. While the prototype 
was evaluated with users and by experts on accessibility the 
graphical designer conducted a mood board workshop with 
the PPG to uncover their ideas about the visual design. 
Hence, when we presented the results of the evaluations to 

the project group the visual designer could start working on 
the visual design that would be used in the second iteration. 

Altogether, the general directives of organizational 
requirements, the personas and user requirements, the 
results from the usability and accessibility evaluations, and 
a new form provided the basis for a second high fidelity 
design. However, a few days into the second iteration the 
procurement project leader called us to announce that the 
project needed to make a halt. The PPG had not been able 
to follow and understand all the decisions that had been 
taken during the design process. Therefore they were also 
not sure about the connection between their abstract 
organizational goals and the now concrete design. We were 
assigned to lead a series of full-day workshops with the 
PPG to backtrack what had been done and work through 
both the organizational and user requirements again.  

After three intense workshops spread out over about eight 
days most questions had been answered and the PPG felt 
much more comfortable with the work that had been done. 
We updated the prototype with all the design decisions that 
had been taken during this period and a second round of 
usability test was planned. In the meantime the graphical 
designer negotiated with the PPG about the requirements 
for the final form. As in the first iteration the prototype was 
also sent for evaluation by experts on accessibility. There 
had been many changes in the design, both concerning 
interaction and form issues since the first iteration, and the 
usability evaluations indicated some areas that needed 
reconsideration. This was discussed in a final workshop 
with the PPG. Design decisions were agreed upon and the 
final changes were made to the prototype.  

Figure 3. The design of the final prototype. 

In the new design (Figure 3) each primary persona gets 
their own version, or mode, of the website. This means that 
the whole top navigation can be used for each target group 
which gives better overview and a more shallow 
information architecture. The design is also more action-
oriented than before and more coherent in the sense that 
related parts are now integrated rather than spread out in the 
structure.  

Our last responsibility was to write the final project report 
that described the work process, the personas and basic 
ideas about the final design. This was handed over together 
with the prototype and the final graphical design. Although 
this was the end of our involvement the PPG had much 
remaining work. They had to continue and intensify the 
work of anchoring the results of the whole project in the 
organisation, mainly through a thorough predefined process 
in which the prototype would be sent out for review to 
various departments.  

The halt – an Analysis 
From a UCD perspective the project had progressed 
smoothly. In spite of a tough time plan we were on time. 
Therefore, the halt came as a surprise to us since time had 
been absolute top priority and a halt would inevitably cause 
a delay. But suddenly the priorities had changed. Instead of 
time understanding became essential. When the project was 
discussed in retrospect the PPG leader gave two major 
reasons for the halt: 

“The usability company had delivered entirely accordingly to the 
expectations but the project group did not have full insight and 
understanding (…) of the results, which made them feel uncertain. 
And then they would not be able to perform the extremely 
important work to become ambassadors. So I was forced to halt 
the project so they would be able to understand the results that 
had been produced by the usability company.  

We identified the organizational requirements first and they did 
not reach the same level of concretization as the users’ 
requirements. (…) And the usability company was in charge of 
developing the prototype and we got to review it in this kind of 
dialogue…. but then… the usability company got to strong 
somehow. The usability company was much more professional in 
some way – they had their methodology and they knew where to 
go and so forth. But we, who sat with the organizational 
requirements, in which the usability company did not have any 
competence, we were not as good at steering, so to speak.”  

We were aware that the PPG was unsure about how the 
abstract organizational requirements should be translated 
into the design and had asked them shortly after the user 
interviews to try to detail their requirements to be able to 
discuss them in relation to the design. This was not done, 
however, and in order to be able to deliver on time we felt 
that we had to move on. Furthermore, since we had read the 
report from their previous work and had designed the 
prototype based on user requirements, but in the overall 
framework of the organizational goals, we were less 
worried. Of course, there were still questions that were 
unanswered and even some contradictions in the documents 
on organizational requirements, but we expected these to be 
resolved during the second iteration.  

In retrospect it becomes clear that the halt was necessary 
not only for the PPG to understand the user requirements, 
but also to specify and secure the organizational 
requirements. The PPG had not been able to detail these to 
the level that the user requirements were specified. Since 
these were also “owned” primarily by the usability 

consultants the PPG experienced that the user requirements 
grew “too strong”. Considering that the previous attempt to 
specify the requirements had failed the motivation to 
actually understand was very high. However, lacking a 
thorough understanding of the user requirements and with 
diffuse and contradicting organizational requirements it is 
not easy to participate in an argumentation about design 
decisions, especially in the fast pace that the project was 
moving. 

The halt is interesting from a research point of view since it 
manifests the importance of working with a dual 
perspective of business and user requirements, as discussed 
later on. It is, however, important to emphasize that it was a 
completely internal project decision and the members of the 
PPG did not consider it as a big thing in the following 
interviews but merely as a response to a too tight time plan.  

Understanding Through Cooperation 
When asked how they would plan the next project based on 
these experiences the PPG members agree that they were 
satisfied with the overall process of identifying the 
organizational requirements first and then the user 
requirements, and the decision to involve usability 
competence: 

 “I don’t believe in this type of methodology where you take in 
users and let them design their own system. I believe in the 
meeting (…) between those that are (…) specialists on designing 
systems and the new technologies etc., and the users’ needs. It is 
in this meeting that you get the absolutely best solutions.”  

If they would change anything the most recurrent comment 
is rather that they themselves should have been more 
involved in the project from the start, and spent time on 
their own with the requirements, without the usability 
company. Even though they would let an outside company 
be responsible for the UCD process they comment that they 
should have participated more in the activities and that all 
work should have been done in their offices, instead of 
having the usability consultants work in their own office.  

“Looking back we should have planned to be more involved in the 
project.” 

Although we who were responsible for the design felt that 
we had captured the essential organizational requirements 
in the prototype the PPG needed to work through the design 
decisions themselves to gain the same understanding.  

“It might not have been that different [had we not had the halt] – 
but it was mostly a feeling that you got time to think through a lot 
of issues (…) Things were more clear to me [after the halt]. I 
could take a discussion with others better than when it was 
highway all the time.”  

Thus, although the design did not change drastically during 
the halt it was needed in order to get the PPG up to speed in 
the design discussions. Nevertheless, the project, although 
following the project plan with respect to the activities with 
the users, turned out to be a different project than expected 
from the PPG’s perspective (Figure 4).  

Anchoring the Results in the Organisation 
Since the end of the design project the PPG has continued 
to anchor their results in the organisation. The prototype 
was sent out for review to different departments with an 
opportunity to comment on the results. The responses were 
summarized and the PPG decided to make several changes 
in the prototype based on the comments. Since this process 
both required the project group to continue to work with the 
requirements and also explain it to others in presentations it 
further increased their feeling of confidence: 

“Now we have done this and we stand up for it – we know it. I 
believe this is very important for the credibility – that it’s not only 
something that a consultant has said since it’s much easier then to 
say “well that’s only a consultant who’s done it. We’ll change 
it”.”  

Although many comments were handed over in the review 
process the PPG agree that the results in general have been 
very well received. Both the final result and the structured 
work process they used to reach it were appreciated. The 
management has now made a decision that the prototype 
represents the vision of the future website and has decided 
to continue to specify a cost and resource estimate for a 
development of the new website based on the prototype.  

 

Figure 4. The process as it actually turned out with a continuous 
dialogue between organizational and user requirements 

Organizational and User Requirements 
The PPG comment in the interviews that the UCD process, 
with the halt, helped them to better understand their own 
organizational requirements, apart from specifying the user 
requirements. Although the original organizational goals 
were not changed their understanding of them and the 
requirements did: 

“The organizational requirements have become more concrete 
(…). The policy documents are written on a fairly high level of 
abstraction. It’s easier now to run in the staircase of abstractions 
(…) I can go from a detailed level, for example a database table. I 
can take this with me and run up to the policy document.”  

By working in a structured way with both organizational 
and user requirements they seem to have built a very solid 
platform from which to continue the procurement project. 
In particular the halt and their own work with the material 
after the design phase seem to have helped them to 
understand how user and organizational requirements are 
interrelated and represented in the design. Here is a 

User Requirements & prototype design 

User 
interviews 

 
The first 
iteration 

 

Anchoring 

process 
Organizational 

requirements 

The 
halt 

The 
second 
iteration

18

concrete example of how the personas and the design work 
aided in this integration and prioritization of the 
requirements:  

One organizational requirement was that the website should 
communicate what the agency do and how well they do it. 
From a usage perspective this was in line with the goals of 
the information seeking persona (i.e. journalists and 
researchers) since a large part of their job is about writing 
about the employment market. However, the employer and 
unemployed personas did not share this interest. Their 
primary goal was to find employers or a new job. This was 
also in line with the main organizational goal of the website 
– to support the matching process between unemployed and 
employers. Therefore we decided to emphasize information 
about the agency in the website for information seekers but 
minimize it in the website for other personas. The 
organizational requirement of informing about the agency 
could not come in conflict with their primary goals of 
matchmaking, which in turn would realize the overall 
organizational goals.  

One of the members of the PPG also describe how they 
now present the personas and the organizational goals 
together through an integrated concept where it becomes 
clear how different personas will use their services 
differently and in different channels in order to realize the 
organizational goals.  

The members of the PPG agree that this project was 
successful in that it followed a structured method from 
abstract 
organizational 
goals 
to 
detailed 
systems 
requirements, and that it took both organizational and user 
requirements under consideration and integrated the two. If 
possible, they would use the same work model again if they 
got involved in a similar project, also because they do not 
have any method or process for this today. 

Working With Personas 
The PPG got interested in the tool personas already when 
the usability company presented it in their project proposal.  

“One thing that caught our interest was to work with personas 
(…) to get something more concrete to work from”  

The fascination with the tool grew during and even after the 
project as it proved its effectiveness. For example, although 
the results of the interviews were much in line with the 
persona hypothesis there were also some important 
differences. One such deviance was that the hypothesis 
divided users based on the agency’s internal categorisation 
of short-time unemployed and long time unemployed users. 
In the analysis, however, it turned out that a categorisation 
based on how long a person had searched for a job, rather 
than how long he had been unemployed, was more 
interesting. But the greatest strength of personas was not as 
an analysis tool but rather as design tool and as a way of 
communicating requirements: 

“Its not only that it becomes very concrete and tangible when you 
work, like a really good tool when we should design the prototype. 

We talked about them as friends in the project group. How will 
Linda handle this? And then everyone knew. Linda was a whole 
concept that stand for a lot of things instead of having to recount 
all the details. So it becomes a very, very smooth tool to work 
with.”  

More interestingly the use of personas did not end with the 
end of the design project but they have lived on during the 
internal preparations for a development decision:  

“The second thing that struck me was what an enormous response 
we have had on these personas when we have been out in the 
organization talking about the project. Suddenly it has become 
tangible even for people who do not have a clue about web 
development. “Right, the users.” And the users are not a grey 
mass but they want different things!” 

The PPG even report that they have found new uses for the 
personas in many other projects and completely other 
settings, such as in education. For example, when 
discussing with the assistants in the local offices who shall 
teach unemployed to use the website the personas have 
helped them understand how different users may need 
different services and may use the website differently.  

“Suddenly our website gets differentiated in relation to the 
users… that is really incredible.”  

CONCLUSIONS 
This case study emphasises that the user centred design 
process, which is commonly perceived as a systems 
development issue, may as well be used in organizational 
development 
or 
systems 
procurement. 
Procuring 
organisations today lack methods or processes to transform 
their often abstract organizational requirements to a systems 
specification for procurement. This case study demonstrates 
how the usability activities may be used in this phase to 
bridge organizational and systems requirements through an 
emphasis on usage. The result of such a process is a 
requirement 
specification 
that 
is 
based 
on 
both 
organizational and user goals and that can be used to 
procure a systems development project.  

Furthermore, the case study highlights how tools such as 
personas and prototypes can aid not only in the design 
process, but can also be used by procurers with no formal 
training in usability in their endeavour to communicate and 
anchor the results of their work. The results indicate that 
success factors include having access to competence in 
UCD and an active procurer who is engaged and want to 
participate in and understand the work of specifying the 
requirements in order to become confident and secure in 
one’s own abilities to know what to procure.