“Today I Tell” A Comics and Story Creation App for People with Autism Spectrum Condition

Estefania Martin, Carlos Cupeiro, Laura Pizarro, David Roldán-Álvarez &
Guadalupe Montero-de-Espinosa

ABSTRACT
This article describes the design, development, and evaluation of an application to help people with autism
spectrum condition (ASC) express themselves through the creation of stories and comics. The intended
platform of the application is touchscreen devices. The design process follows a human-centered design
approach involving caregivers, teachers, usability experts, primary school students, and people with ASC.
The characteristics considered are explained to design and implement the application, as well as the
different evaluation steps. The prototype design was evaluated with 36 experts (teachers, caregivers, and
usability experts). Next, 14 primary school students and 10 participants from a special education institution
tested the application. Among all the participants, five students of the primary school institution have
attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder and five students of the special education institution had ASC. The
feedback gathered shows the importance of multidisciplinary teams in developing an application aimed at
people with special needs. Non-functional features such as usability and accessibility can be bypassed by
developers and this is the point at which teachers, caregivers, usability experts, and even the end users of the
application can provide their insights in order to improve the product during its development phase. This
also reduces the costs that would be incurred if the final product had to be changed after its development.

3. Goals

The main goal of this study is to design, develop, and evaluate
an application that allows people with ASC to express them-
selves through the creation of stories or comics on touchsc-
reen devices. First of all, the minimum requirements that the
application had to meet were established. In this phase, tea-
chers and caregivers were involved, since they are the ones
who know what needs the application must meet in its first

development iteration. The requirements of the app are the
following:

●The creation of scenes or vignettes where users can add

backgrounds, characters, objects, and texts.
●The ability to join scenes or vignettes at later viewings.
●Storage and visualization of the stories and comics

created.
●Personalization of basic options such as language

(Spanish/English) and playing background music while
the user is interacting with the app.

This idea arose when a person with ASC used the “Paint”
application in Windows to try to create stories and comics.
There are several story creation apps on the market, such as
Special Stories (Android and iOS), Tools for Autism Social
Stories (Android), and Book Creator (iOS and Chrome). These
applications focus on the narrative process of the person who
uses them, with different resources available for the elaboration
of the story, which are usually the use of images (static or
moving), access to a gallery, and the insertion of text or recorded
sound. The user uses these tools to create a narrative and build
a sequence with a plot thread of something that has happened
(personal experiences), although other uses are possible, such as
the execution of sequences of tasks, anticipation of facts, or the
elaboration of interest albums. However, our application focuses
on the creativity and the elaboration of fictional stories, includ-
ing a format that features both narrative histories and comics
with dialogues, so we can enable users’ to express emotions in
a digital way. As instructed by the teachers and caregivers,
predesigned images were added into the application, including
various backgrounds, characters, and objects to make the com-
positions. However, they can also create new characters by using
the camera. A similar app is Creapp Cuentos, which is available
on Android and iOS. However, Creapp Cuentos has neither
been designed nor validated by people with ASC. Users can
create their own stories or comics themselves using predefined
images or by incorporating new ones.

We present a human-centered design approach where differ-
ent people, including teachers, caregivers, and people with ASC
were involved. Section 3 describes the iterative and incremental
development process, where 36 participants evaluated the pro-
totype designed (teachers, experts, and caregivers) in order to
give feedback that would help determine future steps in the
development of the tool. Section 4 presents the implementation.
Section 5 describes the usability evaluation of the app performed
at two locations: a primary school and a special education center
with a total of 24 users involved. Lastly, the last sections present
a discussion, results, and conclusions.

4. Design

The practicalities of involving users in the design process have
taken on many different forms, many of which were taking
advantage of a design perspective. Users can participate in the
design process in several ways: interviews, focus groups,
and prototype testing followed by a system evaluation
(Fabri, Andrews, & Pukki, 2016). These methods allow
designers and users to easily understand the expectations

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN-COMPUTER INTERACTION
681

about the app and engaged experiment with variations of
future possibilities (Holmlid, 2012). While initially focusing
on system end users only, more recently this has been
expanded to include multiple stakeholders with an interest
or investment in the technology product. This kind of design
differs from the traditional design approaches in that the users
and stakeholders are not simply a source of information or
evaluator of the final product, but active contributors of
design ideas and decision-makers in the process (Sanders &
Stappers, 2008).

We created an interdisciplinary workgroup. Developers,
researchers, and two special education teachers worked
together on the user interface (UI) of the application. The
special education teachers provided the main requirements
for the UI. The teachers are experts in the use of Information
and Communication Technology (ICT) tools for people with
ASC. The teachers told us that they wanted the application to
be easy to use and there cannot be opportunities for users to
make mistakes so they can avoid frustration. Furthermore, its
visual elements cannot contain distracting elements, and there
must be bright colors to maintain the children’s attention.
Based on these teachers’ preferences, we built a low-fidelity
prototype to obtain a quick representation of app screenshots
and their relations to receive quick feedback and improve the
app. The prototype consists of six screenshots:

●A landing page with three options: story creation, comic

creation, and configuration (see Figure 1).
●A configuration page: language, background music, and

sound (see Figure 2). An icon on the right-hand side
changes when the user clicks on the button to provide
feedback on whether they have selected the background
music or sound or the language of the UI.
●Stories or comic pages, where a user selects if she wants

to create a new story or to play previous ones (Figure 3).
The comic pages are the same with different texts.
●A page for the creation of stories and comics, including

backgrounds, characters, objects, texts, and audio (see

Figure 1. Landing page.

Figure 2. Configuration page.

Figure 3. Stories page.

Figure 4. Comic creation page.

682
E. MARTIN ET AL.

Figure 4). The user can add a new scene, visualize the
story, or finish the story.
●A page to play stories or comics to see previous works

created, as shown in Figure 5. The page for playing
comics is the same with different texts.

When creating this prototype, we performed an initial evalua-
tion to detect its weaknesses. There were 36 participants involved:
special education teachers (29), primary and early education
teachers (4), and usability experts (3). More of the participants
were special education teachers since the design focuses on people
with ASC. Participants filled out a survey with 20 questions about
the different screenshots. This survey combines closed and open
questions to rate different options and receive improvements. The
surveys collected information about: (i) the understanding of
multimedia elements (texts, images, the application’s pets, colors,
or sounds); (ii) the application’s functionalities (story or comic
creation and visualization); and (iii) the configuration options
(change of language or the use of sound in different parts of the
app). We sent the screenshots, their description, their connec-
tions, and a survey. During this stage, the experts had to describe
their impressions, recommendations, or reviews about the proto-
type. We decided not to use other methods of evaluation since the
tool is subject to major changes. Therefore, a complete evaluation
of usability in this state is not effective as the tool is subject to
constant evolution.

After this evaluation, we made some changes in order to fix
the issues detected and they are the following:

●The sound must be switched off while children interact

with the application to avoid any distractions.
●The texts of the UI (uppercase or lowercase) must be

personalized because depending on the age and reading

method, the children could know how to read only one
of them (uppercase letters are usually easy to recognize
(Worder & Boetcher, 1990)).
●Pictograms facilitate the understanding of the texts.

Therefore, the combination of pictograms and text pro-
motes the understanding of the information presented
in the application. We included ARASAAC (2017) pic-
tograms because most Spanish professionals work with
them to help children with cognitive disabilities to learn
new vocabulary and concepts (ARASAAC, s.f.).
●On the landing page (see Figure 1), we decided to reduce

the number of both speech bubbles included in the
comic option and avatars to just one. Most elements
are distracting.
●The configuration button must be small and separate

from the main options because parents and profes-
sionals will be in charge of personalizing the app to
the child’s needs.
●The sound icon was not clear. A speaker icon might be

more useful.
●Five teachers commented that the language option is not

necessary. However, we did not consider this suggestion
because we wanted to develop the application in differ-
ent languages.
●On the stories page (see Figure 3), the title was not

readable, and the contrast between font and background
needed changes. Furthermore, it was necessary to com-
bine texts with pictograms in the two options: create
a new story or play previous ones.
●The page that contains the creation of stories or comics

was complicated because it had multiple options, which
could be difficult for the ultimate users (see Figure 5). In
the evaluation, 78% of the participants agreed with the

Figure 5. Play stories page.

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN-COMPUTER INTERACTION
683

distribution of the elements on the screen. The reviewers
considered the use of the carousel of images appropriate
and easy to use for the end users. The options for adding
backgrounds, characters, and objects had to be distinct
from other options. The reviewers considered the size of
the bin too big, and the user could delete elements
unintentionally. The picture of the camera could also
confuse users, so the participants suggested deleting it.
●The “play stories/comics” page also needed thumbnails

with the first scene or vignette so that the end user could
recognize the story or comic that she wants to visualize.

Furthermore, teachers answered questions about different
aspects of the design of the tool. The questions followed
a Likert scale between 1 and 5 in order to rate usability aspects
of the application. Measuring the ease of use of an application
is one of the most important aspects when developing tech-
nological products for people with disabilities (Dawe, 2006).
According to the results of this questionnaire, we can predict
that the ease of use is high, although future evaluations with
usability experts may be needed to confirm these findings.
Figure 6 presents the results obtained for ease of use (rate and
percentage of users). Only three teachers out of 36 disagreed
about the easiness (8% of the participants). Perhaps these
three teachers would have preferred to have had a creation
comic page, which has the main functionality of the app.
Additionally, the participants considered the interaction
design process to create and play stories and comics well
structured. Figure 7 presents the results obtained for this
question, where only one teacher commented that the steps
are not logical (3% rated this question with a value of 2).

The last three questions were open and were about high-
lights, improvements, and suggestions. The highlights are the

originality, simplicity, color of the application, and use of
appropriate icons. However, the most important drawbacks
are the use of the same technique in the placement of text and
icons on all buttons of the application, the need to include the
text configuration, and the possibility of enlarging the text to
facilitate reading.

5. Application

The implementation of the application “Today I tell” involves
technologies that allow the creation of stories and comics in
different devices, with the aim of achieving high levels of accessi-
bility and ease to improve the abilities of people with ASC, thanks
to the guidance of teachers, caregivers, and students in the design
and development process. We follow a client-server model,

Figure 6. Results of the ease of use on scale from 1 (difficult)–5 (easy).

Figure 7. Results of the understanding of the steps to create a new story or
comic on scale from 1 (difficult)–5 (easy).

Figure 8. Landing page of the second prototype.

684
E. MARTIN ET AL.

combining technologies such as HTML5, CSS3, JavaScript, and
PHP. Thus, “Today I tell” is usable on any device that has Internet
access (PCs, tablets, digital whiteboards, or smartphones).

We took into account the feedback obtained with the survey
done with teachers and improved the first prototype. Figure 8
presents the new landing page with one main character. The
options button is separate from the main options, and there is
only one speech bubble for the comic option. As suggested, all
buttons included the same representation (a pictogram and its
text; see Figure 9). We also improved the contrast between the
background and text compared to the previous version.

When the user wants to create a new scene, the first step is
adding a new scene by pushing the stage button (see Figure 10).
Then, the available elements appear in the carousel located in the
lower part, which allow the user to move from one side to the
other. Next, the user can add characters or objects through
a single click of the corresponding buttons. Users can move all
objects or characters included in the story by dragging them to
a desired place. Figure 10 shows a scene of a story in English with
two characters, an object (a ball), and the text of the scene, which
takes place in a park.

After adding the elements to the scene, we can include text
that describes it. Additionally, the user can move the text
element around the scene until placing it in the appropriate
area. If the user does not want the added element, the user can
delete it using the bin. Lastly, after finishing the creation of
the story, the user can save it to the server with the title
specified. If the story has different scenes, the user can change
between them by pressing the arrows located on both sides of
the current scene at the top of the page.

If the users want to visualize a previous story or comic,
they can select this option, and the thumbnails with the first
scene and the titles appear to help them recognize the story
(see Figure 11). When the user clicks on a specific story, the
first scene appears (see Figure 12). If the story has different
scenes, the user can navigate using the thumbnails that appear
at the bottom of the current scene.

6. Trials

After creating the app, we performed two trials at two educa-
tional centers: Nuestra Señora del Recuerdo and Alenta. The first

Figure 9. Stories page of the second prototype.

Figure 10. Story creation page of the second prototype.

Figure 11. Play stories page of the second prototype.

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN-COMPUTER INTERACTION
685

is a school that offers preschool, primary, and secondary levels.
The goal of this first educational experience was to examine the
usability of the application with primary school students before
people with ASC interacted with it. Therefore, we could get
information about possible usability and accessibility issues
that could be overcome before testing the application with
students with ASC. In addition, in this trial, new features for
the application might be suggested, which could help us to
further develop the application. We added the improvements
from the first trial before doing the second trial. The second
school is a special education center for students with cognitive
disabilities or ASC. The evaluation of the application in this
school provides a direct view of the intended users using the
application.

6.1. Traditional school

6.1.1. Participants
Fourteen primary school students from 6 to 7 years old were
involved. The teacher selected the students who participated.
Three types of participants were selected: (a) students with no
difficulties, (b) students with ADHD (attention-deficit hyperac-
tivity disorder), and (c) a student with deficits in communication
skills and social interaction. The first group of participants was
for measuring the children’s ability to use the application and
included eight students. The second profile provided insight on
how students with attention problems concentrate on the com-
pletion of the task (five participants). The last participant was
a girl with a few similar characteristics to people with ASC.

6.1.2. Methods
There were three one-hour sessions with one session held for each
type of user (students without difficulties, students with ADHD,
and a student with disorders in communication and social inter-
action). All students from this school worked with the same
version of the application. We also used different approaches.
For students without difficulties, we explained the goal of the
application. However, we provided no explanation about their
screens or functionalities to determine how intuitive the UI is.
Apart from the explanation of the app’s goal, students with

ADHD received a short demonstration before they started to
interact with the application. Finally, the girl with deficits in
communication and social interaction interacted with the applica-
tion with the support of his teacher. He guided her explaining the
options.

We applied direct observation techniques with all three
groups (Dix et al., 2004). We chose this way of gathering
information because the literacy skills of the students are
not fully developed yet, which makes difficult to obtain data
through normal questionnaires. During the sessions, two
observers took notes of all the questions, difficulties, and
successes that occurred. Additionally, their teachers provided
more suggestions in order to improve the application.

At the end of the sessions, we did an oral survey with six
open questions with the children: (i) “do you like it?” (ii)
“what do you like?” (iii) “is it easy to use?” (iv) “what back-
grounds do you miss?” (v) “what characters do you add?” and
(vi) “what objects do you miss?

6.1.3. Results
The first group (students without difficulties) had different
issues: (i) they had difficulties with reading the text and the
buttons, (ii) the text came out of the speech bubbles in the
comics, (iii) they clicked the home button when they were
creating a new story (it was too close to the buttons for scenes,
characters, and objects), and (iv) they wanted to add the same
character twice, which was not possible. Therefore, the but-
tons and texts had to be bigger, the home button had to be
clearly separate from the other options, and including the
same character twice should be possible. Apart from these
improvements, the interface was easy to use and intuitive, and
the participants created many stories and comics.

In the second session (students with ADHD), after a brief
tutorial, the users could interact with the app in a fluid and
faster manner than the first group. However, we observed the
same difficulties: the texts were difficult to read, and the
students wanted to add the same character twice. Finally,
the girl with communication and social interaction deficits
tried the app. She required the help of a teacher to create
a story or comic systematically. The problems that arose were
the same as in the other two groups, but writing text is
difficult for her and is sometimes a frustrating task.

Regarding the oral survey that the participants did after each
session, most children stated that they liked the app, and that it
was easy to use. Only one participant did not like the app. They
had more fun creating stories than comics. They suggested adding
different backgrounds, characters, and objects. We considered all
the information gathered was taken into account before perform-
ing the next trial at the special education center. We improved the
prototype to solve the issues that arose and built a new version of
the application before starting the next trial.

6.1.4. Improvements made
After gathering and analyzing the data, we modified our
initial design so it could satisfy most of the suggestions
made. First of all, the use of a single pet was suggested by
several teachers since the inclusion of many pets could be
distracting. This pet should appear in the same place in the
different windows.

Figure 12. Visualization of a specific story of the second prototype.

686
E. MARTIN ET AL.

In addition, we established a fixed position for the buttons
that allowed users to go to the initial screen of the application
and that allowed them to change the configuration of the
application. Their size was reduced, encouraging users to
concentrate in the most important functionalities, which
were represented by bigger buttons. By fixing the position of
the buttons, a more homogeneous distribution of the graphic
components is achieved, which makes the interface easier to
use and easier to learn.

Another feature highlighted by experts was the unification
of pictograms and text within the buttons. In this sense, all the
buttons will include an image and a text to ease the compre-
hension of the functionality of that button in a visual and
textual way. Generally, the buttons size was increased and so
was the text they contained to make them easier to read.

6.2. Special education center

6.2.1. Participants
The participants of the second study were 10 students from
Alenta School. Their age was between 13 and 21 years, and

there were six male students and four female students. Among
the students, five of them have been diagnosed with ASC, two
of them have Down’s syndrome, and three of them have
intellectual disabilities. Table 1 summarizes the different pro-
files of the students.

The level of intellectual development differs among all the
participants of Alenta School but all of them move around
medium-low range of intellectual disabilities. These partici-
pants are older than the ones from the previous trial, which
could be a problem. However, all these participants have
something in common which is that they do not have devel-
oped their literacy skills yet. Therefore, it seemed appropriate
to evaluate the application first with children that cannot read,
but that can express themselves verbally and then evaluate the
application with ASC students who can not read or express
themselves verbally. In the first trial, the participants gave us
useful feedback through communication, therefore their
insights could be useful for future users, including ASC users.

6.2.2. Methods
At the Alenta School, participants interacted with both iPads
and interactive whiteboards. First, participants worked with
iPads. The second stage was the creation of stories and comics
using the interactive whiteboard. All the participants inter-
acted with iPads, and two of them also created stories and
comics on digital interactive whiteboards.

For interactive whiteboards, the users had to adapt to
certain functionality changes since the interactive whiteboard
does not have the same functionality as an iPad, such as
movement of the image carousel with arrows on either side
of the interactive whiteboard. When these users worked with
the interactive whiteboard, they had total freedom since they
had previously demonstrated that they could interact well

Table 1. Summary of profiles: Alenta school.

ID
Age
Disability
Gender

P1
19
Autism and lower level of autonomy
Male
P2
17
Autism and certain level of autonomy
Female
P3
16
Autism and certain level of autonomy
Female
P4
15
Autism and certain level of autonomy
Male
P5
19
Down’s syndrome
Male
P6
21
Down’s syndrome
Female
P7
18
Intellectual disability
Female
P8
16
Intellectual disability
Male
P9
14
Intellectual disability
Male
P10
13
Autism, certain level of autonomy and hearing loss
Male

Figure 13. Application on a digital interactive whiteboard.

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN-COMPUTER INTERACTION
687

with the application. The only cue that they received was to
move the previously mentioned image carousel, as they did not recognize this change in the interface. Figure 13 shows the
canvas on the interactive whiteboard.

As done in the other center, two observers took notes while
participants interacted with the application. We chose the direct
observation method because the communication abilities of
people with ASC are sometimes poor, and they cannot express
their thoughts well. Moreover, some participants’ literacy skills
are not fully developed, so yet again it will be difficult to gather
data through written questionnaires. All participants interacted
with the app using iPads. They followed two methods of inter-
action. First, we explained the functionality of the application to
the participants, who then started to create their own story or
comic. The observers annotated all the users’ interactions, parti-
cularly if they had difficulty with any buttons, if they quickly
became used to using the app, and if their creation was coherent.
The second method consisted of the participants creating
a comic step by step with the help of the teacher. The student
had the freedom to choose the elements, texts, and title, and the
teacher only helped the student to follow the process.

6.2.3. Results
The participant P1 interacted without serious problems with the
app. He started with stories and adding different elements to
scenes. Afterwards, he changed to comic creation without diffi-
culties. As the layout and options are similar between stories and
comics, users should be able to transfer the acquired knowledge
from one module to another without effort. However, he had
difficulties adding characters and selecting options accidentally.
When the user selected an element from the carousel, the scene
included it in the upper-left side of the screen. This user did not
perceive it, and he added the same character a few times.
Furthermore, he clicked on the text insertion button and home
button accidentally. Both situations frustrated him because he did
not want to do that. With the information gathered from the rest
of the participants, the teachers and caregivers suggested the
following changes to the application: (i) it is necessary to increase
the font size of the texts (although we increased it from the

prototype used at the primary school, it was not enough), (ii)
they did not appropriately notice the “See stories” button, (iii) it is
not intuitive when viewing a story that you are changing the scene
by clicking on the thumbnails, (iv) possibility of customizing the
application for each user, v) adding emotions to the characters,
and vi) adding new characters, scenes, and objects from real
photos of places, people, and objects that are known to the users
so they can create more familiar, personal and realistic stories.
Figure 14 presents how a participant with ASC creates a new story.

Apart from these observations, teachers suggested linking
scenes, characters, and objects to represent real-world situa-
tions (e.g., if the scene represents a hospital, possible charac-
ters would be doctors, nurses, or patients). Furthermore, it
would be helpful to change the name “scenes” to “places” so
that the participants could understand it better. Once they
had tried the app on the iPad, two users (P2 and P5) created
more stories and comics on the interactive whiteboard with-
out difficulties. The goal of using the other device was to
examine whether the responsive design of the application
works as expected. In this way, we could observe the difficul-
ties on both devices. Furthermore, most schools have inter-
active whiteboards but no digital tablets.

7. Discussion

In our work, we describe an application that allows people
with ASC to express themselves through the creation of stor-
ies or comics on touchscreen devices. We have conducted two
trials to make an initial evaluation of the prototype developed.
In both trials, participants were encouraged to say what they
thought about the application, without any restrictions and
with the observers being bystanders trying not to impact
students behaviors. However, the small number of partici-
pants and the lack of high quantitative data make it necessary
to be careful when interpreting the results obtained.

Overall, the results obtained were positive. The aspects high-
lighted by teachers are the ease of use and the originality of the
application in both trials. The powerful colors help to gain the
attention of the children. Special education teachers enhanced
the easiness of the creation process, the suitability of the icons
used, the omission of distracting elements, and the ease of use
of the image carousel to select the items for the story.

While participants interacted with the iPads, they had
small usability issues. Ease of use and learnability were high-
lighted. The participants in both learning experiments under-
stood how to use the app without any difficulties in a very
short time. They could create stories quickly. The students’
story creations were coherent between scenes or vignettes in
both the use of the same characters throughout the story or
comic as well as the text included to reinforce what the users
wanted to explain. The use of pictograms from ARASAAC
seems to help participants with ASC since they usually used
these pictograms in their daily activities, but their usefulness
when being used by neurotypical children has yet to be
studied. They enjoyed inventing their own stories while they
interacted smiling. There were no predefined rules for creat-
ing stories and comics. Therefore, users could select the char-
acters or pictures that they wanted and invent a narrative to
connect the scenes or vignettes.
Figure 14. An ASC participant creating a story.

688
E. MARTIN ET AL.

The most important difficulty was the way in which parti-
cipants tried to delete items from the current scene. This
functionality was not clear for the users and led to occasional
accidental erasing of the creation. Additionally, some partici-
pants had difficulties with reading texts, and we increased the
font size from one trial to another. When participants used
the application on the interactive whiteboard, the change of
the image carousel to include arrows was easy and did not
produce any issues with interaction.

In this sense, we observed that in the learning experi-
ment with students with ASC, there were some miss-
clicking issues and application changes that went unnoticed
by them. Although the best design for a UI for ASC
students may be achieved by using text and images (Chen,
Tsai, & Wu, 2005), we saw the importance of reducing
visual complexity and using simple language to overcome
the problems that students with mild cognitive disabilities
may have (Wong, Chan, Li-Tsang, & Lam, 2004). Caution
is advised when designing UIs for people with ASC since
rich multimedia interfaces may hamper their learning
transfer (Grynszpan, Martin, & Nadel, 2008). Participants
with autism may shift their attention from a relevant sti-
mulus dimension to a new stimulus dimension, thus redu-
cing concentration when performing a task and causing
errors that can lead to frustration. If the user also has less
developed motor skills and eye-hand coordination, this
problem could get worse, so studying gestures, the place-
ment of the interface buttons, and the cognitive load of the
UI becomes indispensable (Boucenna et al., 2014).

Throughout the evaluation process, it was clear that both
the ease of use and the learnability of the app were quick and
easy. The participants took little time to understand the app’s
functionality and they could manage themselves with few
cues. The elements included on the canvas (pictograms from
ARASAAC), the colors used, and the app’s organization were
suitable for people with ASC. The reinforcement of all the
buttons through text and icons allowed users with reading
difficulties to use the application without problems.

8. Conclusions

The application presented in this article focuses on an area
that is not common in apps for people with ASC. We want
to provide an application for leisure where users create
their stories or comics. Through observation in both trials,
we observed that the participants were enjoying their time
while interacting with the application, while no serious
usability problems were detected. We have also seen pro-
mising results in the app’s usefulness. In a simple and
enjoyable way, the app can explain situations in which the
users could have problems.

We followed a human-centered design approach that
involved different stakeholders. A total of 36 teachers, experts,
and caregivers took part in the design process, and 24 parti-
cipants evaluated the app at two different educational centers.
This iterative approach allowed us to improve the app during
different stages. The feedback received from all participants
involved, technicians, domain experts (teachers and care-
givers), and final users has been valuable. Teachers of special

education have provided valuable feedback to improve the UI,
and information from trials with children (with and without
ASC) allowed us to improve the application. This application
seems to be an inclusive tool because most of the students
from regular schools and special educational centers could use
it. However, our evaluation had a low number of participants
with ASC (five people), so further testing should be done in
order to validate the application.

9. Future work

The evaluation of this application requires more trials more
people with ASC to take part. Furthermore, this article
focused on the design, development, and usability evalua-
tion. Therefore, the next step is to perform studies related
to the users’ creativity (Crunco & Jaeger, 2012) and leisure.
Other aspect to be considered in next trials would be to test
what facial expressions people with ASC prefer in the
drawn characters, specifically in comics as previous works
commented.

Some teachers commented they could also use the application
to help people with autism to understand unfamiliar situations.
This aspect could be an aspect to be considered in next trials in
order to know if the tool is helpful for this task.