Practice Full Report

An Interactive Modeling Tool for Projecting the Health
and Direct Medical Cost Impact of Changes in the
Sexually Transmitted Diseases Prevention Program
Budgets

Erika G. Martin, PhD, MPH; Bahareh Ansari, PhD, MA; Thomas L. Gift, PhD; Britney L. Johnson, MPH;
Dayne Collins; Austin M. Williams, PhD; Harrell W. Chesson, PhD

222
R

We used a human-centered design process—a devel-
opment approach that incorporates users throughout
the project to ensure the product is tailored to their
needs14-16—to understand the health department orga-
nizational context, elicit requirements of STI program
staff, design an interface and model structure that
would meet their needs and technical skills, and eval-
uate the prototype model’s usability.

Methods

Overview

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC) previously developed the STI Prevention Al-
location Consequences Estimator model (“SPACE
Monkey 1.0”) to help health departments estimate the
effect of changes in their STI prevention budgets on di-
rect medical costs and infections averted.17,18 (Authors
T.L.G. and H.W.C. were lead authors on SPACE Mon-
key 1.0.) Since SPACE Monkey 1.0’s release in 2017,

there has been updated scientific literature on the
relationships between state-level STI prevention fund-
ing and reported chlamydia and gonorrhea diagnosis
rates4 and the lifetime medical cost of STIs and HIV
infection.10-13 In addition to updating the scientific evi-
dence underlying the model parameters, we improved
the model’s usability to enhance use by health de-
partments. Although SPACE Monkey 1.0 was shared
with 5 users (representatives from 4 jurisdictions and
1 national organization) for early feedback prior to
release, we identified an opportunity to engage more
users throughout the model development process.
We revised the model in 3 steps. First, we conducted
focus groups with 15 national, state, and local public
health professionals regarding their experiences with
SPACE Monkey 1.0. Second, we developed SPACE
Monkey 2.0, incorporating updated literature-based
parameters (the impact of STI prevention funding
changes on reported infections, the probability of an
STI-attributable HIV infection per STI infection, and
the lifetime costs per HIV and STI infection), a new
model structure to generate confidence intervals, and
other enhancements addressing focus group feedback.
Third, we conducted usability testing on the SPACE
Monkey 2.0 prototype with 6 state and local public
health professionals. Their feedback was integrated
into the final model design.
The University at Albany Office of Regulatory Re-
search and Compliance and human subjects officials
at the CDC determined that this project did not meet
the regulatory definition of human subjects research.

Prior to model development, user feedback was so-
licited on SPACE Monkey 1.0 and another STI cost
model not described here. The 15 participants com-
prised STI program experts from 8 state health de-
partments, 5 local health departments, and 2 national
organizations. Although the model is most suitable
for federally funded jurisdictions, we included local
and national representatives because the other STI
cost model developed in parallel is appropriate for
both state and local jurisdictions; furthermore, we
envisioned that local and national audiences would
find the model useful for demonstrating the value
of STI prevention funding more generally. A conve-
nience sample of participants from state and local
STI programs was recruited through an e-mail to
the CDC’s Strengthening STD Prevention and Con-
trol for Health Departments (STD PCHD) program
Listserv, which included STD PCHD principal inves-
tigators, program directors, program managers, and
surveillance coordinators. We did not impose eligibil-
ity criteria beyond working in a health department

March/April 2024 • Volume 30, Number 2
www.JPHMP.com
223

because we hoped to recruit users with varying tech-
nical skills, past model experiences, and perspectives.
State and local participants were from diverse regions
and settings including large and small health depart-
ments in California (1 state, 1 local), Florida (1 state,
1 local), Idaho (1 state), Maryland (1 local), Min-
nesota (1 state), Missouri (1 local), Ohio (1 state),
Oregon (1 local), Pennsylvania (1 state), Rhode Island
(1 state), and Vermont (1 state). In addition, we in-
cluded 1 representative each from the Association of
State and Territorial Health Officials and the National
Association of County and City Health Officials to
elicit broader perspectives on how the model could be
used by different jurisdictions.
For state and local participants, focus groups com-
prised 2 or 3 participants, with separate focus groups
for state and local respondents (3 state focus groups
and 2 local focus groups). We intentionally organized
small groups, rather than a typical focus group size,
to improve participants’ comfort with sharing ideas,
a relevant consideration, given the COVID-19–related
“Zoom fatigue” at the time of data collection (April
and May 2022). Where possible, we organized focus
groups by jurisdictions’ Census population size. The
2 national representatives were interviewed individ-
ually due to scheduling difficulties. Data collection
occurred virtually by authors B.A. and E.G.M. and
lasted up to 90 minutes. We took detailed notes, rather
than recording the focus sessions, to help participants
provide candid feedback. Prior to the session, par-
ticipants completed a set of tasks with the SPACE
Monkey 1.0 model to ensure a common experi-
ence interacting with the model. The guided exercise
(see Supplemental Digital Content Appendix 1, avail-
able at http://links.lww.com/JPHMP/B281) directed
participants to enter model inputs and review their re-
sults. Participants answered questions regarding their
user experience, the relevance of results to their infor-
mation needs, the model assumptions, how they could
use the model in their own work, and other desired
model enhancements.
The focus groups covered the following topics: par-
ticipants’ prior familiarity with and use of SPACE
Monkey 1.0, usability problems encountered during
their guided exercise and desired usability enhance-
ments, whether the model sufficiently captures the STI
program environment, how participants envisioned
using the model, and other suggestions (see Supple-
mental Digital Content Appendix 1, available at http:
//links.lww.com/JPHMP/B281).
Data from participants’ guided exercises and fo-
cus group discussions were synthesized by B.A. and
E.G.M.for themes,such as specific usability problems,
desired usability enhancements, and required updates
to the model’s underlying assumptions.

SPACE Monkey 2.0 development

After the focus groups, we developed a new Excel-
based model that incorporated the general approach
from SPACE Monkey 1.0, with numerous modifica-
tions to incorporate updated scientific literature and
feedback from the public health professionals. These
are described in the “Results” section.

Usability testing on SPACE Monkey 2.0

After revising the model to reflect updated scientific
literature and user feedback, we conducted usability
testing with 6 state and local public health profes-
sionals who represented model users. All participants
were STI program subject matter experts. We re-
cruited participants with varying Excel skills, prior
familiarity with the model, and geographic location
(Georgia, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South
Carolina, and Vermont). We invited 3 participants
from the focus groups who expressed an interest in
pilot-testing the prototype and 3 additional individu-
als in our professional network who were interested in
the model but had not previously interacted with it. In
describing their experience with Excel, 4 participants
self-identified as having a basic familiarity with Excel,
1 reporting using Excel regularly for work tasks (eg,
developing budget spreadsheets or basic data analy-
sis), and 1 reporting completing advanced work in
Excel (eg, creating pivot tables, using array formulas,
or creating advanced data visualizations).
The usability testing occurred as one-on-one virtual
meetings with B.A. (additionally, E.G.M. attended 2
sessions), lasting 60 to 90 minutes. Participants re-
ceived a usability exercise (see Supplemental Digital
Content Appendix 1, available at http://links.lww.
com/JPHMP/B281) and the prototype model via e-
mail. During the session, participants completed a set
of tasks including exploring the spreadsheet model,
entering inputs, generating output, and exporting a
chart into another application. While working on
the tasks, they shared their screens to allow us to
see how they were navigating the spreadsheets and
were prompted to verbalize their thoughts using a
think-aloud approach.19,20(p365) The usability sessions
ended with an open discussion of participants’ ex-
periences and suggestions. Participants additionally
completed a short 10-question online survey regard-
ing their user experience, derived from a common
usability evaluation instrument.21

Meeting notes and observations from the usability
testing sessions were synthesized by B.A. for themes.
Usability problems (eg, bugs and cosmetic issues) were
addressed iteratively after each usability session, with
subsequent usability study participants working with

224

Most focus group participants reported awareness of
the model, although there was limited prior use. The
most common anticipated use case was generating
findings for advocacy and education. Examples of po-
tential model use were demonstrating the economic
value of STI programs to executive leadership, pro-
viding justification for STI program revenue in budget
proposals to state legislators, making a business case
for continued investment in the disease intervention
specialist (DIS) workforce, and motivating internal
and external audiences about “the impact of our
work.” Participants at all levels (national, state, and
local) expressed enthusiasm about using the model.
Although the SPACE Monkey 1.0 model was per-
ceived as easy to use, participants had suggestions for
improving the user interface and underlying model
assumptions. Major usability recommendations in-
cluded making it easier to compare results of different
analyses, including confidence intervals on the same
page as the main results, adding a functionality to
print input and output screens for meeting handouts,
adding visualizations, simplifying the interface to a
single screen rather than multiple tabs of user-defined
inputs, and revising the interpretation guide for
improved clarity. Participants desired clearer informa-
tion about model assumptions and the calculations to
understand the spreadsheet and describe it to external
audiences. Ideally, such information would be in-
cluded in the model rather than a separate user guide
or scientific manuscript. Most participants preferred
retaining the format as a downloadable Excel-based
application rather than revising the model to be an
interactive Web-based tool. Because it is a common
software, users can save versions with their inputs for
documentation, it can be used offline, and it would
not elicit concerns about the privacy and storage of
data entered in an online platform.
Participants expressed some concerns about SPACE
Monkey 1.0’s underlying conceptual model, which
incorporated 2 methods to estimate program im-
pact: a “historical formula approach” and a “DIS
approach.” The “historical formula approach” used
findings from a study that assessed the relationship be-
tween state-level gonorrhea case rates and federal STI
funding allocations from 1981 to 1998.5 The “DIS ap-
proach” used findings from a study that measured the

association between DIS partner notification and gon-
orrhea case rates in New York State excluding New
York City from 1992 to 2002.22 Participants noted
several critiques: (1) the studies used to inform both
approaches were published in the mid-2000s and per-
ceived to be outdated; (2) the “DIS approach”had less
face validity due to interstate variation in DIS staff
structures, salaries, and activities; and (3) it was dif-
ficult for many state-level public health professionals
to quantify the number of DISs and their salaries be-
cause many DISs are not state employees and their job
responsibilities vary.

For the updated SPACE Monkey 2.0 model, to ad-
dress focus group participants’ concerns about the
validity of the “DIS approach” and the difficulty
of quantifying DIS staff and salaries, we relied ex-
clusively on the “historical formula approach.” In
response to participants’ concerns about outdated
data, the updated “historical formula approach” was
informed by a recent analysis of the impact of STI
prevention funding on reported chlamydia and gon-
orrhea rates through 2016.4 (SPACE Monkey 1.0’s
historical allocations approach cited an older analy-
sis of data through 1998, published in 2005.5) The
study underlying our model has been incorporated
into other modeling analyses of the impact of STI
prevention funding.23

The updated SPACE Monkey 2.0 model calcu-
lates the impact of a permanent, one-time change
in their STI prevention budget over 10 years using
the following steps and base case values from the
Table. The 10-year time frame reflects the number of
years over which the number of infections averted (or
additional infections) is calculated. The direct medi-
cal costs saved (or additional medical costs) are the
discounted, lifetime direct medical costs of these in-
fections, regardless of when their costs are incurred.

1. Users enter information on their jurisdiction’s
number of reported cases, population size, prior
funding amount, and anticipated future funding
(as a one-time change).
2. The
jurisdiction’s
reported
and
unreported
chlamydia, gonorrhea, and syphilis infections
are estimated by multiplying the user-defined
reported cases by an adjustment factor (ratio
of the estimated incident infections nationally24

divided by reported infections nationally25).
3. The anticipated rate of chlamydia, gonorrhea,
and syphilis infections under the new funding
amount is calculated on the basis of extrapo-
lated results from the Williams et al4 historical
formula analysis to estimate the impact of a

March/April 2024 • Volume 30, Number 2
www.JPHMP.com
225

TABLE
SPACE Monkey 2.0 Model Parameters

Parameter
Base Case Value
Low-Impact
Scenarioa
High-Impact
Scenarioa

Chlamydia: Estimated number of incident
infections, nationally 201824,b
3 983 000
3 401 000
4 719 000

Reported number of chlamydia cases, 201825,b
1 758 668
Not varied
Not varied
Gonorrhea: Estimated number of incident
infections, nationally 201824
1 568 000
1 236 000
2 107 000

Reported number of gonorrhea cases, nationally
201825
583 405
Not varied
Not varied

P&S Syphilis: Estimated number of incident
infections, nationally 201824,b,c
146 000
108 000
197 000

Reported number of P&S syphilis cases, nationally
201825,c
35 063
Not varied
Not varied

Probability of STI-attributable HIV infection, per
chlamydial infection10
.00022
.000022
.000418

Probability of STI-attributable HIV infection, per
gonococcal infection10
.00022
.000022
.000418

Probability of STI-attributable HIV infection, per
syphilitic infection10
.00462
.000462
.008778

Average lifetime direct medical cost per chlamydial
infection11,d,e
$190
$100
$340

Average lifetime direct medical cost per
gonococcal infection11,d,e
$190
$80
$380

Average lifetime direct medical cost per syphilitic
infection12,d
$1 300
$800
$2 070

Average lifetime direct medical cost per HIV
infection13,d,f
$461 000
$358 000
$537 000

Impact of funding on incidence rate, chlamydia4,g,h
−0.179
0
−0.348
Impact of funding on incidence rate, gonorrhea4,g
−0.313
−0.081
−0.486
Impact of funding on incidence rate, syphilis4,g,i
−0.313
−0.081
−0.486

Abbreviations: P&S syphilis, primary and secondary syphilis; STI, sexually transmitted infection.
aFor inputs, values correspond to the reported 95% confidence intervals from the original source unless otherwise noted. We use the terms “low-impact scenario” and “high-
impact scenario” rather than lower and upper bound because the 3 parameters for the impact of funding on the 3 bacterial STIs are reversed, with lower numerical values
representing a greater improvement.
bThe reference study provided interquartile ranges (25th and 75th percentiles); the ranges we applied reflect unpublished approximations of the 95% confidence intervals
(2.5th and 97.5th percentiles) obtained from the authors.
cWe used P&S syphilis to be consistent with the user input for the number of P&S syphilis cases. This parameter is used as a denominator for calculating the jurisdiction’s
share of nationally reported cases, which is then assumed to be the same as the jurisdiction’s share of estimated national syphilis incidence.24

dCosts were converted to 2022 US dollars using the medical care component of the consumer price index. Costs reflect direct medical costs only, from the health system
perspective, which includes all direct medical costs without regard to who incurs these costs. The lifetime direct medical cost estimates include the possibility of incurring
direct medical costs of sequelae (eg, pelvic inflammatory disease in women due to chlamydial or gonococcal infection; see the source publications referenced earlier for
details). Other types of costs besides direct medical costs (eg, productivity losses due to morbidity and mortality, the value of a statistical life lost, and intangible costs of pain
and suffering) were not included.
eThe authors reported costs separately for men and women. We created a weighted average for the full population by applying the number of estimated incident infections
nationally.24

fThe base value is the mean of the authors’ reported base value. The ranges are the mean results from the authors’ least and most favorable scenarios.
gSee Supplemental Digital Content Appendix 2 (available at http:// links.lww.com/ JPHMP/ B282) for the calculations from Williams et al4 to develop the model parameters.
The values were inflation-adjusted using the general all-item consumer price index.
hIn the source study, the cumulative effect of STI prevention funding was significant at the P < .10 level for chlamydia and at the P < .05 level for gonorrhea. Accordingly,
the 95% confidence interval for the cumulative impact of funding on chlamydia overlapped 0. For the low-impact scenario for chlamydia, we set the funding impact value to
0, thereby assuming that in the worst-case scenario, increased STI prevention funding would have no effect rather than to worsen outcomes.
iSyphilis was not included in the analysis by Williams et al.4 We assumed the effect of funding on gonorrhea could be used as approximation for the effect of funding on
syphilis.

226

Confidence intervals were generated on the ba-
sis of the “high-impact scenario” and “low-impact
scenario” values for parameters in the Table. The
estimated impact of STI funding changes is more pro-
nounced when applying the “high-impact scenario”
funding parameter values and less pronounced when
applying the “low-impact scenario” parameter val-
ues. See Supplemental Digital Content Appendix 2
(available at http://links.lww.com/JPHMP/B282) for
additional details including confidence interval calcu-
lations and comparison of results between the SPACE
Monkey 1.0 and 2.0 models.

SPACE Monkey 2.0 user interface

Feedback from the focus groups was incorporated
into the final model design. A colorful landing page

provides information on the model’s purpose and
troubleshooting tips for common downloading errors
(Figure 1). We retained the SPACE Monkey 1.0 logo
for consistent branding with the original tool.
After hitting the “Click to Begin!” button, users are
directed to the main user interface (Figure 2). To ad-
dress participants’ desires for a simpler interface, we
included all required inputs and outputs on the same
page. This allows users to enter their inputs on the left
(“Program inputs”) and immediately see the changes
in the main output tables. The output tables include
dynamic text interpretations that automatically ad-
just as the user input values change. The output
tables have embedded conditional coding so that out-
comes of funding increases are labeled as “infections
averted” and “costs saved” and outcomes of funding
decreases are labeled as “additional infections” and
“additional costs.”A button at the bottom of the page
allows users to print the screen as a handout. For this
main page, we decided to present a 3-year impact as
the default because it was the most consistent with
the original historical formula analysis that estimated
impact4 and a common time horizon for presenting
budget analyses to policymakers. All cells on the main
page of the Excel spreadsheet are locked except for the
user inputs to avoid accidental manipulations of the
pivot table and automated text interpretation.
The “Advanced Options” button directs users to
the subsequent screen with more detailed output and
charts (Figure 3). Consistent with the prior screens, we
used the Viridis color palette,26 which is visually ap-
pealing, colorblindness compliant, and can be printed
in grayscale. On this screen, users can adjust the time
frame (from 1 to 10 years). For each infection, there
is a table and chart displaying infections averted and
direct medical costs saved (for budget increases) or ad-
ditional infections and additional direct medical costs
(for budget decreases). The pivot tables and pivot
charts have a dynamic feature based on Excel’s Slicer
tool that allow users to quickly change the number of
years included in their display. This sheet is unlocked
so that users can copy and paste tables and charts to
different applications.
We also incorporated users’ requests for clear ex-
planations of the model. A “Model Overview” tab
(not shown) provides users with a nontechnical de-
scription of the model including a short summary
that users can adapt, an overview of the calculations,
key assumptions and limitations, and references. A
“Model Parameters”tab provides all values, citations,
and other notes for each parameter listed in the Table.

Usability evaluation of SPACE Monkey 2.0

Overall, participants provided positive feedback dur-
ing the usability testing. They found the model to be

March/April 2024 • Volume 30, Number 2
www.JPHMP.com
227

FIGURE 1 SPACE Monkey 2.0 Landing Pagea

Abbreviation: STI, sexually transmitted infection.
aUpon opening the Excel model, users see this greeting page with an overview of the model and troubleshooting instructions for common problems
with the download.

easy to navigate and perceived that it was suitable
for their intended use. They expressed appreciation
for multiple functionalities that we added to the up-
dated model: dynamic charts and tables that could
be manipulated and copied into external applications,
detailed yearly output broken down by infection, clear
text for the model overview and interpretation, and
having confidence intervals.
Several usability problems emerged during the eval-
uation, including model bugs, issues with enabling
macros,accidental deletion of charts in the “Advanced
Options” page, occasional confusion on interpreta-
tion, and not reviewing the instructions. To address
these issues, we resolved the bugs, added instructions
for enabling macros, added cautionary notes in the
“Advanced Options” page to warn users about delet-
ing charts, added “i”icons (“information”) to prompt
users to click on the boxes for pop-up explanations of
the program inputs (see Figure 2, top left section), re-
vised the instructions to be in bright yellow arrows

with smaller snippets of text to catch model users’
attention, added new charts and tables, and edited
instructions.
Participants’ responses to the usability survey
(Figure 4) mirrored their positive comments during
the usability evaluation sessions. Participants had gen-
eral agreement with statements such as “I would like
to use this system frequently” and “I thought the sys-
tem was easy to use” and general disagreement with
statements such as “I thought there was too much in-
consistency in this system” and “I found the system
very cumbersome to use.”

Discussion

Through our human-centered design process, our re-
vised SPACE Monkey 2.0 model incorporates updated
scientific literature and has a customized interface and
functionalities to meet end users’ information needs
and technical skills. We plan to post the model to a

228

aThe program inputs are based on a hypothetical jurisdiction, for illustration purposes. The “i” icons prompt users to click on the relevant cells for a
pop-up box describing the inputs in more detail. The interpretation text is dynamic, with the numbers changing based on the user-defined scenario.
If users model a scenario of an annual funding decrease, the display automatically changes to show findings in terms of “additional infections” and
“additional costs,” and the interpretation text automatically adjusts to discuss a “decrease” in annual funding. Users can click on the “Print” button to
create a PDF or hard copy printout of the page. The “Advanced Options” button takes users to a different page where they can view additional tables
and charts. The colorful arrows on the right provide snippets of instructions to catch the users’ eye and make explanations easier to follow.

FIGURE 3 Advanced Options Pagea

Abbreviation: STI, sexually transmitted infection
aUsers can scroll down to see additional charts for gonorrhea, syphilis, STI-attributable HIV infections, and total STI infections excluding HIV infection.
Users can modify the time frame for the number of years over which the number of infections averted (or additional infections) is calculated by entering
a different number from 1 to 10 in the box on the top left. Users can change the years highlighted in the filter tool (bottom left) to change the data points
displayed on the table and chart. All tables and charts can be copied and pasted into an external application such as PowerPoint.

March/April 2024 • Volume 30, Number 2
www.JPHMP.com
229

FIGURE 4 Usability Testing Survey Resultsa

aN = 6 participants.

public Web site for free download and implement a
comprehensive dissemination campaign to promote
the model. This campaign will include videos and
digital presentations to train users and promote use,
webinars to diverse audiences in collaboration with
professional organizations, and targeted outreach to
end users who we hope can become champions to
encourage use among their peers.
SPACE Monkey 2.0 has several limitations. First, it
cannot be used for outcomes other than chlamydia,
gonorrhea, syphilis, or STI-attributable HIV infec-
tions. Second, it does not calculate the impact of
funding on congenital syphilis because those infec-
tions were not in the scope of the statistical analysis4

that was the basis for the model. Third, the model
includes only direct medical costs (eg, productivity
and other types of costs are excluded) and the esti-
mated costs saved or averted are not disaggregated
by payer (eg, costs saved by a county health depart-
ment vs health insurance). Fourth, the model is most
suitable for small to medium relative changes in an-
nual program funding (less than $2 per capita) to
federally funded jurisdictions. Fifth, the historical al-
locations study on which SPACE Monkey 2.0 was
based4 provided gonorrhea- and chlamydia-specific
estimates of the impact of STI funding but did not
provide syphilis-specific estimates. We assumed that
the relative impact of changes in funding would be
the same for syphilis as for gonorrhea. Sixth, the
underlying data series from the historical alloca-
tions study4 ends in 2016; the model would need
to be updated in the future as new data become

available. In addition, although the underlying his-
torical allocations study4 controlled for a range of
state-level characteristics, SPACE Monkey 2.0 does
not allow users to include jurisdiction-specific char-
acteristics such as sociodemographics or the number
of providers per capita. Finally, it does not account for
differential performance of STI prevention programs.