Protocol

Advance Care Planning Website for People With Dementia and
Their Family Caregivers: Protocol for a Development and Usability
Study

Fanny Monnet1,2, MSc; Charlèss Dupont1,2, MSc; Tinne Smets1,2, PhD; Aline De Vleminck1,2, PhD; Chantal Van
Audenhove3, PhD; Lieve Van den Block1,2*, PhD; Lara Pivodic1,2*, PhD

1End-of-Life Care Research Group, Vrije Universiteit Brussel and Ghent University, Brussels, Belgium
2Department of Family Medicine and Chronic Care, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium
3LUCAS Center for Care Research and Consultancy, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
*these authors contributed equally

Fanny Monnet, MSc
End-of-Life Care Research Group
Vrije Universiteit Brussel and Ghent University
Laarbeeklaan 103
Brussels, 1090
Belgium
Phone: 32 499260389

Methods

Development Overview

The methods selected for the development of the ACP website
are based on a process map for the development of web-based
decision support interventions for a specific audience as
proposed by Elwyn and colleagues [22] and follow the Medical
Research Council (MRC) framework for the development of
complex interventions [23]. Given the complexity of the
intervention, combining these approaches is warranted for the
development of a website that is both evidence- and
theory-informed.

This study focuses on the development stage of the MRC
framework for the development of complex interventions [23].
Within the development stage of the MRC framework, we use

JMIR Res Protoc 2023 | vol. 12 | e46935 | p. 2

the process map for the development of web-based decision
support interventions, which provides a clear development
approach for digital interventions especially. It is composed of
main steps such as (1) content specification, with an emphasis
on considering patients’perspectives in addition to synthetizing
the current scientific evidence, and (2) creative design, including
storyboarding and field and usability testing [22]. Furthermore,
as recommended in the MRC framework, we build in theory
and integrate continuous stakeholder engagement. Thus, in the
first content specification phase, we specify the information
that should be included in the ACP website by identifying
relevant existing evidence and conducting an assessment of
needs among people with dementia, family caregivers, and
dementia experts. In the second creative design phase,
prototypes of the ACP website are developed and revised in
several iterations.

User-Centered Design and Patient and Public
Involvement

In all phases of the development process, we incorporate user
views as recommended in recent literature reviews on the
development of technological interventions [4,24]. We adopt a
user-centered approach throughout the development of the ACP
website. User-centered design is a recognized method for
complex intervention development [23] and is an evidence-based

approach that emphasizes the importance of the needs of end
users during the development [25]. Additionally, as advocated
by Alzheimer Europe, we integrate meaningful patient and
public involvement (PPI) consultation sessions at different
stages of the development process to enhance the quality and
relevance of the ACP website [26]. PPI sessions are conducted
with an advisory group composed of people with dementia,
family caregivers, representatives from local dementia
associations, and palliative care experts (nurse and consultant
for ACP). This group is consulted throughout the development
process, in parallel to user testing with study participants,
through online meetings and emails.

Stakeholder Groups Involved in the Development
Process

The development of the ACP website is supported by 4 groups
as suggested by Elwyn et al [22]: a project management group
(composed of FM, CD, LVdB, LP, and TS), a project group
(composed of all authors of this paper), an advisory group (a
PPI group composed of representatives of regional dementia
and palliative care organizations and experts in Flanders, people
with dementia, and family caregivers), and a technical
production group (contracted IT partner). Figure 1 gives an
overview of each group’s responsibilities.

Content Specification Phase of the ACP Website

In this phase, we specify the information that should be included
in the ACP website by identifying relevant existing evidence
and conducting an assessment of needs among people with
dementia, family caregivers, and dementia experts. An overview
of the activities conducted in this phase and their main output
is presented in Figure 2. Results from the research activities in

the content specification phase are reported separately [27-29].
In this content specification phase, we summarize the evidence
from these activities. This includes ensuring the content and
structure of the website are in line with previous research on a
web-based ACP tool, the information already provided on the
internet by dementia associations, and the needs expressed by
people with dementia and their families for ACP and an ACP
website, as well as with the opinion of experts in the field.

Creative Design Phase of the ACP Website

Results from the content specification phase inform the design
phase of the ACP website. The findings from the evidence base
and the user needs assessment are used to build the first concept
of the website. An overview of this study, its aims, and all
involved groups is shown in Figure 2.

We adopt an agile development approach to build the ACP
website. This approach is characterized by an iterative and
dynamic development process while collaborating with several
groups of stakeholders. It is based on the principles of
continuous design improvement and testing based on rapid
feedback and change and allows for high-quality adaptive
software [30,31]. Such an approach is thus in line with a
user-centered approach. Within the agile development approach,
we use the Scrum method, as it particularly emphasizes the role
of feedback loops. The core characteristic of the Scrum method

is the sprint, which is a short development timeframe of
approximately 4 weeks [32]. Each sprint requires careful
preparation from recruitment of participants to meetings with
the advisory group and the technical production group. Based
on the complexity of website development and previous work
using a Scrum in the development of health-related interventions
[33], we estimate that the development of the ACP website will
be conducted in 5 successive stages, including 4 sprints. An
overview of the sprints is shown in Table 1.

In the presprint, the project management group summarizes and
synthetizes the evidence found in the content specification phase.
Then, the preliminary concept of the ACP website is discussed
in a meeting with the advisory group. The project management
group drafts a specification document based on the evidence
synthesis and the discussions of the advisory group. Based on
this specification document, the technical production group
develops the first prototype of the ACP website.

Table 1. Overview of the sprints executed during the iterative development process.

User testing
Content
Objective
Sprints

Participants, n
Data collection

N/Aa
Development of the first
prototype
Presprint
•
•
Feedback from advisory group
and project group
Development of initial proto-
type
•
Planning of the subsequent
sprints

12 participants (3 people
with dementia, 3 family
caregivers, and 3 dyads)

Evaluate the usability of the
first 3 features
Sprint 1
•
•
Think-aloud method
Usability testing of the home
page, structure of the website
•
Survey
•
Feedback from advisory group

12 participants (3 people
with dementia, 3 family
caregivers, and 3 dyads)

Evaluate usability of the
following 3 features
Sprint 2
•
•
Think-aloud method
Usability testing of the informa-
tional part of the website
•
Survey
•
Feedback from advisory group
and project group

12 participants (3 people
with dementia, 3 family
caregivers, and 3 dyads)

Evaluate usability of the re-
maining features
Sprint 3
•
•
Think-aloud method
Usability testing of the commu-
nication part of the website and
the web-based tools
•
Survey
•
Feedback from advisory group
and project group

12 participants (3 people
with dementia, 3 family
caregivers, and 3 dyads)

Test the content, face validi-
ty, and readability of the
tool, and its layout and ease-
of-use

Sprint 4
•
•
Semistructured interviews
Content, face validity, and
readability of the whole web-
site
•
Feedback from advisory group
and project group

aN/A: not applicable.

Usability Testing

We follow the definition of the International Organization for
Standardization of usability (ISO 9241-11), that is, “how well
users can learn and use a product to achieve their goals and how
satisfied they are with that process” [34]. This includes the
evaluation of the ease of learning, efficiency of use,
memorability, error frequency, and satisfaction [35].

People with dementia, family caregivers, and dyads evaluate
several versions of the prototype of the ACP website. Based on
their input as well as feedback from the advisory group, the
technical production group adapts and extends the tool in several
iterations (sprints). After 3 usability sprints (sprints 1 to 3), the
latest prototype of the ACP website is evaluated by people living
with dementia, their main family caregivers, and dyads in terms
of content, face validity, readability, and layout (sprint 4). The
findings are used to develop the final prototype of the ACP
website. An overview of the usability testing is provided in
Table 1. The following sections explain the procedure in more
detail.

Participants

We aim to include 48 participants in total. We organize the
testing with people with dementia, family caregivers, and dyads.
For each iteration (sprint), we aim to include 12 participants (3
people with dementia, 3 family caregivers, and 3 dyads) who
are asked to test the prototype and fill in the System Usability
Scale (SUS) questionnaire. For every sprint, we seek to enroll
new participants. For people with dementia, the inclusion criteria
were being aware and informed of their diagnosis, having an
interest in and being willing to test an ACP website (including
using a computer and the internet), speaking and understanding

Dutch, being able to understand the information about this study,
and being able to sign a written informed consent form. For
family caregivers, the inclusion criteria were as follows: being
the main or primary caregiver of a person formally diagnosed
with dementia, having an interest in and being willing to test a
web-based ACP tool, being 18 years of age or older, and
speaking and understanding Dutch.

Recruitment

We ask participants to use a computer and the internet, which
can be challenging, as one needs to have a certain level of
computer literacy. The topic of ACP can also be sensitive and
can evoke emotional reactions. Therefore, we use a process of
active volunteering in our recruitment, that is, potential
participants have to indicate themselves if they want to
participate in this study. Thus, it is a self-assessment of
willingness to participate and interest in the topic.

We recruit participants through different organizations such as
the Flemish Alzheimer Liga, memory clinics, or Belgian
sickness funds. Individuals who are interested in participating
are asked to contact one of the researchers, who in turn sends
an information letter and an informed consent form about the
study through email. Potential participants are asked to reply
to the email or send back the forms if they still want to
participate in the study after reading the study information letter
and informed consent.

Data Collection

Sprints 1 to 3

The usability tests are conducted in individual sessions with
people with dementia, family caregivers, and dyads. Each
session is conducted according to a pretested protocol, in the

JMIR Res Protoc 2023 | vol. 12 | e46935 | p. 5

following order: (1) a think-aloud exercise on a set of predefined
tasks [36], (2) researcher observations, and (3) a usability
questionnaire. The aim of combining these methods is to gather
more diverse data. The same type of session is performed with
the participants in the sprints 1 to 3. The sessions are conducted
in a familiar setting, for instance, the location where they are
recruited or in the homes of the participants.

First, we ask the participants to fill in a demographics
questionnaire. We give them tasks and oral instructions on how
to go through the features of the ACP website prototype. People
with dementia, their family caregivers, and the dyads are asked
to navigate through each prototype version using a “think-aloud”
method. This involves asking participants to verbalize their
thoughts, impressions, and feelings while engaging with the
tool. A researcher is present to observe and note the participants’
physical cues, successes in tasks, mistakes, difficulties, or
comments [36]. Guidance or interference from the researcher
is kept to a minimum to investigate whether the ACP website
prototype is intuitive. However, if the participants fall silent for
too long (eg, if the researcher notices that a participant has
silently moved on to a new task or is experiencing difficulties
without expressing them), the researcher reminds them to keep
thinking aloud using prompts [36].

In addition, participants’ perspectives on usability are further
assessed through the SUS questionnaire [37]. The SUS is a
widely used and a simple, reliable, and validated 10-item scale
that measures subjective usability and that has already been
used by people with dementia [36,37]. The SUS score measures
users’ perception of the usability of the prototype in terms of
effectiveness, efficiency, and satisfaction. Each item is scored
on a 5‐point Likert scale (strongly disagree = 1 and strongly
agree = 5). Higher scores (range 0‐100) represent better
usability [37].

Sprint 4

We ask all participants to fill in a demographics questionnaire.
Then, we ask people with dementia, family caregivers, and
dyads to navigate the ACP website and answer questions in a
semistructured interview about the content, face validity, and
readability of the website, as well as about its layout.

Data Analysis

The data from the think-aloud sessions and interviews are
audio-recorded and transcribed verbatim. The field notes from
the observations serve to further support the data collected
during the think-aloud exercise. From sprint 1 to 3, the
think-aloud sessions are analyzed through thematic analysis of
the notes taken by the researchers and, if the notes were not
sufficient, we listen back to the audiotapes to complete the notes.
After sprint 4, the data from the transcript are analyzed using
thematic analysis [38]. The data are coded by 2 researchers to
identify key themes. The researchers meet and discuss the
preliminary codes before agreeing on a final list of codes.
Disagreements are resolved through discussion.

The data from the SUS questionnaire complements the findings
from the think-aloud sessions and interviews. Data are analyzed
with SPSS (version 25; IBM Corp). The SUS score is calculated
by summing the score contributions of each item. For items 1,

3, 5, 7, and 9, the score contribution is the scale position minus
1. For items 2, 4, 6, 8, and 10, the score contribution is 5 minus
the scale position. To obtain the overall value of the SUS score,
the sum of the scores must be multiplied by 2.5. Mean scores
are calculated, and comparisons between types of participants
are considered. A score of 68 or above will be deemed
acceptable [39]. Descriptive statistics are used to describe
participant demographic characteristics.

Ethics Approval

This study received approval from the Ethical Review Board
of Brussels University Hospital of the Vrije Universiteit Brussel
on June 26, 2021 (BUN 1432021000437). To determine the
ability of people with dementia to give informed consent, we
ask them to read the informed consent form out loud. We ask
them per line if they understand their rights and whether they
understand what is asked of them. One of the researchers (CD)
ensures participants with dementia understand what they sign
by discussing the statements formulated in the informed consent
form with them. A family caregiver is also present to help the
researcher assess the understanding of the person with dementia.
If everything is clear, they are asked to sign the informed
consent. We also ask the family caregivers to sign the informed
consent form of the persons with dementia as witnesses, as
recommended by the Alzheimer’s Association National Board
of Directors [40]. All data are coded anonymously, and
pseudonyms are used when quoting participants.

Results

We began recruitment of participants in October 2021, and
participant enrollment has been completed. A total of 48
participants took part in the usability testing across 4 prototypes
of the ACP website, and we conducted a total of 6 advisory
group meetings. Data analysis has not started.

Dissemination of the results will be led by the authors and will
include presentations at international conferences and
publications in scientific peer-reviewed journals and the creation
of best practice guidance for the development of technology for
people with dementia. Results from the development and
usability study will be published in 2023. A larger evaluation
study will also be conducted. After evaluation and further
adaptation where needed, the ACP website will be made freely
available as a resource for people with dementia and their family
caregivers, if it is evaluated as acceptable and useful by users,
and no negative effects are noticed. The website will be
disseminated via the dementia organizations that were involved
in our advisory group and is expected to be publicly launched
in 2024.

Discussion

Principal Findings

User involvement and PPI are recognized as critical components
in the development of eHealth and digital solutions, as they can
help ensure that interventions meet user needs [41,42]. Involving
users in the development of technology has been suggested as
an important component for improving technology acceptance,
especially for older people [43]. The involvement of people

JMIR Res Protoc 2023 | vol. 12 | e46935 | p. 6

living with dementia in particular has been highly advocated
for in the development of technology both in research and by
groups such as Alzheimer Europe [24,26,44]. Yet, studies
providing a detailed description of user involvement in
technology development are scarce. A particular strength of this
protocol relates to the step-by-step description of our
development process and how we approached the involvement
of multiple key stakeholders in all phases of the website
development. We particularly emphasize the combination of
PPI input and user-centered development methods, leading to
a transparent and reliable development process. The
development process of the ACP website brings together
researchers, regional stakeholders in the fields of dementia and
palliative care, as well as people living with dementia and family
caregivers to support people with dementia and their families
in engaging in ACP.

Furthermore, this protocol describes in detail a unique
combination of approaches consisting of the MRC framework
for the development of complex interventions [23], the process
map for the development of web-based decision support
interventions [22], and an agile development approach rooted
in user-centered design. The findings of the content specification
phase, which are based on rich and extensive input from people
with dementia, family caregivers, and dementia experts, as well
as up-to-date research evidence on ACP in the field of dementia,
have informed the design and content of the ACP website. The
iterative development process adopted in the creative design
phase facilitated the provision of feedback from the end users.
This combination of methods can support researchers and
designers in the development of web-based technologies, as
well as understanding and considering user needs early on and
throughout the development process. We hope that our efforts
to describe this research approach will inspire researchers to
integrate PPI and user-centered approaches in their own studies.

We strongly encourage the active participation of people with
dementia, their caregivers, and regional stakeholders in research
on the development of web-based technologies for dementia
care.

One of the challenges anticipated in the study described in this
protocol is that our sample may not be very heterogeneous. In
particular, one of the inclusion criteria was to have an interest
in testing a website regarding ACP; thus, our sample may be
composed of people with generally higher computer skills and
who are already familiar with the topic of ACP. Therefore, we
may lack different types of perspectives, which could influence
the content and design of the ACP website. This study is the
first step before a larger evaluation study, which will involve a
larger sample and where we will aim for variability in the sample
in terms of age, gender, type of dementia, and dyad composition
(eg, partners or a parent and child). Additionally, continuous
technical support should be organized to encourage the
participation of people with lower computer skills.

Conclusions

The methods put forth in this protocol describe a feasible and
inclusive approach to the development of an ACP website. The
results from this study will be used to refine the design of the
ACP website for a future larger evaluation study to assess the
ACP website’s acceptability by people living with dementia
and their family caregivers and the effects on people with
dementia and family caregivers’ knowledge of ACP, attitudes
toward ACP, and intention to engage in ACP. We hope that the
findings of the development and usability of the ACP website
for people with dementia and their family caregivers will
contribute to the design and development of future studies
involving the development of web-based technologies for people
with dementia.