CLINICAL INVESTIGATIONS

Development of a Clinically Feasible Process for Identifying
Individual Health Priorities

Aanand D. Naik, MD,*† Lilian N. Dindo, PhD,*† Julia R. Van Liew, PhD,‡

Natalie E. Hundt, PhD,*† Lauren Vo, MS,§ Kizzy Hernandez-Bigos, BA,§ Jessica Esterson, MPH,¶

Mary Geda, BN, MSN, RN,¶ Jonathan Rosen, MD,§ Caroline S. Blaum, MD, MS,k and
Mary E. Tinetti, MD¶**

OBJECTIVES: To develop a values-based, clinically feasible
process to help older adults identify health priorities that
can guide clinical decision-making.
DESIGN: Prospective development and feasibility study.
SETTING: Primary care practice in Connecticut.
PARTICIPANTS: Older adults with 3 or more conditions
or taking 10 or more medications (N=64).
INTERVENTION:
The
development
team
of
patients,
caregivers,
and
clinicians
used
a
user-centered
design
framework—ideate ! prototype ! test !redesign—to develop
and reﬁne the value-based patient priorities care process and
medical record template with trained clinician facilitators.
MEASUREMENTS: We used descriptive statistics of quan-
titative measures (percentage accepted invitation and com-
pleted
template,
duration
of
process)
and
qualitative
analysis of barriers and enablers (challenges and solutions
identiﬁed, facilitator perceptions).
RESULTS: We developed and reﬁned a process for identifying
patient health priorities that was typically completed in 35 to
45 minutes over 2 sessions; 64 patients completed the process.
Qualitative analyses were used to elucidate the characteristics
and training needed for the patient priorities facilitators, as
well as perceived beneﬁts and challenges of the process.
Reﬁnements based on our experience and feedback include
streamlining the process for greater feasibility, balancing

ﬁdelity to the process while customizing to individuals,
encouraging patients to share their priorities with their clini-
cians, and simplifying the template transmitted to clinicians.
CONCLUSION: Trained facilitators conducted this process
in a busy primary care practice, suggesting that patient pri-
orities identiﬁcation is feasible and acceptable, although
testing in additional settings is necessary. We hope to show
that clinicians can align care with patients’ health priorities.
J Am Geriatr Soc 66:1872–1879, 2018.

Key words: patient priorities; preferences; goal; goal-set-
ting; older adults; multimorbidity

METHODS

Development of a Values-Based Patient Priorities
Identiﬁcation Process

A user-centered design framework (ideate ! prototype !
test !redesign) was adapted to develop the patient priori-
ties identiﬁcation process.36 The investigators developed the
core concepts (ideate) through a synthesis of prior literature
and input from advisory panels consisting of 6 patients or
caregivers; 7 primary care providers (PCPs); 8 specialty cli-
nicians; 3 payers; 5 health system leaders; 5 patient, care-
giver, and clinician organization representatives; 3 health
informatics technology experts; and 2 redesign experts.
From January 2014 to June 2015, advisory panels con-
vened 39 times to identify modiﬁable contributors to frag-
mented, burdensome care and determine core elements for
building a feasible, sustainable approach to improving care
by addressing these factors.6,37 This process, described
previously,6 culminated in development of a logic model for
patient priority–aligned care, which begins with patients
identifying and communicating their health priorities. These
priorities guide interactions between patients, caregivers,
and clinicians as they select care options.6 The core steps
for the patient priorities identiﬁcation process are described
in Table 1.

Patient Priorities Identiﬁcation Process

PCPs invited their patients to collaborate with a facilitator
(described below) to identify their health priorities. Multiple
practice change strategies, described elsewhere,38 were used
to ensure buy-in and participation of PCPs. Each step in the
patient priorities identiﬁcation process has a deﬁned purpose
and content adapted from our prior studies.23,24,39,40 These
steps occurred in a clinical setting, the patient’s home, or over
the telephone over 1 to 2 sessions, depending on each
patient’s preferences, circumstances, and readiness. The
patient priorities identiﬁcation process moved through values
clariﬁcation to values-informed elaboration of goals and
preferences and a conversation about tradeoffs. We devel-
oped patient and facilitator manuals to guide participants
through the process. The facilitator manual mirrored the
patient manual with the addition of instructions on how to
guide patients through the steps and tips for addressing com-
monly encountered challenges. Patient advocates and experts
in health literacy suggested edits to the patient manual.

Reﬁnement of the Patient Priorities Identiﬁcation
Process

Modiﬁcations to the identiﬁcation process and accompanying
manuals were based
on input from facilitators’ initial

1873

experiences with patients and every-other-week teleconfer-
ences with the development team from October 2016 to July
2017. The most important reﬁnement was addition of the
fourth step, which focused on encouraging patients to interact
with their PCPs regarding their goals and preferences.
The primary outcome of this process is the elaboration
of a set of health priorities, consisting of health outcome
goals and healthcare preferences, which are transmitted to
the healthcare team by scanning a completed template into
the electronic health record. The workﬂow for transmitting
health priorities is described elsewhere.38 Patients are encour-
aged to share their priorities with their clinicians and prompt
their clinicians to consider how currently recommended care
aligns with the patient’s health priorities. Table 1 provides a
comprehensive description of the 4-step patient health priori-
ties identiﬁcation process. (Supplemental Figure S1 provides
an overview.)

Training of Priority Facilitators

Facilitators are health professionals who help patients identify
their health priorities. Facilitators who participated in the cur-
rent feasibility study included an advanced practice registered

nurse and a member of the healthcare team with case man-
agement experience, both employed by the large primary care
practice. Facilitators prepared for training by reviewing the
facilitator manual. Training began with a face-to-face session
in which facilitators practiced the process with a member of
the development team and then with a standardized patient.
Facilitators then tested the process with 10 patients, during
which time they observed each other and gave feedback.

Feasibility Testing

We conducted an open, single-arm feasibility assessment of
the revised patient priorities identiﬁcation process from
October 1, 2016, to July 31, 2017. This feasibility pilot
involved older patients with multiple morbid conditions
and the 2 facilitators that the development team trained.
The institutional review board of Yale School of Medicine
approved this study.

Patient Participants

Patients aged 65 and older were drawn from an existing
Medicare population of a large primary care practice. Patient

Table 1. Adapting Steps, Purpose, and Content of Patient Priorities Identiﬁcation Process

Visit with primary clinician
• Primary clinician invites patient to participate in patient health priorities care using scripted language: “When a patient, such as you,
has a number of medical conditions, medications, and specialists—sometimes your own needs and priorities get lost. We have a
program called Patient Priority Care where you can meet with one of our staff members to describe your priorities and make sure we
are all on the same page in deciding about your care. Would it be all right if (facilitator’s name) gave you a call to arrange a time to
meet?”
• Primary clinician explains rationale and importance of this approach to decision-making and care of persons with multiple conditions
and multiple clinicians.
• Primary clinician encourages patient to focus on function (valued life activities and abilities) rather than symptoms and how patient
perceives beneﬁts and burdens of current treatments.
First step with facilitator—Introduction to patient health priorities and values clariﬁcation process
• Clarify what matters most to patients (their values).
• Link how values relate to current life and health circumstances. To better understand what the patient wants to be doing, consider
focusing on the positive: “What would the patient do if certain negatives (e.g., symptoms, limitations) were removed.” This is how values
lead to health outcome goals.
• Identify what is effective and what is burdensome with the patient’s current health care.
Second step with facilitator—Adapting values into health outcome goals and exploring healthcare preferences
• Patient and facilitator collaborate to identify health outcome goals based on their values, current health, and likely health trajectory.
• Facilitator works with patient to elaborate speciﬁc care preferences based on prior discussion of what is and is not working with his or
her healthcare.
• Facilitator supports patient to communicate his or her priorities proactively at subsequent encounters with primary and specialty care
visits.
Third step with facilitator—Discussing tradeoffs and completing patient health priorities template
• Facilitator helps patient address tradeoffs that arise from incongruence of 1 or more goals, healthcare recommendations, and patient’s
care preferences and burdens of that care.
• By working through these inevitable tradeoffs, facilitator and patient will iteratively reﬁne patient priorities. This process helps to move
from a goal that is vague or too ambitious to one that is more realistic.
• Facilitator enters health outcome goals and care preferences into electronic health record template that resides in easily accessed
location for all clinicians to review. Subsequent visits with facilitator or clinicians should focus on adjustments to health outcome goals
and recommended healthcare that reﬂect these tradeoff decisions and how well outcome goals are being achieved.
• Patients prepare a speciﬁc ask to start the conversation. This is written on a tear off sheet that patients take with them to their next
clinician visit
Fourth step with facilitator—Encouraging patients to communicate their health priorities
• Facilitators integrate elements of patient activation theory and practice to prepare patients to advocate for their health priorities during
subsequent encounters with primary and specialty care clinicians.
• Patients are encouraged to discuss their priorities and inquire about ways in which their health care may help them accomplish these
priorities. Facilitators and patients practice (role-play) conversations.
• Patients identify a “speciﬁc ask” to start conversation with their clinicians. This ask is written and provided to patient to take to their
next clinician visit

1874
NAIK ET AL.

panels were screened for eligibility based on the presence of
of the following inclusion criteria: English-speaking and 3 or
more chronic conditions, taking 10 or more medications, or
seen by more than 2 specialists. Exclusion criteria included
known diagnosis of advanced dementia, chronic dialysis,
residing in a nursing home, and meeting hospice criteria. Per-
sons with mild cognitive impairment were included per
judgement of their PCP. Between October 1, 2017, and July
31, 2017, 119 persons were offered patient priorities identiﬁ-
cation. Of these, 69 were contacted to complete a baseline
interview for the patient priorities care project. These
patients were eligible for inclusion in this study. The remain-
ing 50 individuals had returned to their PCP before we were
able to contact them, precluding our ability to obtain their
baseline interview.

Quantitative Evaluation of Feasibility

Descriptive data included sociodemographic characteristics
and Treatment Burden Questionnaire9 and Patient-Reported
Outcomes Measurement Information System Physical and
Mental Health subscale scores.42 Assessments of feasibil-
ity include the number who agreed to undergo and com-
plete the patient priorities identiﬁcation process and the
number and duration of visits required to complete
identiﬁcation.

Qualitative Interviews with Facilitator Participants

Facilitators were interviewed using open-ended questions
to elicit perceptions of the patient priorities identiﬁcation
process. Facilitators were asked: How would you describe
your experiences with facilitating patients’ priorities? and
How does it compare with your typical encounters with
patients? Facilitators were also asked to comment about
which parts worked well, which were challenging, which
they would change, and which they perceived that patients
valued most.

Analysis

We calculated frequencies, proportions, and distributions
for all quantitative variables using descriptive statistics.
Qualitative
data
were
analyzed
using
the
constant
comparative method of qualitative analysis.41,43 Interview
transcripts were reviewed line by line to identify and
sort
segments
of
data
with
similar
concepts
into
distinct themes. Following coding by a lead analyst (JVL),
additional investigators (AN, LD, MT) reviewed, negoti-
ated, and reached consensus regarding thematic analysis
and
resolved
discrepancies.
We
similarly
identiﬁed
challenges associated with the patient health priorities iden-
tiﬁcation process, the development team’s responses to these
challenges, and subsequent reﬁnements through thematic
analyses of the development team’s teleconferences.

RESULTS

Acceptance and Feasibility of the Patient Priorities
Identiﬁcation Process

Of the 69 eligible patients, 64 (93%) agreed to identify their
health priorities; 64% were female, 89% white, and 59%

aged 75 and older (Table 2). All 64 participants completed
the process, 31 of whom completed the ﬁnal or close-to-
ﬁnal version of the patient priorities identiﬁcation process.
Total time to complete the 4 steps outlined in Table 1 was
35 to 45 minutes, usually within 1 session. When the initial
facilitation process occurred in the clinic immediately after
a PCP visit rather than the patient’s home, the time for
Steps 1 through 4 was often completed in two 20-minute
visits, with the second visit used to further explore tradeoffs
(Step 3) and strengthen activation (Step 4). Participants pro-
vided a rich array of health outcome goals. Examples of
health outcome goals identiﬁed include: “I want to continue
to babysit my grandchildren each day to help my daughter
while she works;” “Wants to continue to cook lunch for
her son each day;” “I want to be able to drive to the gym
for my Zumba and water aerobics”—current loss of feeling
in feet is a barrier; “I want to continue to keep working on
appliances and run my own business—hand pain makes
this difﬁcult;” “Wants to be able to have less pain in her
back when walking to go hopping with her husband;” “I
want to continue to visit my aunt who is on hospice;” “I
want to continue to play cards with my friends once per
week;” “I want to see my granddaughter born in Octo-
ber”—progression of his cancer is a barrier; “Would like to
be able to work outside in her garden and push a wheel
barrel—fatigue makes this difﬁcult;” “I want to continue to
travel to Fort Myers each year to stay with my daughter for
the winter.” Participants also identiﬁed care preferences and
helpful and bothersome care (Table 3). Examples of helpful
care identiﬁed (care preferences) included: “Triamterene
helps with the swelling;” “I would do surgery to extend my
life;” “Cardio rehab is helping me;” “My CPAP is helpful, I
sleep about 4 hours at a time;” “Wear Depends;” “visiting
nurse, she keeps all these medication changes straight;”

Table 2. Baseline Characteristics, N = 64

Baseline Characteristic
Value

Age, n (%)
65–75
26 (41)
76–89
34 (53)
≥90
4 (6)
Female, n (%)
41 (64)
Non-Hispanic white, n (%)
57 (89)
Currently married, n (%)
25 (40)
Lives alone, N (%)
29 (45)
Education attainment, n (%)1

<High school
10 (16)
High school graduate or equivalent
28 (44)
Some college, technical or associates
degree
14 (22)

Bachelors or graduate degree
9 (14)
Treatment Burden Questionnaire score,
median (IQR)
22.5 (5.5–45.5)

Patient-Reported Outcomes Measurement
Information System subscale score, median
(IQR)
Physical Health
12.5 (11–15)
Mental Health
13 (11–16)

13 did not answer.
IQR = interquartile range

1875

“VA helps me with injections in my eye for my macular
degeneration;” “Prednisone for my rheumatoid, it helps.”
Examples of difﬁcult or bothersome care identiﬁed (care
preferences) included: “I don’t know if my medications are
causing my muscle pain;” “Pain all the time with the
chemo, I wouldn’t really know if the other medications are
making it worse;” “When I saw Dr. X, he lowered my
amlodipine because it was increasing my swelling, but when
I met with Dr. Y, he increased the amlodipine because I was
feeling like something was hitting my chest when I walk;”
“I get this electric shock pain in my hands, I don’t know if
my meds are causing this;” “Could my meds be causing my
need to run and pee at night?” “I get hypoglycemic. I start
to get weak and shaky. I don’t know why or if I’m taking
too much of something;” “Meds are too expensive, Huma-
log was $220.00;” “I stopped levothyroxine because it
made me tired;” “I am losing weight, which concerns me,
not sure if it is the meds;” “Furosemide made my stomach
upset and made me just feel crappy.”

Facilitator Input on Patient Priorities Identiﬁcation
Process

Themes from qualitative interviews with facilitators included
characteristics of facilitator training and perceptions of the
patient priorities identiﬁcation process, including potential
challenges (Table 4). Facilitators recommended having prior
experience with motivational interviewing and an under-
standing of the complexities of patients’ lives and health care;
they indicated that the feedback that the development team
provided during the weekly telephone calls and the prompts
and troubleshooting tips from the facilitator manual were
valuable and constructive. Facilitators described the process
as time intensive but rewarding because it built rapport with
patients and bolstered patients’ investment in their care.
Facilitators felt that many patients were reluctant to discuss
their priorities with their PCPs and needed encouragement
and coaching to do so.

Challenges and Reﬁnements to the Patient Priorities
Identiﬁcation Process

The challenges and resulting modiﬁcations of the process
identiﬁed through iterative review and feedback are shown
in Supplementary Table S1. Reﬁnements included simplifying

Table 3. Performance with Patient Priorities Identiﬁca-
tion Process*

Performance Element
Value

Family member or friend participated in patient
priorities identiﬁcation, n (%)
9 (14)

Completed patient priorities template, n (%)
64 (100)
Number of health outcome goals elaborated, n (%)†

1–2
11 (17.2)
3
31 (48.4)
4–6
22 (34.4)
Number of healthcare preferences elaborated,
median (interquartile range)
5 (3–7)

*The 64 participants were referred from among the 9 primary care clini-
cians in the pilot practice, all of whom participated.
†Health
outcome
goals
are
the
personal
health
and
life
outcomes
(e.g., function, longevity, social activities, symptom relief ) that people hope
to achieve through their health care.
 Care preferences, also called patient activity, refer to what individuals are

able and willing to do or tolerate to achieve their health outcomes and
include such items as medication complexity, health visits, diagnostic test-
ing, self-monitoring, and self-management tasks.

Table 4. Facilitator Themes and Representative Quota-
tions about Patient Priorities Identiﬁcation Process

Characteristics of Facilitators and Facilitator Training that
Support Patient Priorities Identiﬁcation
Appreciation for the complexities of older adults’ lives and health
care, and experience with motivational interviewing
“[Facilitators] need experience with the geriatric population …
knowing what the challenges are .... understanding where
[patients] are in their life and how they feel about it …. it’s also
important to have experience with some type of facilitation or
patient counseling or like motivational interviewing …. ”
Inclusion of feedback, prompts, and troubleshooting tips
improved skills
“… learning as you go, and it’s gonna change and adapt a little
bit based on what the [patients] need.”
“…training materials [are] very good and very comprehensive,
but they were at the conceptual level [at the beginning]. So it
didn’t really tell you what exactly to say. We are sort of
troubleshooting materials as we go”
Facilitators’ Perceptions of the Patient Priorities
Identiﬁcation Process
The patient priorities identiﬁcation process itself is rewarding.
“it’s unbelievably rewarding … Seeing these patients make the
connections and actually get a sense that their clinicians are
seeing them as more than their conditions….” “We’re talking
about how their health really relates to things that are important
to them…So I think that that’s the most powerful thing …”
Time intensive yet builds rapport and patient investment in
patient priorities care.
“It’s really about building the rapport, and the more that you can
get them comfortable …they’re kind of willing to progress with the
conversation.” “The ﬁrst session really allows for rapport building,
comfort for the patient … they really feel that they’re being heard.”
Be ﬂexible regarding patients’ unique needs.
“…conversations don’t really go in a linear order. You kind of
have to follow where they’re leading you and meet them where
they are … ”
Potential Challenges Related to the Patient Priorities
Identiﬁcation Process
Values identiﬁcation is an essential and challenging aspect of the
process.
“Once we get into things that they really value, you see them light
up. You see their face change. You see it in their eyes. You see
their voice change. That kind of tells me where to go. It works the
best when we hit on something that you can tell is really
important. Then, it’s really easy, and it goes from there, but you
have to ﬁnd the right thing that really kind of sparks them.” “The
word values didn’t always resonate with people.… So sometimes
we had to start with something really concrete.”
Transmission of information to clinicians may not produce substantive
changes in their clinical decision-making processes.
“It’s more now the challenge of what happens between clinicians
and patients, because it’s very easy [for a facilitator] to upload the
note [to the electronic health record]. For the most part, [clinicians
are] really receptive to trying it, but I think that they get caught up
in how much time it takes. I think that they’re pretty good about
hearing it, but how they’re able to do it is sometimes tougher.”
“The real difﬁculty has been the clinicians’ understanding that the
consideration of healthcare preferences and outcome goals should
be standard in treating patients with multiple chronic conditions.

1876
NAIK ET AL.

the patient manuals and adding tips and scripts to the facili-
tator manuals to address commonly encountered barriers to
helping patients identify their health priorities. Facilitators
streamlined the process to make it less time intensive and
more ﬂexible to meet individual patient needs. One reﬁne-
ment was the addition of Step 4, with input from national
leaders in patient engagement, to encourage patients to take
ownership of their goals and preferences, to communicate
them to their clinicians, and to participate in priority-based
decision-making. At the suggestion of a participating physi-
cian and patient advocacy experts, we added a “speciﬁc ask”
for patients to start the conversation with their clinicians: “If
I could change one thing about my health care, it would be
(ﬁll in) so that I can (ﬁll in).” This ask is written and pro-
vided to the patient to take to their next clinician visit to link
speciﬁc care options to goals and values and provide a ﬁrst
step in clinical decision-making.
Facilitators worked with the development team to cre-
ate a patient priority template that is integrated into the
electronic health record (Supplemental Table S2). Facilita-
tors document the patient’s current functional status, values
(what matters most to them), health outcome goals, and
healthcare preferences (“helpful care,” “difﬁcult or bother-
some care”). The template concludes with one speciﬁc ask
that helps link outcome goals with care preferences and a
starting point for making decisions. PCPs are alerted to the
template through an electronic health record alert. Reﬁne-
ments to the template focused on increasingly succinct doc-
umentation of care preferences and health outcome goals,
preferably in patients’ own words, and structural changes
to encourage its use.

DISCUSSION

The current study describes the development, reﬁnement,
and feasibility testing of a patient priorities identiﬁcation
process targeting older adults with multiple morbid condi-
tions. Development and reﬁnement beneﬁted from having
multiple user perspectives, including patients, facilitators,
PCPs, and a multidisciplinary development team. Input
from facilitators and patients during feasibility testing
resulted in reﬁnements drawn from clinical experiences.
Results of this study demonstrate that healthcare pro-
fessionals can be trained to perform the patient priorities
identiﬁcation process as part of their clinical encounters.
Furthermore, identiﬁcation of patient health priorities is
practical and feasible for older adults with multiple chronic
conditions. Facilitators report that the patient priorities
identiﬁcation
process
is
rewarding
and
enjoyable
but
requires training and formal feedback with point-of-care
manuals and investment of time with each patient. Our
experience suggests that facilitators can be drawn from vari-
ous health professions (e.g., nurses and nurse practitioners,
social workers, psychologists, physicians) with prior train-
ing in motivational interviewing or similar skills. Facilita-
tors described the values clariﬁcation step as essential but
challenging at times because patients are at various levels of
readiness to engage with facilitators and their clinicians
about their values, goals, and healthcare preferences. We
adapted the facilitator manuals to offer prompts and con-
crete examples to encourage conversations about what mat-
ters most to patients. Facilitators felt that beginning with

values clariﬁcation improved the reliability and usefulness
of the patient health priorities identiﬁcation process.
Reﬁnements, based on user feedback, included adap-
tations to the facilitator training, patient and facilitator
manuals, and patient priorities template to simplify the
process and enhance acceptability and usefulness. In addi-
tion, facilitators used the steps described in Table 1 and
Supplementary Figure S1 ﬂexibly in terms of length,
order, and emphasis to customize the process to each
patient’s readiness. Reﬁnements to the content and struc-
ture of the template over time culminated in the version
described in Supplementary Table S2. The integration of
patient encouragement was a reﬁnement that prepared
patients to advocate for their health priorities with their
clinicians.44–46

This work builds on a growing literature describing
approaches that develop clinicians’ communication skills for
adults with serious or life-threatening illnesses.13–15,47 A
recent intervention targeting patients with a life expectancy
of 2 years or less resulted in greater documentation of patient
values and goals in the electronic medical record than in a
usual care group.15 The patient priorities identiﬁcation pro-
cess targets patients with broader illness trajectories that
allow for a wider time horizon of goals and range of prefer-
ences. Prior case management interventions for frail older
adults have effectively linked patient preferences to care
plans,48,49 although disease guidelines, not individual patient
priorities, were the primary basis for care plan development in
these case management models. Although building on earlier
work, our project is the ﬁrst to our knowledge to include a
clinically feasible approach not limited to advanced illness or
the end of life for identifying and linking each person’s health
outcomes goals with the health care they are willing and able
to receive or participate in to help achieve those goals.
Eliciting and documenting the personal values of older,
multimorbid adults is uncommon in routine care,24 despite
playing a central role in person-centered care.24,45,47,50

Identifying what matters most (broad statements of patient
values) using a structured process during routine encoun-
ters opens the door to understanding and framing speciﬁc
health outcomes that patients are willing and able to
achieve.11,24 Values (broad statements of what matters
most) are the precursors to identifying SMART health out-
come goals.1,11,24,47

The current study has limitations. The sample was
drawn from a limited geographic area, although more than
half of participants had a high school education or less,
supporting the acceptability of this process over a wide
range of educational levels. It remains to be determined
whether the process can be imbedded sufﬁciently in routine
care to allow reassessment of patient priorities over time, as
needed as health status changes. We are collaborating with
PCPs to determine whether they ﬁnd this information
appropriate or useful. The availability of healthcare team
members to facilitate the process is an impediment for
health systems with fewer resources. The need for motiva-
tional interviewing skills may be a further limitation,
although these skills are part of nursing, social work, and
other health professions training. It is unclear how to ensure
alignment of healthcare decision-making with patient health
priorities and the eventual effect of eliciting patient priori-
ties on longitudinal outcomes.

1877

Despite these limitations, input from a multidisciplinary
development team combined with feedback from patients,
clinicians, and health literacy and patient advocate experts
is a strength of this work. Conducting the study with
practice-based clinicians in the context of a primary care
service suggests that implementation of the patient priorities
process in practice is feasible.

Implications and Next Steps

Our ongoing work includes ascertainment of patient and
clinician perceptions of the process and evaluation of the
effect on clinical decision-making and on patient, clinician,
and health system outcomes. We are assessing the feasibil-
ity of the patient priorities care process in individuals with
dementia. We will also test the process in additional set-
tings to determine whether feasibility or acceptance differs
according to educational level, ethnicity, or other factors.
We are also exploring the role of payment innovations and
value-based payments to cover facilitator and clinician time
to identify patient priorities and provide priorities-aligned
care. The patient priorities identiﬁcation process will be
disseminated as an online training program to prepare
patient
priorities
facilitators
and
further
spread
the
approach using tips and tools for clinicians without access
to a facilitator.