Original Paper

A Mobile Phone–Based App for Use During Cognitive Behavioral
Therapy for Adolescents With Anxiety (MindClimb): User-Centered
Design and Usability Study

Amanda Newton1*, PhD; Alexa Bagnell2,3*, MA, MD; Rhonda Rosychuk1, PhD; Janelle Duguay3, BA, BSW; Lori
Wozney2, PhD; Anna Huguet2, PhD; Joanna Henderson4, PhD; Janet Curran5, PhD

1Department of Pediatrics, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada
2IWK Health Centre, Halifax, NS, Canada
3Department of Psychiatry, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada
4Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada
5School of Nursing, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada
*these authors contributed equally

Alexa Bagnell, MA, MD
Department of Psychiatry
Dalhousie University
PO Box 9700
5850/5980 University Avenue
Halifax, NS, B3K 6R8
Canada
Phone: 1 902 470 8087

Methods

Study Overview

The study took place from August 2015 to December 2018
(Figure 1) and was conducted in 3 phases. We worked with an
app designer and developer to create the app using a
user-centered design approach during each study phase [12].
The study design is consistent with recommendations on
mHealth technology development and evaluation, including
user experience design, development, and alpha and beta testing
[13]. Informed assent or consent was obtained from all
participants prior to participation. In phase 1, the MindClimb
app was designed and developed in consultation with youth and
CBT-trained clinicians. In phase 2, adolescents in treatment for
an anxiety disorder evaluated the app for acceptability,
learnability, and usability in 2 testing cycles that took place
outside of the formal treatment setting. In this phase, we also
asked app developers to evaluate the app using a set of rules
(heuristics) to measure the usability of the user interface. For
this phase, we used Nielsen’s heuristics [14]. In phase 3, app
usability was assessed by adolescents and therapists during CBT
treatment for anxiety. This involved reviewing the frequency
of app use for skills practice between CBT sessions, satisfaction
with app features, and barriers and facilitators to app use. The
study was led out of the University of Alberta (Edmonton,
Alberta, Canada) and Dalhousie University (Halifax, Nova

JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 12 | e18439 | p. 2

Scotia, Canada). The University of Alberta and the IWK Health
Centre’s Research Ethics Boards approved the study.

Figure 1. Study timeline.

Participants

We recruited a convenience sample of adolescents, young adults,
and CBT therapists to provide initial, varied perspectives on
app design. Our goal was to recruit 7 to 10 participants. We
invited individuals aged 12 to 24 years from across Canada who
were members of the Centre for Addiction and Mental Health’s
National Youth Advisory Committee (NYAC) and CBT
therapists specialized in outpatient anxiety treatment at the IWK
Health Centre in Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada, to participate.
CBT therapists from the same setting were also invited to
participate in phase 3 if one of their patients was recruited into
this study phase.

For all phases, we recruited purposeful samples of adolescents
aged 13 to 18 years from an outpatient program at the IWK
Health Centre in Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada. At the IWK
Health Centre, adolescents are treated until their 19th birthday.
Adolescents receiving outpatient treatment at this setting scored
≥25 on the Screen for Child Anxiety Related Emotional
Disorders (SCARED) [15], indicating a clinical level of anxiety
symptoms. To participate, adolescents needed to be fluent in
English. As sex differences are noted in mobile phone use [16],
we hoped both adolescent boys and girls would participate.
Youth identifying with any gender were welcome to participate,
as we were not testing sex- or gender-based differences in app
use in this study. Honorariums were provided to participants
(phase 1 and 2: Can $25 gift card [US $19.14]; phase 3: Can
$40 gift card [US $30.61]). Consistent with recommendations
in the literature, our recruitment goals for phases 1 and 2 were
7 to 10 adolescents (phase 1) and 10 adolescents (phase 2)
[14,17]. In phase 3, we aimed to enroll 21 adolescents and 7

CBT therapists (with each therapist treating 3 of the enrolled
adolescents) to comprise a total sample size of 28 participants.
This sample size was chosen assuming a 30% dropout rate for
clinicians and patients (5 clinicians with 3 patients per clinician,
for a total of 15 participants), which would still allow detection
of an effect size of at least 1.1 in the mean change in frequency
of app use (between last and first weeks of use; 2-sided,
1-sample t test, 80% power, type I error rate of 0.05). PASS
(NCSS Statistical Software) was used to determine the
detectable effect size, and the sample size was adjusted for
potential intracluster correlation (clinicians were considered a
cluster; ρ=0.1) using an inflation factor.

We also recruited a convenience sample of app developers in
phase 2 via email using professional contacts identified by our
app developer. To be eligible to participate in the heuristic
evaluation, developers needed to have postsecondary training
in human-computer interaction and experience in designing and
evaluating health apps for mobile devices. We considered 5
developer participants to be an adequate sample size for the
heuristic-based evaluation [14,17].

Procedures

Phase 1

App development began with wireframing, a process in which
our team created black-and-white pictures of MindClimb app
screens and arranged them to determine how users would
navigate and use the app (Figure 2). We organized the
MindClimb wireframes around guiding adolescent users through
the development of 3 main components: (1) fear ladders, (2)
relaxation, and (3) thinking traps.

JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 12 | e18439 | p. 3

Figure 2. Screenshot of an initial MindClimb wireframe.

First, fear ladders are a tool designed to help adolescents work
on their exposure goals. Our goal was to allow adolescents to
create, select, and manage multiple ladders. Events for each
ladder would be synced with the phone’s calendar app, and
phone notifications would be used to remind and cue adolescents
of upcoming events. After completion of the exposure,
adolescents could rate the activity in terms of its difficulty.
Ladders could also be archived (“history” tab on the wireframe).

Second, the relaxation section would offer information about
relaxation techniques that could be used as strategies before and
after exposure events and for general self-care.

Third, the thinking traps section would contain information on
and examples of common cognitive errors that could occur
during planned exposure activities.

All user actions were mapped out and the details of each
interaction were defined. Content (text) was later created to
support app functions and tasks.

We used the wireframes to create a predesign prototype of the
MindClimb app using InVision (InVisionApp Inc), a digital
product design platform [18] used by our app developer. The
predesign prototype was visually similar to the black-and-white
line art used in the wireframes (Figure 3).

Figure 3. A screenshot of several phone screens for the predesign prototype of the MindClimb app.

The predesign prototype was shared with NYAC members and
CBT clinicians during separate 1-hour brainstorming sessions.
The youth session was held via a web conference and led by 2
NYAC youth engagement facilitators who were collaborators
on the study [19]. Youth were prompted to generate ideas on
app aesthetics (ie, look and feel) and desired features of a user

experience (eg, what app features would ease use) (see
Multimedia Appendix 1). The clinician session was held in
person at the IWK Health Centre and facilitated by a research
team lead and coordinator and the app developer. As therapists
were oriented to the predesign prototype, they were prompted
to discuss the flow and approach of the app’s features and

JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 12 | e18439 | p. 4

whether any essential treatment components were missing from
the app (section 1 in Multimedia Appendix 1). We summarized
the ideas generated from both sessions by themes and
incorporated them into the development and design plans for
the app.

We initiated app design after the predesign consultations
concluded. During app design, our team completed 3 steps: (1)
review of the style board, a collage of different design styles
and elements, to establish the design direction of the app, (2)
approval of a creative brief to establish the aesthetic approach
to be used for the app, and (3) approval of the interface design
by reviewing several visual mock-ups of wireframe screens that
were based on the direction defined in the creative brief. The
result of these steps was a design plan that was used by our app
developer to create a low-fidelity MindClimb prototype in the
InVision platform [18].

The low-fidelity prototype underwent evaluation by adolescents
receiving outpatient CBT treatment. Adolescents participated
in a digitally recorded focus group facilitated by a research team
lead and coordinator and the app developer. As adolescents
interacted with the prototype, they were prompted to discuss
app features and use, including difficulty in creating exposure
events and navigating the app (verbal ratings on a scale of 1 to
5: 5=hard, 1=easy) (section 2 of Multimedia Appendix 1). We
transcribed the recorded sessions and thematically analyzed the
discussions using a general inductive approach [20]. We used
the themes and verbal ratings to finalize the programming on
an iOS version of the MindClimb app that was fully functional
(a high-fidelity prototype).

Phase 2

We used a mixed-method approach in 2 iterative testing cycles
to refine the high-fidelity MindClimb prototype. In both cycles,
we asked adolescents to evaluate the usability and acceptability
of the prototype, and in cycle 2 we also evaluated its learnability.
In cycle 2 we asked app developers to conduct a heuristic
evaluation of the prototype to identify usability problems with
the user interface design [14,21]. During testing, MindClimb
was supported by TestFlight (Apple Inc) [22], an app designed
to support beta testing that was used by our app developer.

Adolescent testing sessions took 1 hour to complete and were
led by a research team lead and coordinator and the app
developer. The sessions were structured according to a
think-aloud testing guide (Multimedia Appendix 2) and digitally
recorded to facilitate data analysis. Adolescents who did not
own or have access to an iOS operating system smartphone that
was required to download MindClimb were provided with a
smartphone or tablet on which to use MindClimb during the
testing cycle.

In cycle 1, adolescents first participated in a walk-through
exercise on how to create an exposure activity (fear hierarchy)
using the app’s ladder function. Adolescents were then asked
to complete their own ladder, and facilitators engaged them
during this task by posing questions from the testing guide to
document experiences with task completion. Field notes
documented by the facilitators were used to inform results
interpretation. Adolescents were encouraged to use the app on

their own before cycle 2 testing (one week after the first cycle).
We chose this timeframe because we wanted to understand
learnability in the timeframe in which adolescents would use
the app during CBT (ie, between weekly therapy sessions).
Cycle 2 proceeded similarly to cycle 1 and included gathering
feedback regarding adolescents’ use of the app during the
previous week. At the end of both cycles, adolescents rated their
experience with the app by completing the 10-item System
Usability Scale (SUS) [14].

Data from the think-aloud activity were examined using a
template approach to analysis [23]. We reviewed the findings
from cycle 1 after the session to allow the developer to make
necessary modifications to MindClimb prior to cycle 2. We
interpreted mean SUS scores using published recommendations:
a mean score >70 indicated acceptable usability, 50 to 70
indicated marginal usability, and <50 indicated that the app was
not acceptable (score range was 0-100). Given the user-centered
process that we undertook for app development, we
hypothesized that adolescents would report high acceptability
and learnability, as supported by the qualitative think-aloud
data and an acceptable usability score (≥70).

Following adolescent testing, we asked mobile app developers
to evaluate MindClimb based on Nielsen’s usability heuristics
using a 5-point severity ranking scale (SRS) [17]. Median scores
from the SRS were interpreted as follows: 0=none, 1=cosmetic,
2=minor, 3=major, and 4=catastrophic [24]. We hoped that
developers would report a low level of errors (ratings of 1 or 0)
using the SRS. Any median SRS scores ≥1 were addressed in
a final iOS version of the app, and an Android version was then
built.

Phase 3

In the final phase, we conducted a case series study to assess
the usability of MindClimb among adolescents and therapists
during group CBT for anxiety. The group therapy setting was
a more convenient approach to recruit from and to study app
use during real-world clinical care. Specific usability objectives
were to (1) track frequency of skills practice between CBT
sessions through self-report of ladder use (use of exposure
hierarchies) and other MindClimb features as part of CBT and
(2) identify satisfaction as well as barriers and facilitators to
MindClimb use during CBT.

Following enrollment, a research coordinator collected
adolescent demographic data (age and gender) and contact
information (email address and phone number) and recorded
the adolescent’s preference for future contact (phone, text, or
email). Therapists were asked to provide their names and contact
information (phone and email).

A research team lead, research coordinator, and app developer
provided training sessions for adolescents and clinicians on
downloading MindClimb to their smartphones and using the
app in conjunction with weekly CBT sessions; therapists were
not required to download the app, as they would not be actively
using it but rather, supporting their patient during use.
MindClimb was available for download in both the iOS App
Store and Google Play Store. Training was guided by a review
of a MindClimb quick start user guide provided to participants.

JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 12 | e18439 | p. 5

During training, therapists could also download the app for the
purposes of understanding the app’s functions so that discussion
of app use could be incorporated into treatment sessions, and
they were provided the same review of the MindClimb quick start user guide.

Data were collected throughout the group therapy period (Figure
4). Adolescents began using the app with sessions 3 to 9 to
coincide with treatment content on exposure activities. The use
of key CBT features in MindClimb—ladders (exposure
hierarchies), thinking traps, and relaxation strategies—was
assessed weekly, with therapists completing the survey with
each adolescent to report how frequently the adolescent used
MindClimb between treatment sessions and rating the
helpfulness of features they used over the same period on a scale
of 1 (least helpful) to 10 (most helpful) (Multimedia Appendix
3). After 6 to 7 treatment sessions, adolescents and therapists
were contacted to report satisfaction and experience with using
MindClimb during treatment. Satisfaction with app use was
measured using a study-created questionnaire based on the
Client Satisfaction Questionnaire [25] for adolescents (5
questions asked; score range of 0-15, with higher scores
indicating higher satisfaction) and therapists (4 questions asked;
score range of 0-12, with higher scores indicating higher
satisfaction) (Multimedia Appendix 4). User experience
interviews were conducted by a research team lead (clinician

interviews) or research coordinator (adolescent interviews).
Therapists completed the interview in person; adolescents had
the option to complete the interview over the phone or through
online chat (eg, using iMessage). If an adolescent was not
comfortable completing the interview over the phone or using
online chat, they had the option to complete an online version
of the interview in SurveyMonkey that used open fields for text
entry. None of the adolescents in phase 3 chose this online
option. Interviews were based on a semistructured guide
featuring the 14 domains of the Theoretical Domains Framework
(TDF) [26], with versions for therapists (Multimedia Appendix
5) and adolescents (Multimedia Appendix 6). The TDF provided
a useful approach to identifying experiences, barriers, and
facilitators to MindClimb use. Interviews were digitally recorded
and transcribed.

We used descriptive statistics (eg, means with standard
deviations, proportions and percentages, medians with range)
to summarize demography and MindClimb satisfaction and use.
We also used box plots to visually display MindClimb use. We
used directed content analysis to synthesize interview data [27].
We were unable to recruit our intended sample size of therapists
and patients, so intracluster correlation was not determined for
continuous outcomes, and adjusted mean change scores were
not calculated.

Figure 4. Phase 3 data collection timeline. CBT: cognitive behavioral therapy.

Results

Phase 1

Predesign consultations on MindClimb were held in November
2015 with 6 NYAC youths via a web conference and in
December 2015 with 3 therapists (9 participants in total).
Feedback provided on the predesign prototype is summarized

in Table 1, alongside the impact of this feedback on MindClimb
development and design. Feedback centered on 4 areas for app
development and design: (1) the app should be responsive to
user needs and preferences, (2) the app should contain features
relevant to the practice of CBT for anxiety, (3) the app should
be easy to use and navigate, and (4) app design should prioritize
aesthetics.

JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 12 | e18439 | p. 6

Table 1. Summary of the feedback provided during the predesign consultations.

Impact on MindClimb development and design
Development area and feedback

The app should be responsive to user needs and preferences

No change made, as this feature was already intended.
Ensure app connectivity with phone calendar (youth)

No change made, as this feature was already intended.
Do not require Wi-Fi connection (youth)

Users will have the ability personalize exposure activities and coping
strategies.
Personalization should be possible (youth)

The app will contain interactive features, such as rewards and points
for app use and pop-ups with positive affirmations.
Make the app interactive (youth)

Completion of exposure activities will unlock new reward content.
Build in rewards; completion of exposure activities unlocks new reward
content (therapist)

The app should contain features relevant to the practice of CBTa for anxiety

The app will contain text and videos on self-care strategies.
More information on self-care strategies (therapist)

No change made, as it is beyond the scope of the purpose of the app.
Consider a live chat with counselors (youth)

The app will contain text and videos on self-care strategies. Interactiv-
ity will be limited to videos.
Include a “tools” section that contains static information along with in-
teractive components (therapist)

The app will include an “other” option under suggested self-care and
coping strategies.
Include an “other” option under suggested self-care and coping strategies
to allow patients to identify a personal strategy not listed

Users will have the ability to retry and reschedule events.
Ensure users can repeat scheduled exposure events (therapist)

Events created in the app will appear in a single stream, with overdue
events flagged as being overdue. Users will have the option to view
and reschedule these events from the dashboard.

The app dashboard should list overdue events before upcoming events
(therapist)

The app should be easy to navigate

Content for each app section will be brief. Visual clutter will be
avoided.
Ensure the app is not cluttered and has clean lines (youth)

Each screen will support a single action for the user.
Make sure there is less content on screens (ie, more pages or screens for
content) (youth)

No change made; the main dashboard will be used.
Tabs to facilitate use (youth)

Videos will be used to provide information on how to practice specific
relaxation techniques; images will not be used for guiding the creation
of exposure activities, but sample fear hierarchies (ladders) will be
provided.

Images for guiding steps or how to use (youth)

App functions will be sequential and logical.
Ensure that it is easy to move between functions (youth)

Each app icon will reflect the section content that it represents.
Self-explanatory icons (youth)

Content for each app section will be brief so that scrolling down for
information or functions will not occur.
Ensure that it is easy to scroll through content (youth)

Push notifications will be limited to reduce the likelihood of noticeable
lag in the running of the app.
Ensure transitions between functions are quick (no lagging) (youth)

App design should prioritize aesthetics

All feedback incorporated into the creative direction and design options
(storyboard) developed for the app.
Big lettering for titles, large fonts for important content (youth)

Incorporated into design options.
No advertisements (youth)

Incorporated into design options.
“Calm” aesthetic (youth)

Incorporated into design options.
Bright colors, neutral colors, not too many colors (youth)

Incorporated into design options.
Twitter-style text, brief and concise (youth)

Incorporated into design options.
Have a good graphic artist/designer (youth)

Incorporated into design options.
Use sans serif font (youth)

aCBT: cognitive behavioral therapy.

JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 12 | e18439 | p. 7

The app was further developed based on youth and clinician
feedback. A low-fidelity MindClimb prototype was then created.
Screens from the prototype are presented in Figure 5. The
prototype native app had full functionality and could be used
by youth and therapists from an iOS device without requiring
an internet connection.

Feedback on the low-fidelity prototype was collected in June
2016 from 4 adolescents receiving outpatient CBT. We were
unable to recruit our intended minimum of 7 participants.
Participating adolescents reported preferring a colorful palette
with white accents. They understood what the MindClimb app

was for by looking at it and found it easy to create exposure
events in the app (4 ratings of “1”). Ease of navigation was also
rated as easy (ratings of “1” and “2”) and app sections were not
confusing. Adolescents indicated that preferred terms in the app
were “step ladders” rather than “fear ladders” for exposure
activities and “helpful thoughts” versus “thinking traps” in order
to shift to more positive or neutral wording. The app was
modified to use “step ladders,” but we chose not to use “helpful
thoughts,” as this change in wording did not accurately convey
the content in the thinking traps section of the app. However,
we did review the relaxation section of the app to ensure helpful
thoughts were conveyed.

Figure 5. Screens from the low-fidelity MindClimb prototype.

Phase 2

Testing the high-fidelity MindClimb prototype took place in
November 2016. A total of 10 adolescents participated in cycle
1, and 7 of these adolescents also participated in cycle 2. Of the
10 participants, 5 were female (50%) and 3 were male (30%);
gender was not documented for 2 adolescents. The mean age

across 7 adolescents was 15.1 (SD 0.90) years; age was not
documented for 3 adolescents. The mean SUS score from both
cycles was 77, indicating acceptable usability. Results from the
think-aloud activities revealed only minor issues with the app.
Issues identified by the adolescents in the testing cycles and
changes made to the app are outlined in Table 2. Changes to
the app were made prior to the heuristic-based evaluation.

JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 12 | e18439 | p. 8

Table 2. Summary of adolescent feedback generated during usability testing cycles that was incorporated into MindClimb.

Changes applied
App feature and feedback

Security and privacy

Incorporated an option for the user to create a PINa that must be entered
each time the app is opened

Cycle 1: password protection is important

Syncing of events with main calendar is optional
Cycle 2: “a password to get into the app or ladders”

Notifications

Added single “We’ve missed you!” notification to pop up after 1 week
of having not used the app
Cycle 1 generated varied feedback on the frequency of user notifications,
including wanting daily reminders, reminders 1 to 2 times per week, and
notifications after a period of 1 to 2 weeks of inactivity

Users will receive 1 notification alert when their event is scheduled to
occur
Cycle 2: alerts were described as sometimes overwhelming and stressful.
Adolescents wished for an option to turn off notifications

Step ladder creation and management

Difficulty scale for exposure activities changed to 1 to 10
Cycles 1 and 2: a scale of 1 to 10 to rate the difficulty of exposure activ-
ities is more appropriate than 1 to 5

Added the ability to repeat an event
Cycle 2: adolescents wanted the option to complete an exposure activity
several times before proceeding to the next step in their ladder

Selection of dates for exposure activities is optional
Cycle 2: scheduling specific dates and times for each exposure activity
might be difficult to plan; app should allow users to “opt out of dates”
and dates should not be mandatory

Exposure activities, regardless of difficulty rating, can be rearranged
by dragging and dropping
Cycle 2: adolescents wanted ability to change the order of exposure ac-
tivities and an easy way to “move the steps around”

Activities can be created without selecting a coping strategy
Cycle 2: adolescents wanted the ability to not have a coping strategy at-
tached to an exposure activity

Positive reinforcement and rewards

Incorporated random short positive messages provided by the monster
characters at various points within app
Cycle 1: “Quotes would be good. Ones that make you smile more or
positivity”; creatures were a popular reward, especially the ability to
upgrade characters; “increase the content” that the monster character
says

Added 3 additional monster characters (total of 4) that can be unlocked
for completing activities within the app
Cycle 2: adolescents wanted monster characters to relate quotes to them;
“it’s fun to use, but the point system doesn’t do anything right now. If
the points system unlocked another guy (character)”

Positive self-talk

Allow users to record their own positive self-talk messages and replay
them during exposure activities
Cycle 2: adolescents wanted to be able to record “own memo (voice),
positive self-talk”

Relaxation techniques and thinking traps

Added voice narration and video as a way for users to access selected
relaxation techniques during events
Cycle 1: adolescents wanted a voice that could walk them through the
relaxation techniques

Text edited for length and clarity
Cycles 1 and 2: too much text on deep breathing and thinking traps

Added “acting as if” relaxation techniques
Cycle 2: techniques learned in CBTb are not in the app

aPIN: personal identification number.
bCBT: cognitive behavioral therapy.

The heuristic evaluation took place between May and June 2017.
A total of 5 developers, all male, participated. For the majority
of the app’s usability heuristics, the median score indicated no

issue. A cosmetic issue regarding load time was identified for
the error prevention heuristic and was corrected. Results from
the evaluation are presented in Table 3.

JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 12 | e18439 | p. 9

Table 3. Severity ranking scale results from mobile app developers.

Developer comments
Median scorea
Usability heuristic

“It would be nice to have to see your points or progress somewhere all the time” [Developer
5]
0
1. Visibility of system status

“Instructions on ‘Create an Event’ page not very descriptive. Could include example of an
event. (e.g., Practice in front of mirror)” [Developer 1]
0
2. Match between system and the
real world

“No immediate ‘undo’option for event completion choices, but events can be edited anytime
to change completion choice” [Developer 2]
1
3. User control and freedom

“If different terminology is used in treatment it may take a moment for the terms used in
MindClimb to register with users” [Developer 3]
1
4. Consistency and standards

“The app sometimes takes a long time (~20secs) to move from the splash screen to the home
screen on iPhone 5S” [Developer 2]
0
5. Error prevention

“When adding a relaxation technique, I selected a category and chose a specific technique.
When you tap Save and return to the category selection screen, it would be nice to see the
specific technique you chose and not only the category selected before hitting next” [Devel-
oper 5]

0
6. Recognition rather than recall

“Not a lot of system tailoring present, but given the target audience and system scope, likely
not required or useful” [Developer 2]
0
7. Flexibility and efficiency of use

“Some subheading may not be needed (e.g., ‘select a ladder to view its events’)” [Developer
1]
0
8. Aesthetic and minimalist design

“Did not encounter any error conditions” [Developer 5]
0
9. Help users recognize, diagnose,
and recover from errors

“Help documentation was readily available on all screens” [Developer 5]
0
10. Help and documentation

aHeuristic scoring range: 0=none, 1=cosmetic, 2=minor, 3=major, and 4=catastrophic.

Screenshots of the final version of MindClimb are provided in
Figure 6. Based on the high-fidelity evaluations from adolescents
and app developers, the final version of the app has the

following key content and functions: (1) step ladders, (2)
dashboard, (3) relaxation, (4) thinking traps, (5) rewards, (6)
settings, and (7) help sessions.

Figure 6. Screenshots of key content domains for MindClimb.

First, the app contains step ladders, formerly termed fear ladders.
Up to four coping strategies built into the app (eg, audio clips
of soothing sounds, text instruction and videos of relaxation
techniques) can be identified for each event. When creating
ladders, the adolescent indicates how difficult they think it will
be to complete the exposure (scale of 1 [easy] to 10 [hard]);
after completion of the exposure, adolescents can rate the
activity again in terms of its difficulty to actually carry out.
Users are able to repeat exposures as part of the step ladder

features; ladders can be archived for review of progress and
activities.

Second, the dashboard contains all of the upcoming events
created for each step ladder. The dashboard provides a quick
overview of scheduled events sorted by date.

Third, for the relaxation feature, text and audiovisual clips are
available in conjunction with information about relaxation

JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 12 | e18439 | p. 10

techniques that can be used as strategies before and after
exposure events and for general self-care.

Fourth, the thinking traps section contains brief information on
and examples of common cognitive errors.

Fifth, a rewards section tracks adolescent progress with step
ladder events. Points are awarded for event and ladder
completion; different point levels allow the adolescent to unlock
different MindClimb characters that appear with encouraging
messages while the app is being used.

Sixth, a settings screen allows the adolescent to protect
MindClimb with a 4-digit personal identification number (PIN),
set a security question and answer should the PIN be forgotten,
and turn on calendar syncing so that MindClimb events sync
with the phone’s calendar app.

Last, a help session supports use in each content domain (eg,
sample ladders are provided in the step ladders section).

Phase 3

A total of 8 adolescents (all girls) and 3 therapists (all women)
used MindClimb during group therapy between November 2017

and December 2018. Another 3 adolescents consented to
participate, but 1 withdrew from the study and 2 did not
download the app for study participation. The 2 adolescents
who did not download the app for use did not provide
information on why they chose not to use the app. The mean
age across the participating adolescents was 14.0 (SD 1.5) years.
The median SCARED score reported by adolescents was 56
(range of 46-62); the median SCARED score reported by parents
regarding their children was 46 (range of 23-60).

Over the group treatment sessions, MindClimb use began during
session 3 (with 2 adolescents), session 4 (with 1 adolescent),
session 5 (with 3 adolescents), or session 6 (with 2 adolescents).
All the adolescents reported using the app between sessions,
and use ranged between features and adolescents (Figure 7);
none of the adolescents reported use in the final week of
treatment. The largest range of use occurred with the relaxation
feature of the app, with some users using it infrequently (once)
and some using it regularly (24 uses over a 4-week period). Use
of the thinking traps feature was also varied (range of 0-18 uses).
The step ladders feature was the most regularly used, with most
adolescents using it 9 to 10 times during group treatment.

Figure 7. Median use of MindClimb features over 7 sessions of group cognitive behavioral therapy.

The average satisfaction score among adolescents was 11.3 (SD
1.4). Adolescents rated the step ladder (median rating of 7) and
relaxation (median rating of 7) features of MindClimb as slightly
more helpful in completing weekly exposure activities than the

thinking traps feature (median rating of 6) (Table 4). The
average satisfaction score among therapists was 10.0 (SD 2.0).
Therapists reported slightly higher overall satisfaction with the
app compared with adolescents (Table 4).

JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 12 | e18439 | p. 11

Table 4. Adolescent and therapist satisfaction with MindClimb.

Responses, n (%)
Question

Adolescents

Q1. Satisfaction with the amount of help they received from MindClimb

0 (0)
Quite dissatisfied

0 (0)
Indifferent or mildly dissatisfied

6 (75)
Mostly satisfied

2 (25)
Very satisfied

Q2. Satisfaction with the kind of support they wanted from MindClimb

0 (0)
No, definitely not

1 (13)
No, not really

6 (75)
Yes, generally

1 (13)
Yes, definitely

Q3. Whether they would recommend MindClimb to a friend if they needed similar help

0 (0)
No, definitely not

0 (0)
No, I don’t think so

5 (63)
Yes, I think so

3 (38)
Yes, definitely

Q4. Satisfaction with the amount of support they received from MindClimb to help them deal more
effectively with their anxiety

0 (0)
No, it seemed to make things worse

0 (0)
No, it didn’t really help

5 (63)
Yes, it helped somewhat

3 (38)
Yes, it helped a great deal

Q5. Whether they would use MindClimb again if they were to seek help again

0 (0)
No, definitely not

0 (0)
No, I don’t think so

6 (75)
Yes, I think so

2 (25)
Yes, definitely

Therapists

Q1. Satisfaction with the amount of contributions MindClimb made to each treatment

1 (33)
Quite dissatisfied

0 (0)
Indifferent or mildly dissatisfied

1 (33)
Mostly satisfied

1 (33)
Very satisfied

Q2. Whether they would recommend MindClimb to a colleague who was looking to use an app in
their clinical practice

0 (0)
No, definitely not

0 (0)
No, I don’t think so

0 (0)
Yes, I think so

3 (100)
Yes, definitely

Q3. Whether they would use MindClimb in the future with other patients

0 (0)
No, definitely not

0 (0)
No, I don’t think so

JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 12 | e18439 | p. 12

Responses, n (%)
Question

1 (33)
Yes, I think so

2 (67)
Yes, definitely

Q4. General satisfaction with using MindClimb as part of their clinical practice

0 (0)
Quite dissatisfied

0 (0)
Indifferent or mildly dissatisfied

1 (33)
Mostly satisfied

2 (67)
Very satisfied

MindClimb experience interviews with adolescents identified
that they all participated in the study to see if the app could help
them manage their anxiety. All the adolescents felt confident
in their ability to use the app, found it easy to use, and stated
that experience was not needed to use it. One adolescent noted
that some prior CBT sessions would be required so that
treatment terminology and skills (eg, step ladders) were learned
prior to MindClimb use. A selection of adolescent quotes on
the MindClimb app, grouped by our a priori categories
(experiences, barriers, facilitators), are provided in Textbox 1.
All the adolescents felt that the app fit well with their usual

approach to treatment activities and was useful to helping
complete treatment activities outside of group sessions.
Moreover, 6 of the adolescents reported that they did not
experience any negative outcomes associated with using
MindClimb. All 8 adolescents found the reminders for use (eg,
“miss you” and “where have you been?”) that were built into
the app were helpful for use and necessary to ensure that they
used the app regularly. Six adolescents found that they would
forget to use the app if they had a busy day, if they “weren’t in
the right head space—like feeling mad,” or if they had a lot of
school homework.

Textbox 1. Adolescent perspectives on using the MindClimb app.

Experiences with MindClimb during treatment

•
“I used it for a Step Ladder on how to be comfortable around new people. One of the steps was to sit beside someone on the bus. I felt accomplished
when I did it.” [Participant 2]

•
“I used it when starting a new dance class. In the car I used the relaxation sounds/techniques.” [Participant 5]

•
“It is nice that it is on my phone and I can use it whenever I need it. It is easy and helpful.” [Participant 3]

•
“Helped a lot. Not needing to look at book [group materials]. Have it with me all the time on the phone.” [Participant 4]

•
“Pretty important. Step Ladders in group had reminders and would help me remember to do therapy homework which was helpful.” [Participant
6]

Challenges and barriers to use

•
“Sometimes worried if making stepladder wrong. Put two activities in same stepladder but figured it out.” [Participant 6]

•
“Low to mid was more helpful in terms of anxiety level using app. [When] very worried/nervous, [the app] did not help as anxiety too high.”
[Participant 8]

•
“It can get boring with only Step Ladders. Being able to get different coloured characters and new accessories [rewards] would make me use it
more.” [Participant 2]

Facilitators for use

•
“Reminders were good. Step Ladders helped. Homework [from the group] is stressful as is, [the app] helped remind to do it.” [Participant 8]

•
“Relaxed, planned out [prepared], organized.” [Participant 7]

•
“Reminded me of the things I learned in group. What they teach is there [in the app] all the time.” [Participant 4]

•
“… it was really easy to open up app anywhere and use it.” [Participant 1]

•
“Happy when got points and new [characters].” [Participant 6]

MindClimb experience interviews with therapists identified that
they were interested in integrating technology into group
sessions. One of the therapists described:

We think it would help in engaging in using skills.
Also, the importance of having your skills and tools
with you at all times, and youth always have their
phones with them to refer to. In future, we should

make it more part of the group and have youth keep
their phones out to use during the group sessions.
[Therapist 3]
Two of the therapists noted that the views of their patients were
important to app use:

JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 12 | e18439 | p. 13

If they didn’t find it useful then I would be less likely
to try again in the future. [Therapist 2]
The 3 therapists described feeling confident in incorporating
the app into treatment sessions, stating that the app was easy to
use and intuitive. However, reminding patients to use it in
sessions, including detailing app use in the treatment manuals
and having therapists model use during group sessions, were

described as approaches for ensuring routine use and
maximizing app contributions, and 1 therapist noted that not
having access to their patients’ step ladders was challenging,
as they liked to have copies on file (“ability to review/record
information” [Therapist 1]). Selected quotes from the therapists’
experiences with MindClimb use are presented in Textbox 2,
as are quotes on perceived benefits and limitations to use.

Textbox 2. Therapist perspectives on using the MindClimb app with adolescents during group cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT).

Experience using MindClimb

•
“So in group setting [I] was a little hesitant to ask and have them use it. Did not want to make them feel uncomfortable. Worried that would get
distracted with navigating app instead of content. Would be great to have the app on computer or iPad on smart board—project on screen and
follow on the large screen. This would be easier to help visually.” [Therapist 1]

•
“Sometimes forgot to remind people to use it. Need reminders for clinicians and possibly integrate in manual so that you remember to incorporate
in each part of CBT.” [Therapist 3]

•
“No ethical or legal issues beyond what youth already record in their book or notes, need to keep it confidential and not able to [be] accessed by
others. In most cases book/paper is less confidential as lying around.” [Therapist 3]

Benefits to using MindClimb during treatment

•
“Much more helpful for youth to use their skills in the moment- huge plus. Also most teens are digital oriented with their phone, so more likely
to use than paper, and more fun. More [discreet] as well… Most teens will forget workbook but very few forget their phones.” [Therapist 1]

•
“Main benefits are that the material and skills are always accessible and anxiety can happen anywhere. Also great for reminding youth to practice.
[Helps] the clinician in having skills and tools more readily available for practice (like not forgetting their homework sheet).” [Therapist 3]

Limitations to using MindClimb during treatment

•
“Only disadvantage is not being able to share stepladders… Realistic thinking was [also] a challenge as the app did not fit as well with this skill.”
[Therapist 1]

•
“I think having them put in the reminders in-session would have been better; to walk them through how to use it with their own examples. Again,
easier done in an individual than a group setting.” [Therapist 2]

•
“[Need] preplanning with group to incorporate app into group structure. More info structure on how to do it in the group as to how they would
use it. Also need to make sure they are using the app for group and not something else on their phone.” [Therapist 1]

•
“More screen time.” [Therapist 3]

Discussion

Principal Results

In this study, a multiphasic user-centered design approach
allowed our team to develop, design, and test the MindClimb
app with input from designers, developers, adolescents, and
therapists using multiple approaches. Guiding principles for
app development were the promotion of autonomy and
ownership of treatment goals outside of formal treatment
sessions, the focus on real-time skills practice, the
personalization of treatment, and the simplicity of use under
stress. The design of the app incorporated core components in
a successful digital mental health tool that was secure and
co-designed by stakeholders (adolescent users and clinicians)
and that integrated evidence-based skills and usability [28]. The
app was designed with high rigor in 3 stages of development
and had high usability ratings by users (adolescents) and app
developers, with only minor errors that were corrected before
the final version. In our real-world usability evaluation, we
found that adolescents and therapists were satisfied with the
MindClimb app and found it easy to use and helpful in practicing
CBT skills during treatment. Adolescents found the relaxation
strategies and the step ladders with reminders to practice to be

the most helpful components of the app. Therapists identified
the benefits of having this app to help youth practice skills
between CBT sessions and encouraged further integration of
app usage into CBT sessions to encourage regular app usage.
Both therapists and adolescents found the tools on the app easy
to use and the most relevant to CBT practice. Step ladders and
relaxation strategies were the two most used components of the
app, and adolescents reported using the app between CBT
sessions.

Limitations

MindClimb was designed to be simple and easy to use between
CBT sessions to plan and complete real-time exposure activities
using skills (cognitive, relaxation, exposure practice, and
reward) learned in treatment. As it was not intended to be a
broad-scope, stand-alone treatment app, it includes some but
not all of the recommended evidence-based treatment
components 
for 
anxiety 
disorders: 
psychoeducation,
self-monitoring, cognitive skills, problem solving, exposure
activities, and contingency management. In a recent review of
the content in smartphone apps marketed for child and
adolescent anxiety, Bry et al [29] concluded that there are few
comprehensive, evidence-based self-management apps available
for use. We propose that fit for purpose also needs to be

JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 12 | e18439 | p. 14

considered alongside app content to ensure that the proposed
intent of an app is supported by its content and that evaluations
of an app are also consistent with its intent. In this regard, we
feel that MindClimb has been designed for a specific purpose
for use by adolescents (users) in treatment and CBT therapists,
and its functions reflect this purpose.

The results of MindClimb implementation are derived from a
small sample of adolescents and therapists and should be
interpreted with this limitation in mind. We were unable to
recruit our intended sample size for phase 3 of the project, which
would have allowed us to study app use over a more diverse
user population (including, potentially, male users). Recruitment
was challenging, as there were not as many CBT groups offered
for anxiety during the study period due to a decrease CBT
clinician availability. Future implementation studies of
MindClimb (and other mHealth apps) need to examine the
penetrance of MindClimb in clinical practice and include more
diverse populations of users (reflected in gender identity, type
of anxiety disorder and treatment setting, etc).

Comparison With Prior Work

A recent review by Wozney and colleagues [30] indicated that
acceptability is the most commonly investigated implementation
outcome among studies of e-mental health care technology for
adolescent depression and anxiety. The development and
evaluation of MindClimb contributes additional methods and
data on app learnability and initial usability. The field of
e-mental health care technology will continue to benefit from
studying a broader range of implementation outcomes. For apps
such as MindClimb that are intended for use alongside therapy,
important implementation outcomes include fidelity (the degree
to which an app was implemented during CBT as intended),
penetration (the extent of app use within a treatment setting),
and sustainability (the extent to which an app’s use was
maintained in a treatment setting) [31]. Feedback from therapists
in this study suggested that workflow and integration issues are
critical for embedding new technology in clinical care. Like our
study, in other mHealth studies, technology has been regarded

as useful, easy, and relevant to CBT practice, but support during
use, other commitments, perceived relevance, and difficulty of
use can be factors in whether an adolescent uses and continues
to use a technology [32,33]. Implementation studies examining
fidelity, penetration, and sustainability can introduce new
understanding of the impact of apps on the course of treatment
and on therapist roles, responsibilities, and workflow and inform
the development of tailored implementation strategies to support
app use during therapy. Such evaluations can occur within
studies testing the impact of the technology on adolescent health
outcomes. This hybrid approach to studying intervention
effectiveness and implementation [34] offers an efficient and
comprehensive approach to studying mHealth technologies in
real-world clinical settings.

Conclusions

MindClimb was developed and tested by adolescent users of
CBT and therapists in cooperation with app developers. This
approach resulted in an mHealth app that was relevant, accepted,
and used by adolescents during CBT for anxiety. Evaluation of
the use of this app in a clinical practice setting demonstrated
that adolescents and therapists generally felt it was helpful and
easy to use for CBT practice outside of therapy sessions. As
exposure practice is the core component to anxiety CBT
treatment and often reported as the most challenging to practice,
the app shows promise in helping encourage adolescents to use
these skills outside of therapy sessions. Having CBT skills and
tools at all times on their phones provides adolescents the
opportunity to practice skills more often between sessions.
MindClimb increased access to evidence-based CBT skills
outside of the formal therapy sessions in a format accepted and
used by teenagers. Clinicians found the app helpful in
encouraging practice but sometimes forgot to remind their
patients; they recommended integrating app usage into the CBT
treatment manual. Implementation studies with larger youth
samples that examine the integration of technology in clinical
care and the impact of the app plus CBT on clinical care
processes and patient outcomes are now necessary.