Utilizing a user-centered approach to
develop and assess pharmacogenomic
clinical decision support for thiopurine
methyltransferase

Khoa A. Nguyen1,2,3,4*
, Himalaya Patel3, David A. Haggstrom2,3,5, Alan J. Zillich4, Thomas F. Imperiale2,3,5 and
Alissa L. Russ3,4

Methods
Study design and setting
This study was conducted at a large, midwestern Vet-
erans Affairs (VA) Medical Center and a co-located,
major academic healthcare system (MAHS). For EHRs,
the VA uses the Computerized Patient Record System
(CPRS) while the MAHS uses a commercial EHR. At the
time of this study, neither healthcare system used any
PGx-CDS in their prescribing processes.
This study was conducted in two phases. In Phase I,
we conducted qualitative interviews to assess the infor-
mation needs of physicians to develop interface design
requirements for PGx-CDS for TPMT. Phase I inter-
views were conducted at each physician’s facility. Results
from Phase I were applied in Phase II to develop a
prototype and evaluate the design of PGx-CDS through
usability testing with physicians. Phase II usability testing
was performed at the VA Health Services Research and

Development (HSR&D) Human-Computer Interaction
and Simulation Laboratory [19] or via remote usability
testing, based on participants’ preferences. This study
was approved by the Indiana University IRB (protocol
1602878929R003.)

Phase I: qualitative interview
Participant recruitment
Physicians from both healthcare systems were recruited
for a 30-min, semi-structured interview conducted by a
pharmacist researcher (KN). Physicians were eligible to
participate if they had prescribed azathioprine or mer-
captopurine in their clinical practice. Participating physi-
cians were divided into two groups of specialty pracitce:
gastroenterology and oncology with each group further
divided into subspecialty of adult and pediatric practice.
Each participant was verbally consented prior to the
interview (the IRB approved the exemption for written
consent for this phase).

Procedure and data collection
Participants were interviewed individually. The full inter-
view guide is available in the Additional file 1: S4. Inter-
view questions. Examples of questions include:

1. What is your perception and interpretation of the
meaning of TPMT pharmacogenomic clinical
decision support tools?
2. If the computer system provided decision support for
pharmacogenomics, would you use it in your clinical
practice? Why or why not?
a.
How might such a tool be helpful to you?
b. What barriers do you foresee for incorporating
the tool into your work?
c.
Would you like such a system to work similarly
to an alert system?
d. What information would you like to see
presented in a PGx-CDS?

Interviews were audio recorded and transcribed for
analysis [20]. Two independent analysts, a pharmacist
researcher, and a human-computer interaction expert
analyzed transcripts through a combination of inductive
and deductive qualitative analysis to identify initial
theme [21]. A priori codes were derived from the inter-
view questions. Analysts met regularly to discuss and
agree upon themes that were identified inductively.
Similar to other literature, analysts independently coded
the transcripts then met weekly to discuss discrepancies
until reaching consensus [22]. A third individual, a hu-
man factors expert, was consulted if discrepancies could
not be resolved. Data were analyzed and managed using
NVivo 10 (QSR International).

Page 2 of 13

Phase II: prototype development and usability testing
Prototype development
Data from qualitative interviews and available literature
[23–25] were used to inform the development of an
electronic prototype of the PGx-CDS in a mock EHR
(Additional file 1: S5.) The prototype was developed by a
research pharmacist and a human-computer interaction
expert. We created a list of key features to design a
PGx-CDS for TPMT using both collected interview data
and human factors principles (Table 1) These key fea-
tures in Table 1 focused mainly on the display while
interview data provided the content of the PGx-CDS
prototype. In phase II of this study, we evaluated both
the display and the content of the PGx-CDS prototype
via usability testing. To facilitate iterative evaluation and
redesign, the prototype was not implemented in a “live”
EHR. This approach, which has been used in other stud-
ies [34, 35], allowed the PGx-CDS tool to be evaluated
safely, separate from patient care, providing insight on
how it can be improved prior to implementation. In-
stead, Axure RP 7 (Axure Software Solutions, Inc., San
Diego, CA) was used to design the mock-up EHR as well
as the prototype (Fig. 1) This was a cost-effective, rapid
approach to help physicians visualize the potential design

of a future PGx-CDS interface. Participants could interact
with the prototype as if they were working with an actual
PGx-CDS from the EHR. This prototype provided a realis-
tic impression of what the PGx-CDS could look like in
clinical practice. This also helped us identify early errors
in the design. Finally, in clinical practice, a TPMT related
PGx-CDS would need to support many types of pre-
scribers for patients being treated for leukemia, IBD, or
rheumatoid arthritis. Therefore, we chose to apply a uni-
versal design approach [36] for PGx-CDS with the goal of
creating a CDS that can effectively support a wide range
of primary care and specialty prescribers. A universal de-
sign approach is generally robust and often requires less
training and education of end users [37].

Scenario development
Four standardized, fictitious patient scenarios were de-
veloped by a team consisting of a research pharmacist, a
gastroenterologist, and an oncologist to test the usability
of the PGx-CDS. Two scenarios were developed for on-
cology participants to represent leukemia patients, one
with a homozygous and one with a heterozygous muta-
tion, and two scenarios were developed for gastroenter-
ologists (Additional file 1: S3) to represent patients with

Table 1 Key features of PGx-CDS display design

Subsequent design decision
Human factors principle(s) applied or Interview results

1. Important information is presented on a single screen
Hazard control hierarchy [26, 27]

2. Action buttons are color coded
Blue for “Accept” button, red for “Override” button
Visual Cue [28]

3. Risk bar visualization indicates the danger of mutation
Red for homozygous mutation, orange for heterozygous mutation
The risk is categorized into high, moderate, low

Attention switch [29, 30]

4. Information is grouped into categories
Decision-making alignment
Chunking [31]
Three main criteria are: genotype result, dosing adjustment
recommendation from references, and new medication
order recommended

5. Recommendation(s) from the PGx-CDS is positioned so physicians
can visually compare it to their current medication order
Proximity compatibility principle [32]
Minimize user memory load [33]

6. Additional information (e.g., lab values, references, calculations,
immunization such as flu shot, TB) and contact information) are
presented as supplemental information (via clickable buttons)
to avoid information overload

Minimize user memory load [33]
Flexibility for user control of data display [33]
Interview results: PGx-CDS Content
Examples from the interviews:
“Less is more,”
“One of the biggest things to know is the ANC
[absolute neutrophil count], the platelet… so you can
[evaluate the new order recommended]”
“[Information from referencces] was condensed, it could
be more helpful if you could turn things [certain lab values,
calculations] off.”

7. Supplemental information (e.g. calculation, lab values) can be view
simultaneously with the main information
Minimize user memory load [33]

8. Physicians can choose between two options for reviewing reference
sources: 1) access information online or 2) send references to their own,
individual email

Flexibility [33]
Interview results: PGx-CDS content
Example: “It would be nice to have [two options for
reviewing reference sources] because most clinicians
are not going to have time to read it right there”

Page 3 of 13

IBD. Patient scenarios were further refined based on
feedback from a gastroenterology specialist and pilot
testing with a primary care provider.

Participant recruitment
Physicians from each healthcare system were recruited
for a 30-min usability session. Eligibility criteria were the
same as phase I: physicians were eligible to participate if
they ever prescribed azathioprine or mercaptopurine in
their clinical practice. Participants were consented in
written prior to their sessions.

Simulation procedure
One of two moderators, each with experience moderat-
ing usability sessions, conducted each session and read a
scripted introduction (see Additional file 1: S1, moder-
ator script) to maintain consistency across participants
[35]. Participants were informed that the goal was to im-
prove the design of the PGx-CDS. Participants were
asked to complete two patient scenarios that were rele-
vant to their practice and complete tasks as though they
were prescribing for real patients (Additional file 1: S2.)
A physical barrier separated the moderator from partici-
pants to help reduce the potential for bias [19]. Also, the
moderator refrained from offering guidance to the par-
ticipant during the usability session.
All participants completed tasks in the same sequence:
one patient scenario with a homozygous mutation followed
by one patient scenario with a heterozygous mutation.
There was no time limit for each scenario. Participants were
asked to ‘think aloud’ [38] by verbalizing their thoughts,

reactions, and points of confusion as they interacted with
the PGx-CDS while completing the scenarios. Afterward,
participants were asked to respond to an online 19-item
Computer System Usability Questionnaire (CSUQ) [39] via
REDCap software [40] to gather their level of satisfaction
with the PGx-CDS tool. Finally, the moderator concluded
the session by conducting a debrief interview with the par-
ticipant to collect additional feedback about the interaction.
We used an iterative method to test our prototype be-
cause our goals were to develop and rapidly refine a
provider-centered PGx-CDS to help providers with their
thiopurine prescribing decisions. Specifically, any usability
errors identified during testing were used to enhance the
design of the PGx-CDS prototype. A similar, iterative
prototyping method has been successfully applied in other
research studies of health information technology [41, 42].

Data collection and outcomes measures
Qualitative usability data were collected via the “think
aloud” technique with participants’ verbalizations cap-
tured by [38] Morae 3.3 (TechSmith Corp.) screen video
and audio recordings. Additionally, qualitative data in-
cluded information from debriefing interviews. Quantita-
tive usability data were collected on four established
measures of usability [41]: learnability, usability errors,
efficiency, and satisfaction. Learnability and usability er-
rors were evaluated by reviewing Morae® video record-
ings. Efficiency was measured from the time-stamped
video recordings and included the amount of time the
physicians spent completing each scenario as well as
time spent on the PGx-CDS prototype interface. Finally,

Fig. 1 Screenshot of a PGx-CDS prototype interface. This is the 2nd version we used to conduct usability testing in phase II

Page 4 of 13

after working on the usability scenario, participants were
asked to complete the CSUQ 19-item questionnaire [39]
to evaluate their satisfaction with the PGx-CDS. Each
participant
completed
the
questionnaire
once.
In
addition to capturing their overall perceptions of satis-
faction of PGx-CDS, this questionnaire assessed their
satisfaction for three main domains: system usefulness,
information quality, and interface quality.

Results
Participants’ characteristics
Across both phases, 14 physicians (12 male; five from the
VA and nine from the other MAHS) participated. Women
accounted for 14% of the participants. The average age of
participants was 39 years (range, 30 to 48 years). Table 2
summarizes the demographic information of participants.

Emergent themes from interviews
Interviews yielded 11 themes: the need for PGx-CDS for
TPMT; impact of PGx-CDS on clinical workflow; lab
testing preferences; perceived barriers to PGx implemen-
tation; PGx-CDS content; PGx-CDS display; references
within PGx-CDS; genetic result content; display of pa-
tients’ genetic results; PGx care coordination; and exam-
ples of related software and CDS systems. Table 3 lists all
11 themes, overarching comments from participants,
and example quotes. A table with definitions of each
theme and comments from each specialty group is
shown in the Additional file 1: S6.
Some themes have been discussed elsewhere in the lit-
erature for other types of CDS [23–25, 43], therefore,
the Results section below focuses on themes new to the
literature that can benefit the implementation of PGx-
CDS. These themes are presented into two overarching
categories: 1) physicians’ views about PGx-CDS, and 2)
key design features needed for PGx-CDS.

Physicians’ views on pharmacogenomic clinical decision
support
During interviews, all ten physicians expressed a high
degree of interest in a PGx-CDS tool to help them with

prescribing decisions for TPMT. They expected that
PGx-CDS would help detect patients’ history of TPMT
genetic mutation(s) when they prescribe either mercap-
topurine or azathioprine and then provide guidance on
how to “adjust the dose”. However, they emphasized that
PGx-CDS needs to be incorporated into the current
EHR rather than as a standalone software system and
must operate in real-time to be effective.
Additionally, both specialty groups described the poten-
tial value of PGx-CDS in reducing their reliance on
pharmacy-related resources. Oncologists indicated that
the implementation of PGx-CDS might reduce the burden
and workload for their pharmacy service. Specifically, phy-
sicians could use the PGx-CDS to look for new dosing
recommendations and references rather than depend
heavily on consulting the pharmacy service. In addition,
one physician described that PGx-CDS can help assist
with his/her work because “there is a lot of [mental] fa-
tigue [with] mercaptopurine dosing [because of irregular
dosing regimens], but to have something [like a PGx-CDS]
that would function to coordinate and assimilate informa-
tion into one place, [it] would actually decrease [my] fa-
tigue over time” (Pediatric oncologist C). Similarly, GI
specialists who rarely prescribed TMPT medications or
encountered this genetic mutation in patients shared that
if PGx-CDSs were readily available in the EHR, they would
“be more inclined to use [the CDS]” rather than consulting
outside clinical references or primary medical literature.

Important design features needed for clinical decision
support
Content
Based on interview data, information that needs to be
included in the PGx-CDS interface for TPMT decision-
making are below, along with numbers of participants
that expressed a need

– genotype (homozygous mutation or heterozygous
mutation) (n = 5)
– phenotype (poor metabolizer, regular metabolizer,
or high metabolizer) (n = 4)

Page 5 of 13

– the meaning of the correlation between genotype
and phenotype (i.e., whether the patient is at high/
low/medium risk for side effects) (n = 6)
– potential medication risks for patients (i.e.,
myelosuppression, neutropenia); recommendation
for dosing adjustment; (n = 9)
– Reference citations to support the dosing
recommendation. Importantly, the prescriber needs
to be able to trust the PGx-CDS and “validate the
recommendation with their own internal thought
processes.” (n = 8)

There are several additional features described as de-
sirable by physicians, with evidence that some PGx-CDS
design needs are unique to the type of physician special-
ist. Pediatric oncologists (n = 3) wanted to have clarifica-
tion regarding the dosing calculation - how the new
dosing recommendation was calculated since it can be
based on the patient’s weight or body surface area - for
medication dose adjustment. One pediatric oncologist
also wanted PGx-CDS to provide guidance about the
specific dosing scheme that is appropriate for the indi-
vidual patient, since dosing regimens for azathioprine
and mercaptopurine are not the same for each day of
the patients’ medication regimen. For example, in 1
week, a patient can be taking one tab of azathioprine 50
mg for 4 days (M, W, F, Sun) and 1.5 tabs of azathio-
prine 50 mg for 3 days (T, Th, Sat) for a total of 375 mg/
week. This complicated dosing regimen can become
more confusing when additional, PGx-related dosing ad-
justment is needed. To account for the patient’s genetic
profile, the PGx-CDS needs to provide clear guidance
about this regimen. Also, a physician wanted PGx-CDS
to help create a long-term dosing agenda for patients
with complex regimens. This physician indicated that
this type of support might save time for both the pre-
scriber and pharmacist when counseling patients on the
new dosing regimen.

Additionally, while pediatric oncologists (n = 2) expressed
a preference to have a dose adjustment based on patients’
body surface area, gastroenterologists recommended that the
PGx-CDS provide dose adjustment based on patients’
weight. Also, several physicians from both groups (n = 3)
shared that since thiopurine medications are used for main-
taining therapy when treating patients with either leukemia
or IBD, the PGx-CDS should also recommend specific lab
tests (e.g., white blood cells, hemoglobin) that should be or-
dered for monitoring medications. Physicians confirmed that
lab values related to TPMT medications also are important
information to present in the PGx-CDS. Additionally, physi-
cians expressed a desire for the PGx-CDS to present the fol-
lowing options for medication management: neutrophil
count as a lab value; ability to turn on/off certain options
within the PGx-CDS content; and ability for the PGx-CDS
to automatically generate recommendations for a new dosing
regimen within the medication ordering screen of the EHR.
Finally, if a patient presents with a TPMT homozygous mu-
tation, gastroenterologist providers (n = 3) stated that they
would be more likely to prescribe a different biologic agent
rather than adjust the medication dose, therefore informa-
tion like Tuberculosis test and vaccine information should
be available to the prescriber through PGx-CDS so they can
choose the alternate biologic medication more effectively.

Display
Physicians (n = 3) from both specialties expressed the
importance of having clear and concise information on
the PGx-CDS: “less is more.” Also, since the TPMT mu-
tation can cause serious side effects for patients, they
envisioned an interruptive, PGx-CDS pop-up in the mid-
dle of the screen to help them pay more attention.
When participants were asked whether they want to have
an option to send the supporting reference(s) for PGx-CDS
recommendations to their email account, and most (n = 9)
were interested, including all five gastroenterologists. In
contrast, oncologists generally wanted more opportunity to

Page 6 of 13

review patient information in real-time since “pediatric on-
cology is different than the primary care setting, we have
more time”. Therefore, they preferred to have all informa-
tion, including reference content, presented on the PGx-
CDS interface to help them make prescribing decisions.

Usability testing
Efficiency
Efficiency was measured by the time each physician spent to
complete the medication orders (see Fig. 2) All participants
(n = 7) successfully completed all assigned patient scenarios
for the usability tasks without help from the moderator.

Satisfaction
Satisfaction ratings were high across participants (Table 4).
One participant (#5), however, rated the ‘interface quality’
relatively low (mean 3.3).
During the usability sessions, participants across special-
ties expressed high satisfaction with this prototype. They
were especially satisfied with the visual design of the alert
(n = 5). One adult GI specialist mentioned, “I like that the
[warning] is red to alert me about the TPMT mutation. It
catches my attention.” Similarly, an adult oncologist
stated, “[the] alert is visually well designed, it gets your
attention, things that [are] important are in red, it gives
you some options [to make decision].”

Usability errors
We highlight four usability errors that were uncovered
during usability testing. First, several participants (n = 3)
mentioned they were unclear whether the “Accept” button
approved the PGx-CDS recommendation or approved
their original medication orders. A pediatric oncologist
stated, “I assume ‘Accept’ will accept a new order but it is
not clear. ‘Accept new order’ will be more clear – pediatric

oncologist E.” Another participant suggested changing the
label to “Accept recommendation. – Adult oncologist C”
Also, the initial button labeled “Others” also was unclear
for several participants (n = 3). An adult GI specialist men-
tioned, “I like the ‘Other’ button but it does not necessarily
tell me what that is.- Adult GI C” Thus, we replaced it
with “Immunization and contact info” to aid clarity during
usability testing. Second, the earlier version of the PGx-
CDS prototype did not have a cancel button to allow par-
ticipants to get out of CDS without further action. This
hinders the control and freedom of prescribers when or-
dering medications. We added this option to the proto-
type
during
the
usability
testing
period
after
two
participants completed usability testing. Third, when par-
ticipants used the “Override” button from the CDS inter-
face, they stated that it lacks a warning message to prompt
them about their potential dangerous actions of overriding
the recommendation. An adult GI specialist commented,
“[PGx-CDS] should have a second level of warning such as,
‘This patient is at a very high risk of severe leukopenia, are
you sure you want to expose patient to that risk?’- Adult GI
D.” Another adult GI specialist stated, “For [the] override,
you should build something like, ‘Are you sure you want to
override this recommendation?’. It can be malpractice if
overriden.- Adult GI D” Finally, two providers mentioned
that the CDS interface did not provide a patient’s weight or
body surface area (BSA) to help providers confirm the dos-
ing calculation. A pediatric oncologist mentioned, “This
CDS is based on weight, we used BSA to calculate the dose.
– Pediatric oncologist F” This suggestion was noted for fu-
ture improvement.

Discussion
This is one of the first studies to employ a user-centered
design approach to develop a clinical decision support tool

Fig. 2 Efficiency of using PGx-CDS to complete a medication order

Page 9 of 13

for pharmacogenomics, specifically for TPMT medications.
Key contributions of this research include the following: 1)
application of human factors engineering to design a PGx-
CDS for TPMT, 2) analysis of prescribers’ information
needs and developed a PGx-CDS prototype using informa-
tion collected from practicing providers, and 3) evaluation
of a prototype PGx-CDS via usability testing, which could
inform future implementation of PGx-CDS in EHRs to aid
in the care of patients. While a user-centered design ap-
proach has been used to develop many other types of CDS
based on the literature [44, 45], it appears that user-
centered design approaches have been underutilized for
few PGx-CDSs, including TPMT biomarker for azathio-
prine, or mercaptopurine. As discussed in the introduction,
pharmacogenomic clinical services are still at an early stage
of development. It is important to collect prescribers’ infor-
mation needs and design a PGx-CDS system that supports
prescribers’ workflow for pharmacogenomic prescribing.
Therefore, the development of new PGx-CDSs using a
combination of human factors engineering and information
collected from end-users is critical for the successful adop-
tion and implementation of pharmacogenomic services.
This study aligns with some information found in
prior literature. For instance, our results agree with two
studies which found that PGx-CDS should present dos-
ing guidelines and recommendations to users rather
than just information about the potential harm of the
adverse interaction [15, 23]. Since the numbers of bio-
markers and availability of genetic tests are increasing, it
is unsustainable to expect providers to immediately re-
call guideline recommendations and how to interpret all
pharmacogenomic results. Our results also agree with
Devine et al. that PGx-CDS should include a summary
of the literature related to PGx mutations, dosing rec-
ommendations, and the ability for end-users to verify
the recommendation sources [15].

Despite these commonalities, our study was unique com-
pared to prior research in that it applied a human factors
approach to develop the PGx-CDS prototype for TPMT.
Specifically, the development of our PGx-CDS was in-
formed by “the four pillars of successful user-interface de-
velopment,” published by Shneiderman et al. [46] to
increase the chance of successful implementation. These
four pillars are 1) user interface requirements, 2) guidelines
documents and processes, 3) user-interface software tools,
and 4) expert reviews and usability testing. The ‘user-inter-
face software tools’ pillar was described in our Methods
section. Below, we use the remaining three pillars to
organize the discussion of our study results.

User interface requirements
As described by Jacko [47], clearly specifying user require-
ments is key to successful interface development. In this
study, the process of a hybrid analysis of physician inter-
views allowed us to identify specific aspects that they per-
ceived as important design features for PGx-CDS. We
organized these design features into PGx-CDS “content”
and “display.” The information we gather about PGx-CDS
content and display allowed us to include essential infor-
mation into PGx-CDS interface prototype that providers
needed to make prescribing decisions. Additionally, sup-
porting references for the PGx-CDS recommendations
can help gain providers’ trust when they make prescribing
decisions. These features were then separated further for
distinct
comments
between
two
subspecialties.
This
allowed us to add options to the PGx-CDS prototype de-
sign to help support the needs of both physician special-
ties. For example, the PGx-CDS interface (Fig. 1) gave
physicians options to directly access the full reference de-
tails for recommendations (preferred by oncologists) or to
send those references to the physicians’ work email ad-
dresses (preferred by gastroenterologists). The PGx-CDS

Table 4 Satisfaction scores for the PGx-CDS interfacea. Data for individual participants are presented as means

System usefulness
(items 1–8)
Information quality
(items 9–15)
Interface quality
(items 16–18)
Overall
satisfaction
(item 19)

Participant 1:
6.0
4.8
4.7
5.0

Participant 2:
7.0
7.0
7.0
7.0

Participant 3:
7.0
7.0
7.0
7.0

Participant 4:
6.1
6.5
6.0
6.0

Participant 5:
7.0
7.0
3.3
5.0

Participant 6:
6.0
6.0
6.0
6.0

Participant 7:
7.0
7.0
7.0
7.0

Gastroenterologists: (n = 2)
median (range)
7.0 (6.0–7.0)
7.0 (4.8–7.0)
6.0 (4.7–7.0)
6.0 (5.0–7.0)

Oncologists: (n = 5)
median (range)
6.5 (6.0–7.0)
6.5 (60–7.0)
6.5 (6.0–7.0)
6.5 (6.0–7.0)

aParticipants rated each item on a 7-point Likert-type scale where 1 = strongly disagree and 7 = strongly agree. Results are shown as mean for each individual and
median (range) for each physician group

Page 10 of 13

interface we designed received high satisfaction scores
from both types of physician specialists in ‘information
quality’ and ‘interface quality’ (Table 4), which is likely be-
cause we gathered and applied design requirements dir-
ectly from users via interviews.

Guidelines documents and processes
We used our findings to create a summary of PGx-CDS
design recommendations (Table 1) to assist with new
PGx-CDS development for TPMT. This table was gener-
ated from both interview data and human factors princi-
ples to align the PGx-CDS with physicians’ workflow
and needs. These design recommendations are not only
applicable for TPMT but may also inform the develop-
ment of PGx-CDS for other pharmacogenomic bio-
markers. In addition, they are not EHR dependent. CDS
developers can follow these recommendations to develop
PGx-CDS interfaces that align with the requirements
and constraints of each specific EHR system.

Expert review and usability testing
We conducted formal usability testing with physicians to
evaluate the design of our novel PGx-CDS prototype inter-
face. Overall, providers were able to learn how to use the
new PGx-CDS effectively and were highly satisfied with the
interface and design of the PGx-CDS for TPMT. Satisfac-
tion rates (Table 4) were high in all three aspects of the
PGx-CDS prototype (system usefulness, information qual-
ity, and interface quality). These findings demonstrate the
enthusiasm of physicians for this type of PGx-CDS and the
value of applying a user-centered approach in the develop-
ment of a new PGx-CDS prototype. Providers will be more
likely to adopt a new CDS when they are satisfied with the
design of the system [48].
This study has several limitations. First, it is possible that
our sample is affected by selection bias since we did not
randomly select participants. Providers who were more in-
terested in PGx-CDS may have been more willing to par-
ticipate in the interview and usability evaluation than those
not interested in PGx-CDS. This bias may have contributed
to our positive findings for satisfaction with the PGx-CDS.
We took steps to reduce other potential biases by standard-
izing interview and usability procedures. Second, providers
were informed that patient scenarios were fictitious, and
they might not respond to PGx-CDS recommendations in
the same manner as they would for real patients. Third, we
applied the think-aloud technique, which can sometimes
lengthen time measurements. Therefore, the time physi-
cians spent on the PGx-CDS tasks may be greater in our
study than in actual clinical practice. Fourth, only 14% of
our participants were women in this study. While we
attempted to recruit as many women participants as pos-
sible from all eligible participants, the small number of fe-
male providers is a limitation of our study. Finally, we only

recruited seven participants for usability evaluation. The
small sample size limited the number of usability findings.
Nevertheless, work by Nielsen et al. indicates that 5 partici-
pants can identify up to 80% of major usability errors [49].

Future directions
The results of this study can provide further guidance in
the development and enhancement of other PGx-CDS in-
terfaces, such as PGx-CDS for clopidogrel, or CYP2D6.
The key features we identified in this project (Table 1) can
serve as a reference for new studies to evaluate PGx-CDS
interface design as well as the development of new PGx-
CDSs. We plan to continue this research line with PGx-
CDSs development in an actual functional system at a
well-established institute in the US. Specifically, we will
evaluate and compare the current implemented PGx-CDS
interfaces at that institute with newly developed PGx-CDS
tools that utilized the guidance from this project. Those
result can help identify the strengths and weaknesses of
different PGx-CDS designs in clinical practice. Also, our
findings can inform related approaches to develop other
PGx-CDS workflows in the EHR, such as passive PGx-
CDS that appears to the side of the screen, for example, or
a mix of passive and interruptive PGx-CDS. Finally, user-
centered approaches can be used to develop new PGx-
CDS that utilize not only pharmacogenomics results but
also other factors such as the patient’s profile in the EHR
and drug-drug interactions from their medication list to
provide further guidance in pharmacogenomic medication
decision-making for prescribers.

Conclusion
This is one of the first studies to apply user-centered design
to develop a PGx-CDS tool for physicians who prescribe
TPMT medications. This research resulted in a satisfying
PGx-CDS interface prototype for physicians, which may be
useful to patients receiving TPMT medication treatment.
Our results suggest that providers are interested and in
need of PGx-CDS for TPMT to improve treatment safety
and efficacy. This study provides further guidance to help
with the development of clinical decision support for
pharmacogenomics, especially for the TPMT biomarker.