Original Paper

Development and Modification of a Mobile Health Program to
Promote Postpartum Weight Loss in Women at Elevated Risk for
Cardiometabolic Disease: Single-Arm Pilot Study

Jacinda M Nicklas1, MA, MD, MPH; Jenn A Leiferman2, PhD; Steven Lockhart3, MPH; Kristen M Daly2, MPH,
MSc, PhD; Sheana S Bull2, MPH, PhD; Linda A Barbour4,5, MD, MSPH

1Division of General Internal Medicine, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, CO, United States
2Community and Behavioral Health, Colorado School of Public Health, Aurora, CO, United States
3Adult and Child Consortium for Health Outcomes Research and Delivery Science, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, CO, United
States
4Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Diabetes, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, CO, United States
5Division of Maternal Fetal Medicine, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, CO, United States

Jacinda M Nicklas, MA, MD, MPH
Division of General Internal Medicine
University of Colorado School of Medicine
12348 E Montview Blvd
Aurora, CO, 80045
United States
Phone: 1 3037249028

Methods

Development of the Fit After Baby Program

We developed the mHealth Fit After Baby program using
evidence-based strategies for weight loss, cardiometabolic
disease prevention, and behavior change based on current
evidence and best practices [34]. Guided by the Integrated
Theory of mHealth [35], we incorporated a theoretical
framework that included traditional health communication and
behavioral theories including the elaboration likelihood model
[36], the theory of planned behavior [37], the life-course
approach [38,39], and Bandura’s model of social cognitive
theory for behavioral change [40], as well as engagement
strategies from design-thinking, user-centered design, and
mobile technology in health promotion [41-45]. This inclusion
of multiple and diverse theoretical perspectives in app design
is critical to the creation of a mobile solution that is engaging,
effective, and scalable. The content and structure were adapted
from the DPP specifically for a postpartum population, and we
incorporated features and techniques that have proven efficacy
for weight loss such as self-monitoring, goal setting, remote
coaching with tailored feedback, and social support [46-49].
We designed the Fit After Baby app to integrate with the
commercial apps Fitbit and MyFitnessPal. Gamification through
points and badges was used to motivate behaviors through
accountability and reinforcement [50]. The use of game-like
components in health and nutrition apps is widespread and some
initial studies demonstrate that women in particular may derive
social benefit from gamification [51-53]. The Fit After Baby
program also included the engagement strategies of push
notifications to remind or trigger the user to interact with the
app, as well as favoriting, in which users could curate their own
health library for future use and thereby personalize the app.

A registered dietitian with experience in both the DPP and
motivational interviewing served as the lifestyle coach for the

Fit After Baby program. She based her conversations on the
weekly content contained in the app but was encouraged to
follow the participants’ lead if they wanted to discuss other
topics. The lifestyle coach kept detailed notes on her
conversations and reviewed any issues weekly with the principal
investigator.

Iterative Feedback and Design Process

Rapid iterative design is a process in which technology is tested
and repeatedly refined with small groups of users to optimize
functionality and usability [54,55]. We refined the content and
delivery of the mHealth Fit After Baby program over three
rounds of beta-testing through an iterative design process, and
then we developed a final version of the program.

Recruitment

Women between 18 and 40 years of age with a postpartum BMI
of 24 to 45 kg/m2 who were within 6 months of a recent
singleton or twin delivery complicated by gestational
hypertension, preeclampsia, preterm delivery (32-37 weeks),
an SGA neonate (weight <10th percentile for gestational age),
and/or GDM were recruited for the study from women delivering
at the University of Colorado Hospital on the Anschutz Medical
Campus in Aurora, Colorado. Women were required to have
access to an iPhone or iPod (Apple Inc, California) touch ≥5S,
and women with a history of preexisting diabetes, cancer, or
CVD were excluded. The institutional review board at the
University of Colorado approved the study, and all patients gave
written informed consent.

Pilot Testing

We conducted three 4-week beta-testing pilots with unique
participants. The participants used the Fit After Baby app for 4
weeks, received support from the lifestyle coach, and provided
ongoing feedback. Participants were required to open the app
and provide online feedback in week 1 to receive a Fitbit by
mail to use for the remainder of the study. Participants were
asked to log on to a Web-based asynchronous user group
platform each week and answer a set of questions in threaded
discussions. Interactions with the app and threaded discussions
were tracked by researchers. The three 4-week pilots were
conducted during the time period June 2015 through February
2016.

Feedback and Iterative Design

After each round, we analyzed feedback using content analysis,
and changes were made to the mobile app and program before
conducting subsequent rounds. Consequently, each subsequent
round had a new iteration of the app and program. We held two
in-person group structured interviews lasting 90 min after all
three rounds were completed. Participants from each round were

included. Group interviews were digitally recorded and
transcribed verbatim.

Analysis

We used an iterative and team-based process guided by
qualitative content analysis [56,57]. A qualitatively trained
analyst and principal investigator both inductively and
deductively developed the code book. Initial codes were based
on the interview guide domains, and the code book was
expanded based on codes that emerged from the data. The
analyst and investigator jointly reviewed and coded the threaded
discussions and group interviews until no new codes were
identified and there was strong code assignment agreement. All
transcripts were independently read, double coded, and then
merged before analysis. Any discrepancies in coding were
addressed through discussion and consensus among the coders.
Throughout the analytic process, the analyst and principal
investigator met regularly to check new findings, discuss
emergent new codes and themes, and assess the preliminary
and final results. ATLAS.ti version 8.0 was used for data
organization and management. Data from all rounds and group
interviews were used to design a final version of the mobile app
and program.

Results

Demographic, Tracking, and Online Feedback Data
for Beta Testing

Table 1 demonstrates the characteristics of the participants who
participated in beta testing. The median age for beta testing was
33 years, with a median BMI in the obese range of 31.8 kg/m2.
The majority of participants were white, and preterm birth,
pre-eclampsia, and gestational hypertension were the most
common pregnancy complications.

Table 2 shows the user data for the mobile app. The beta-testers
opened the app an average of 21 out of 28 days. Participants
tracked a median of 14 of 21 days of suggested diet tracking on
MyFitnessPal, and tracked physical activity using Fitbit or the
exercise tracker within the app for a median of 16 of 21
suggested days. We recommended that participants check in
with their coach and enter their weight once per week. On
average, participants checked in three times over the course of
the program and weighed in five times. The overall mean weight
loss was 4.3 (SD 2.3) lbs over the 4-week period. The first beta
pilot round included 4 women, and they were actively engaged
in the program and app. Many changes were made to the app
between rounds 1 and 2 in response to feedback and user data.
In round 2, there was more variable participation, with some
women engaging much less in the app. After we conducted the
next round of iterative changes, the engagement increased again
in round 3.

Feedback and Iterative Development

Feedback addressed usability, navigability, content, and
function, and certain themes arose which we used to develop
changes in subsequent iterations of the app and program.
Multimedia Appendix 1 details the iterative changes made
throughout the rounds, including representative quotes
associated with the changes.

Navigation

One major theme addressed through successive iterations was
navigation. The round 1 version opened to a content screen
tailored for that particular day, and participants expressed that
they did not know where they were in the app and they were
not clear about what they needed to do each day. In response,
we developed a home screen consisting of a task list. Tapping
on tasks in the list navigated the participant to the screen for
that task, and a checkmark automatically appeared once the
participant had completed a particular task. New participants
in subsequent rounds were enthusiastic about checkmarks and
the improved navigation. The final navigation strategy
developed after round 3 employed rotating task cards that linked
with tasks in the apps and retained the function of automatically
checking off completed tasks.

Diet Tracking

We asked participants to use MyFitnessPal for diet tracking.
Participants expressed some frustration with tracking of dietary
intake. Participants had to download the MyFitnessPal app and
open the app to record food and drink, and they complained
that it was difficult to switch back and forth between apps. As
has been shown previously, tracking of dietary intake is difficult
and cumbersome, and can be difficult to maintain for long
periods of time [58]. Several participants expressed how difficult
it was to track dietary intake while taking care of an infant. In
the ultimate version of the program, we elected to ask patients
to track diet for only certain days coordinated with a particular
dietary theme (ie, tracking saturated fat during week 6 which
focuses on dietary fat). However, we retained the option to track
every day and to earn points for this. In the final version, we
also decided to ask participants to use the Fitbit app for both
diet and exercise tracking, so they would not have to download
or navigate to the MyFitnessPal app, and therefore there would
be less back and forth between apps.

Tracking and Syncing of Physical Activity

Participants were asked to use Fitbit for step tracking, and there
was also an exercise tracker built into the Fit After Baby app.
Participants were sent a Fitbit Zip at the beginning of week 2,
if they had been using the app. They needed to download the
Fitbit app and connect it with their Fitbit device. Although

participants did not actually need to open the Fitbit app once it
was downloaded, they complained that their steps were not
always syncing qith the Fit AFter Baby app. The majority of
participants stated that they would have preferred a wrist band
Fitbit, so we transitioned to this for the final version of the
program. The wrist Fitbit (Fitbit Flex 2) is also waterproof, so
we felt that this would encourage adherence since some
participants told us they forgot to remove the clip Fitbits from
their clothes before washing them. We retained the ability to
log workouts in the Fit After Baby app specifically to give
participants the ability to keep track and earn points if they
forgot to wear their Fitbit.

Content

Participants in all three rounds requested more content,
particularly content tailored specifically to postpartum women.
In round 1, the most common requests for additional content
included more information about breastfeeding, working, and
postpartum mental health. This content was added before round
2, and group 2 also requested additional content about
breastfeeding, as well as healthy recipes and information about
exercising with an infant. Although we added this content, round
3 participants requested even more exercise information as well
as recipes and more detailed diet information. For the final
version of the program, we added additional exercise content,
multiple exercises with instructions and pictures demonstrating
ways to exercise with an infant, a yoga curriculum, and a more
extensive recipe collection.

Photos/Graphics

Participants from all three rounds requested more diversity in
photos to better reflect their own postpartum experiences. They
expressed that women who look like thin models did not reflect
what it was like to be a postpartum mom struggling to lose
weight. However, some women mentioned that the photos were
appropriate, so at each round, we worked to diversify some
images but kept others. A few women also commented that the
women in the photos looked too calm and relaxed, and they
wanted to see some images that would reflect the stress of
parenting a newborn. In response, we added additional images
to reflect the broad range of emotional experiences postpartum.

Points and Rewards

Participants in round 1 felt that the points and badges had little
meaning and it was not clear how points were earned. Before
round 2, we simplified the badges and designed an explanatory
function that would detail what activities earned points and how
many points were earned. However, participants continued to
express confusion about point accumulation and also felt that
the point and reward system was not motivating. When asked,
participants were enthusiastic about the idea of tangible rewards
like gift cards. In our final version, we improved the points and
rewards system by simplifying our point system to a single
health warrior badge with 4 levels (bronze, silver, gold, and
platinum). When a participant reaches each health warrior level,
they earn gift cards that we send to their email.

Coaching

In round 1, some of the participants mentioned that although
they knew that they were supposed to check in with their coach,

it was not clear what they were supposed to talk about. For the
subsequent iterations, we added topic suggestions to each coach
check-in prompt. Some participants also felt the coach check-in
should not be the responsibility of the participant but should
rather be initiated by the coach. Others mentioned that the
information in the coaching sessions should be more
individualized. Participants also felt that when the coach was
more aware of exactly what participants were doing with
exercise, diet, and weight, they were more motivating. To help
the coach provide more targeted coaching, we designed a coach
app with a dashboard showing individual activities by
participants who were using the Fit After Baby app, dietary
intake, weight, steps, and points earned. This enabled the coach
to follow each participant’s activities in real time and provide
targeted feedback and coaching.

Website

We designed a companion website to the Fit After Baby
program. The website was designed to contain additional content
that was not included in the app, including recipes. In addition,
the website also provided a portal for participants to view
personal data and rewards in greater depth and at a larger visual
size. However, the website was rarely used, and most
participants stated that the website was not useful or that they
did not use the website because it was not easy to use on their
mobile phones. We decided to remove the companion website
for the final iteration of the program.

Additional Suggested Features

Several participants requested that mind-body and meditation
techniques be included in the app. In the final iteration, we
added a substantial amount of content including mind-body
techniques and a yoga curriculum introducing two new poses
per week. Many participants also expressed interest in sharing
their information socially with the cohort. Further discussion
revealed that they preferred the idea of sharing within the group
simultaneously participating in the Fit After Baby program and
going through similar challenges to sharing with friends or
family members. There were mixed reviews on the idea of
competition within the cohort, and on the idea of working
together to earn points toward a common goal. Other participants
requested more stories from women who had succeeded at
achieving their postpartum goals. These features were not added
to the final version but may be considered in the future.

Overall Impression of the Program

Overall, most participants responded that they were satisfied
with the Fit After Baby program. Interestingly, we found that
although the participants responded favorably to the content in
general, they consistently requested more at each round. This
feedback substantially modified the content of subsequent
versions and was valuable in informing the final iteration of the
program. Our improvements in the navigation of the app resulted
in fewer complaints about navigational issues in subsequent
iterations. All participants from the third iteration who responded
in week 4 about whether they would recommend the Fit After
Baby program to others said that they would. Participants in the
group interviews responded favorably to the program overall
and affirmed that it was helpful. They felt that the program

provided motivation and accountability to make changes in the
postpartum period. Both participants in the second group
interview expressed that they would have liked to continue to
use the program. Overall, participants felt that the most useful
components were the reminders and tracking components, and
almost everyone seemed to enjoy using the Fitbit. In addition,
most seemed to appreciate the information on healthy eating,
quick and easy recipes, and exercises to do with baby.

Discussion

Principal Findings

We successfully employed an interactive, user-centered,
participatory method of rapid, iterative design and evaluation
to optimize the mHealth Fit After Baby program for postpartum
women. Our multidisciplinary team of researchers and designers
substantially improved the content and functionality of the app
at each successive iteration by integrating user feedback.
Qualitative data collected in the Fit After Baby development
process provide valuable insight into the use of mobile
technology–based weight loss apps in the target population of
postpartum women at elevated cardiometabolic risk.

The most common and consistent theme through the iterative
development process was a request for added content, and
particularly added content tailored to postpartum mothers.
Participants requested more postpartum-focused diet, exercise,
and weight loss information, and also information on
breastfeeding and postpartum mental health, including
mind-body techniques for coping with stress. A consistent theme
was the need to improve navigation because of difficulties in
navigating to the appropriate screen. We responded to
suggestions about navigation by creating a home screen with
checkboxes so that daily and weekly tasks were more clear. The
feedback from our participants suggested that the navigation
was improved significantly by the final iteration. We were
somewhat surprised to learn that women did not find the
companion website to be useful, and furthermore, they found
it difficult to use on a mobile phone. We eliminated the
companion website for the final iteration. Diet and exercise
tracking turned out to be challenging to most of our participants.
Participants were clearly frustrated with the amount of time it
took to track their diet and also disliked switching between apps,
so in our final iteration, we limited tracking to particular days
and decreased app switching by using the Fitbit app to track
both diet and exercise. Many women said that they would prefer

a wrist Fitbit, and we moved to this for the final version. We
learned that the gamification component of points and badges
was confusing and not very motivating. Many women said that
they would prefer a tangible reward, so we added in the
opportunity to earn gift cards for the final version. The
participants also expressed a need for content that we did not
originally include which led to the addition of a week of content
focusing on mental health, anxiety, and stress in the final
version.

Limitations

There are several limitations to this study. We developed and
tested the Fit After Baby app on an iPhone Operating System
platform. This affected the demographics and economic status
of the recruited participants, which may thereby affect
generalizability. We are currently developing an Android version
of the Fit After Baby app and will be able to use both versions
for future studies. The group sizes for the iterations were small,
and therefore may not be adequately representative. Consistent
with the demands of women during this very challenging
postpartum period, all participants did not contribute to the
online focus group every week. Although we attempted to
conduct 2 in-person focus groups, we had several women who
were unable to attend at the last minute and had to convert the
2 focus groups to 2-person group interviews. For this iterative
design process, we did not include a control group, and therefore
are unable to assess the significance of postpartum weight loss
in this study.

Conclusions

Fit After Baby is a theory-based app using mHealth weight loss
best practices and developed using the principles of rapid
iterative design. To our knowledge, Fit After Baby is one of
only a few weight loss apps designed specifically for postpartum
women and the only one specifically focused on postpartum
women at increased cardiometabolic risk. The design process
involved a multidisciplinary team of researchers in collaboration
with a technology team. We found the process of iterative
development to substantially change the content and function
of the Fit After Baby program which may be helpful for the
development of similar programs in the future. Our first iteration
compared with our final version has undergone substantial
modification owing to this iterative process, and we are currently
testing the final version of the Fit After Baby program in a pilot
randomized trial with a primary goal of postpartum weight loss.