Original Paper

Web-Based Structured Education for Type 2 Diabetes:
Interdisciplinary User-Centered Design Approach

Shoba Poduval1, MRCGP, PhD; Jamie Ross1, PhD; Kingshuk Pal1, MRCGP, PhD; Nikki Newhouse2, PhD; Fiona
Hamilton1, MRCGP, PhD; Elizabeth Murray1, FRCGP, PhD

1Research Department of Primary Care & Population Health, University College London, London, United Kingdom
2Nuffield Department of Primary Care Health Sciences, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom

Shoba Poduval, MRCGP, PhD
Research Department of Primary Care & Population Health
University College London
Royal Free Hospital, Rowland Hill Street
London, NW3 2PF
United Kingdom
Phone: 44 020 3108 1207

Methods

Phase 1: Design for Effectiveness

Methods From HCI: Establishing User Requirements
for HeLP-Diabetes as a Precursor for HDSO

Focus Groups
The first steps of the HCI design process involve understanding
the user context and requirements. This took place during the
development of the HeLP-Diabetes website, before the
development of the HDSO-structured program.

Understanding the contexts in which people live, work, and
learn allows designers to develop products that fit easily into
users’ everyday lives. Products that are easy to use are more
likely to be acceptable to patients and more widely taken up.
Extensive work in establishing the requirements of patients with
T2DM went into the development of HeLP-Diabetes, the
precursor to HDSO, and has been reported by Dack et al [30].
User requirements were conceptualized as features that would
make people want to use the interventions (wants) and features
needed to help improve health outcomes (needs). The
HeLP-Diabetes team conducted focus groups with patients and
health professionals (health professionals facilitated engagement
with the program) to collect this information.

Usability Testing
The content identified as necessary in the focus groups was
integrated by the design team and then reviewed by a
participatory design group consisting of patients with T2DM.
The content went through several iterations and was put through
usability testing. Usability testing is commonly used in software
engineering and HCI research. It has been described as
“representative users attempting representative tasks in
representative environments, on early prototypes or working
versions of computer interfaces” [35]. Usability testing aims to
find flaws in the interface that need improvement and to make
products more sensitive to users’ needs at an early stage of
development [36]. There is a wide range of techniques used in
usability testing, including questionnaires, think-aloud
observation, and interview-based techniques [37]. Usability
testing for HeLP-Diabetes involved users thinking aloud while
undertaking prespecified tasks (eg, finding specific information
or using one of the self-monitoring tools), a technique common
and unique to HCI [38]. Usability testing helped to optimize
the navigation and interactive features of HeLP-Diabetes.
Selected content from HeLP-Diabetes were used to develop the
HDSO program, informed by evidence, theory, and modeling.

Methods From Health

Evidence
Systematic reviews of web-based diabetes self-management
interventions [39-42] have found that the most effective
components are (1) prompting of self-monitoring of behavioral
outcomes, (2) provision of information on consequences of
behavior, (3) barrier to identification or problem solving, (4)
feedback on performance, and (5) interaction with health care
professionals via the internet [39,40,42]. This evidence was
combined with the theory regarding long-term condition
self-management to determine the necessary components of the
program. This theory is discussed in the next section.

Theory and Causal Modeling
The aim of the structured program was not only to impart
knowledge but also to empower and encourage people newly
diagnosed with T2DM to improve their self-efficacy
(self-confidence in self-management) and emotional well-being
by learning about living a healthy lifestyle, making the most of
the NHS and staying motivated. There were many theories and
theoretical models which related to the aims of the program.
These included the Corbin and Strauss model for the work of

living with a long-term condition [43] and behavior change
theories. The Corbin and Strauss model was chosen because of
its holistic approach to diabetes self-management and fit with
education theory about multidimensional learning. Increasingly,
learning has been construed as being multidimensional and
involving the body, emotions, spirit, and the mind [44]. The
Corbin and Strauss model for the work of living with a long-term
condition also emphasizes the need to address the emotional
aspects of disease and identity issues. Corbin and Strauss
identified 3 sets of tasks involved in self-management [45] from
qualitative work on the perception of patients about their
long-term conditions. These are conceptualized as follows [43]:

1.
Medical management: adopting healthy behaviors (eg, not
smoking, exercising regularly, and eating healthy food),
working 
with 
health 
professionals 
(eg, 
keeping
appointments and following instructions), and taking
medicines.
2.
Emotional management: addressing the negative emotions
associated with being diagnosed with a long-term condition.
3.
Role management: coming to terms with the disruption to
one’s sense of self, including adjusting to the patient role

and managing the impact of one’s diagnosis on relationships
with friends, family, and colleagues.

Behavior change theories were used because they can help
predict how and when behavior change occurs [46]. Behavior
change techniques (BCTs) are the strategies used in an
intervention to promote behavior change [47]. They can be
designed using behavior change theories. Interventions that use
more theory-based BCTs have been found to have larger effect
sizes compared with interventions that use fewer techniques in
studies of digital health behavior change interventions [47].

Guidelines on evaluating DHIs [5] recommends identifying the
necessary components of an intervention (including BCTs) by
establishing a credible causal pathway for the intervention;
thereby, linking evidence and theory to the intended outcomes.
We linked the 3 self-management tasks identified in the Corbin
and Strauss model to the intended outcomes of the intervention
(improved knowledge, self-efficacy, and emotional well-being)
using a causal modeling approach. The causal model for HDSO
is illustrated in Figure 3.

Figure 3. Causal model of HeLP-Diabetes: Starting Out program. HbA1c: glycated hemoglobin A1c.

In the long term, the proximal outcomes of knowledge,
motivation, self-efficacy, and emotional distress combine to
enable behavior change and better glycemic control. We opted
not to measure long-term outcomes but focus on the short-term
outcomes, including registration, use, and change in these 3
proximal outcomes.

How HCI and Health Methods Were Combined
Findings from the work on user requirements (HCI) and
evidence, theory, and causal modeling of the intervention
(health) were combined to select appropriate BCTs and develop
the content, format, and structure of the program.

Phase 2: Optimize for Usability

Methods From HCI

The usability testing of the HDSO program was conducted using
questionnaires emailed to 5 patient volunteers. The
questionnaires were written by the GPs and diabetes specialist
nurses in the HDSO team and included the following four items:
(1) the title of the session (eg, easy to understand and relevant
to content), (2) the information contained in the session (eg,
appropriate quantity of information, encouraging tone, and
relevant links to information from other sources), (3) the visual
design of the session (eg, readability of font, ease of finding

access to videos, and the next section of the program), and (4)
any other specific suggestions.

Methods From Health

Usability testing formed part of the early phase work
recommended by the MRC and was undertaken to test the initial
design with target users, before the exploratory in the wild
testing with patients in the NHS.

How HCI and Health Methods Were Combined

Combining the phased approach advocated by the MRC and
making changes to the program based on the results of 1 round
of usability testing meant that the early development of the
program was iterative. This was a key strength of this research.
We did not immediately proceed to evaluation after the initial
design of the program but undertook cycles of testing,
refinement, retesting, and further refinement until we were more
confident that the intervention fulfilled user needs and did not
need major changes. This was recommended by both the MRC
guidelines used by health researchers and the HCI lifecycle
models used by HCI researchers. The refinements made to the
design of the program were based on the results of the usability
testing (and therefore based on user needs and experience).

The purpose of the next stage of testing and refinement was to
evaluate the design of the program against user requirements.
This was undertaken using in the wild testing.

Phase 3: In the Wild Testing and Further Revisions

Methods From HCI

Research in the wild is a term used for research conducted in
natural settings. It is increasingly used in HCI to understand
how people react to and integrate technologies in their everyday
lives over a period [48,49]. In situ studies are more likely to
reveal the behaviors people adopt and the problems they
encounter when they use an intervention at home, at work, or
elsewhere. The advantage of this is that they provide greater
external validity than experimental studies, where participants
are more aware of how they are expected to behave. Another
advantage is that in the wild studies nearly always provide
unexpected findings regarding what humans do when confronted
with a digital intervention; these can be the most informative
findings [49]. In addition to usability testing, this provided an
extra way of testing interventions against user requirements (as
suggested in the HCI design cycle).

Methods From Health

The aim of the in the wild testing was to understand more about
how patients were using the HDSO program in their everyday
lives, including their experiences and views of the problems
they encountered in using the program. Therefore, mixed
methods were used in this study. Quantitative data were
collected on the number of patients registering for and
completing the program, patient characteristics, and changes in
questionnaire scores. The questionnaires administered were the
Problem Areas in Diabetes measuring diabetes-related distress
[50], and the diabetes management self-efficacy questionnaire
[51]. Questionnaires were included in the web-based program
at the start and end of the course. Qualitative methods were used

to explore the patient experiences and views regarding using
the program.

Qualitative methods are used in both health and HCI research,
but there are some important differences in the approaches used.
For example, the locus of expertise differs. In health and social
science research, researchers typically start with their own
expertise rather than the user’s expertise, and the design
interventions that (it is hoped that) users will engage with [2].
In HCI research, the user is assumed to be an expert in what
they do and what they need. Digital health research has adopted
more user-centered approaches to address the challenge of low
uptake and adherence, with a focus on understanding and
accommodating the perspectives of the people who will use the
intervention [15]. In health and social science, a less formative
(developmental) and more summative (cumulative) approach
is often taken, so that there is less focus on early outcomes in
the developmental stages and more focus on the impact of the
final intervention. Emphasis is placed on conducting interviews
of sufficient depth and duration. Interviews in HCI research use
methods that are more common to industry and are driven by
time and resources. Rapid user experience studies with smaller
sample sizes are conducted at several stages during product
development.

How HCI and Health Methods Were Combined

Methods from HCI and health were combined to conduct the
in the wild testing of the HDSO program. The setting for the in
the wild testing was GP practices. This was the natural setting
for this study as referrals to structured education for T2DM
patients occurs in primary care. Practices in 2 London boroughs
that had taken part in a HeLP-Diabetes implementation study
and practices in 2 London boroughs that were interested in
commissioning the HDSO program participated in the study.
The program was offered to these practices for free as an
alternative to established face-to-face diabetes structured
education courses that were already commissioned.

The study was submitted to the Health Research Authority
(HRA) for NHS Research Ethics Committee (REC) for review.
Secondary analysis of information collected as part of normal
care was excluded from the REC review by the HRA as long
as the patients were not identifiable [52]. Therefore, the
collection of data on registrations, completed sessions, and
questionnaire scores were permissible, as the data were
automatically pseudonymized with a numerical identifier.
Patients were informed on registration that anonymized data
were collected by the program and used anonymously for
ongoing service development.

A total of 15 practices agreed to offer the HDSO program to
patients for the study. The program was offered to patients as
an NHS service; therefore, there were no formal inclusion and
exclusion criteria. Practices were informed that the target
population of the intervention was adults (aged ≥18 years) with
T2DM diagnosed in the last 9 months and asked to offer the
program to everyone in this population. Practices were asked
to identify eligible patients by running a search of the electronic
medical records. Practices were sent registration packs to mail
out to eligible patients. A total of 322 packs were mailed out.
The registration pack contained information about the HDSO

program (including that it was being offered as an NHS service
as an alternative to face-to-face courses), how to register, and
a reply slip. Patients interested in using the program returned a
reply slip to the HDSO administrator with their contact details.
Patients were then telephoned by the HDSO administrator who
collected baseline demographic data (which was pseudonymized
and added to the data collected automatically by the HDSO
program) and created a username and password for the program.
The HDSO administrator also confirmed whether they were
happy to take part in research interviews and securely sent SP
the ID numbers of all the patients who agreed. The username
and password for the HDSO program were then emailed to the
patient, along with information on who to contact if there were
any problems.

We used qualitative telephone interviews with patients to
explore their experience of using the program. We took an HCI
approach of rapid data collection and used the data to inform
optimization before further evaluation.

One of the members of the HDSO team (SP) contacted patients
who registered for the HDSO program but did not start or
complete it. We were unable to contact patients who did not
register for the program, as they did not provide us with their
details or consent to be contacted. The patients who did not start
or complete the program were contacted, because we were
particularly interested in the problems encountered with the
program. The telephone calls were semistructured and lasted
approximately 10 minutes. Questions included “What would
help you to use the program more regularly?”

The interviews were carried out by telephone by SP, and written
notes were taken rather than audio-recording and transcribing
because the data needed to be collected and analyzed quickly
to inform the program optimization. Note-taking is a recognized
form of recording [53], and although it has the disadvantage of
not capturing every word verbatim, the researcher mitigated
this by noting down verbatim quotes where they were
particularly pertinent.

Ethical Approval

Ethical approval was obtained from the HRA (reference number:
159488). Data on registrations, completed sessions, and
questionnaire scores were excluded from the HRA REC review,
because of a clause that states that secondary analysis of
information collected as part of normal care is excluded from
REC review by the HRA, as long as the patients are not
identifiable [52].

Results

Phase 1: Initial Intervention Components and Content

Establishing User Requirements for HeLP-Diabetes as
a Precursor for HDSO

Results from the focus groups showed that patients needed help
in managing the complexities of living with diabetes, such as
managing the impact that irregular working hours had on diet
and blood sugar, impact on relationships and social life, and
support in dealing with the profound negative emotions caused
by the diagnosis, which included anger, guilt, shame, and

despair. The tools to help them manage these tasks included
high quality, detailed information, personal stories from other
people with similar experiences, and quizzes to test knowledge
and provide feedback. Health professionals had similar
perceptions of patient needs. Both patients and health
professionals wanted HeLP-Diabetes to be interactive and visual
(with quizzes, videos, and images), to be easy to use, and have
a positive tone [30].

These results were combined with the results of the usability
testing to create HeLP-Diabetes, a website containing 560 pages
of information divided into 8 sections, which patients at any
stage of their illness journey, could dip in and out of.

Content, Structure, and Format of HDSO

We used selected content from the HeLP-Diabetes website
(informed by the causal modeling process) to construct the
HDSO-structured program, which was needed to meet the
QISMET and QOF requirements described in the introduction.

The causal modeling process helped us postulate that
information and BCTs targeting healthy eating, weight loss,
activity levels, smoking, alcohol consumption, and medication
intake, would help users achieve the intended outcomes.
Modules targeting these behaviors were therefore selected from
the HeLP-Diabetes website to be integrated into the HDSO.
The modules contained BCTs, including goal-setting,
action-planning, self-monitoring, and feedback on performance
[31]. These BCTs are based on the self-regulation theory [54],
which states that our major self-regulative mechanism functions
through (1) the self-monitoring of behavior, its determinants,
and its effects; (2) the judgment of behavior concerning the
person and place; and (3) effective self-reaction.

In addition to the BCTs from HeLP-Diabetes, self-assessment
questionnaires and feedback were added as new components to
the HDSO-structured course. The questionnaires assessed
self-efficacy 
(self-confidence) 
in 
self-management,
diabetes-related distress, and diabetes knowledge. These were
positioned in the course in weeks 1 and 8 (before and after the
program), thereby allowing users to reflect on the change in
their scores.

Personalized emails were also added as new components to the
HDSO-structured course. These were added to encourage
motivation and engagement. A systematic review by Alkhaldi
et al [55] on the effectiveness of prompts to increase digital
interventions 
found 
that 
studies 
reported 
borderline
small-to-moderate positive effects of technological strategies,
including emails, to improve the use of interventions. Resource
implications and mindfulness of our ultimate goal being HDSO
delivered at scale across the NHS meant that emails were chosen
as a cost and time-effective strategy for providing users with
reminders.

A curriculum was needed to structure the content and
components of the program and to achieve accreditation as a
structured course. By identifying relevant theory (as suggested
by the MRC guidelines), we decided that the program would
follow a spiral curriculum based on the Harden and Stamper
spiral curriculum model [56]. This model proposes that there
should be an “iterative revisiting of topics, subjects or themes

JMIR Hum Factors 2022 | vol. 9 | iss. 1 | e31567 | p. 7

throughout the course.” The idea is that topics are not just
repeated, but that knowledge and understanding should be
deepened each time. The learner’s competence should increase
with each visit until the overall aim is achieved [56].

The qualitative work that was conducted to establish user
requirements for HeLP-Diabetes showed that users wanted
information to be presented using text, images, and videos.
These formats were therefore used to present information in the
HDSO program and included videos of others living with
diabetes. The text was written for people with a reading age of

12 to correspond with 80% of the population in the United
Kingdom [57].

The result was an 8-session program containing information
presented as text, images, and videos, and BCTs including
goal-setting, action-planning, self-monitoring, and feedback on
performance. Each session was designed to take approximately
40 to 50 minutes to complete and for people to complete 1
session per week. A screenshot of the HDSO program showing
a video giving an introduction to T2DM is shown in Figure 4.
The 8 sessions of the program and each of their parts are listed
in Table 2.

Figure 4. Screenshot of the HeLP-Diabetes: Starting Out program showing video component.

JMIR Hum Factors 2022 | vol. 9 | iss. 1 | e31567 | p. 8

Table 2. HeLP-Diabetes: Starting Out session titles and parts before usability testing and in the wild testing.

Session components
Session title and content

Week 1—getting started

Self-assessment questionnaires
Self-assessment

Information
An introduction to diabetes

Information
Eating well for diabetes

Week 2—self-management

Information and quizzes
Taking control

Information, physical activity goal-setting task, and videos of people’s stories
Becoming more active

Information and videos of people with diabetes
Handling feelings

Week 3—improving my health and well-being

Information
Protecting my body and mind

An exercise for reflecting on the quizzes in week 2, and setting SMARTa goals for diet, medica-
tion, activity, drinking, and other health behavior changes

Making changes

Videos of people with diabetes
Understanding my moods

Information
Working with diabetes

Week 4—taking control of my diabetes

Information, videos of people talking about their interaction with the National Health Service,
and a link to the health record in HeLP-Diabetes where users can record appointments
Making the most of the National Health Ser-
vice

A review of SMART goals set in week 3
Update my goals and plans

A reflection on the results of the mood quizzes in week 3, and a set of “Mood Tools,” including
“Living Life to the Full,” a package developed by clinical psychologists using principles from
cognitive behavioral therapy

Managing my moods

Information and videos of people’s stories
My social life

Week 5—medication and lifestyle

Information, videos about the challenges and benefits of medications, and an interactive “My
medicines” list
Medication

A review and update of goals set in week 3
Review my goals and plans

An opportunity to revisit the mood tools used in week 4
How to fix almost everything

Information
Driving

Week 6—reducing my risks

Information
Reducing the risks of heart attack and strokes

Information
Looking after my feet

An opportunity to review and update SMART goals
Review my goals and plans

Videos of people talking about how they became used to having diabetes and an opportunity to
revisit mood tools
Living with diabetes

Week 7—working with my health care team

Information
Managing illness

Videos about people’s experiences of diabetes care
My diabetes review

Review and update SMART goals
Review my goals and plans

Week 8—celebrating success and planning for the future

Opportunity to repeat the self-assessment questionnaires from week 1
Self-assessment

Opportunity to prepare a care plan
Looking after my diabetes

Information about staying motivated and reading about diabetes in the media
Moving on: the end of the beginning

aSMART: specific, measurable, achievable, realistic, and time bound.

JMIR Hum Factors 2022 | vol. 9 | iss. 1 | e31567 | p. 9

Phase 2: Usability Testing

Responses to the questionnaires described earlier were reviewed
by the team. The relevant changes were made where there was
agreement among responses from the patient volunteers. Where
there was disagreement in responses from the patient volunteers,
the suggested changes were discussed among the team members,
and a consensus decision was made as to whether to make the

changes. Changes were made to the language and layout of each
session of the program, including making text and titles clearer
and easier to understand for users.

Examples of questionnaire responses and changes made to the
program, as a result, are given in Table 3, demonstrating how
the progression of the development of the program was grounded
in user needs.

Table 3. Example usability questionnaire responses and resulting design solutions.

Design solutions
Response from patient volunteer
Questionnaire item
Timeline

Subtitles were added for each section of each
module.
“Subtitles detailing content for each section would be helpful
eg. Self-management 1 - Taking Control; Self-Management 2
- Getting Physical (Becoming more active); Self-management
3 - Handling Emotions (managing feelings?)”

Design
Week 1

Advice about physical activity was condensed, and
the number of videos of people’s stories was re-
duced.

“First 3 pages good with 2 very useful video clips. Page 4
‘Advice about increasing physical activity’ too much detail.
Too many peoples stories at the end.”

Content
Week 2

Contact details for support and advice organizations
were removed and website links were added and
signposted instead.

“Good, perhaps too much detail (contacts, addresses etc.) for
sexual problems - could this be a website link? Level of detail
might be off-putting for newly diagnosed.”

Content
Week 3

We made changes to the design and content of the program
based on the questionnaire responses. This ensured that the
development of the program was grounded in user needs. The
changes included clearer subtitling, advice about physical
activity made more concise, a more appropriate number of
videos of people’s stories included, and links to support and
advice organizations added.

Phase 3: In the Wild Testing

During the study, 24 people registered for the HDSO program.
Quantitative data were collected on program use, questionnaire

scores, and characteristics. Of the 24 people registered, 3 (13%)
people completed the program, 13 (54%) people started the
program but did not complete it, and 8 (33%) people did not
start the program. The data suggested low uptake and
completion, but those who used it seemed to benefit from it
(mean self-efficacy in self-management scores and diabetes
knowledge scores increased).

The telephone interview responses were analyzed using a
thematic analysis approach, and a list of barriers to completing
the program emerged from the data. These are listed in Table
4 with illustrative quotes.

Table 4. Themes observed from the telephone interviews.

Illustrative quote
Theme

Lack of time to start or complete the program
•
“I’ve tried going through it during breaks at work, but I keep getting
interrupted. I’ve only got to the ‘Welcome’ page.”
•
“Can you give me an extra hour in the day?”

Expectation that completing the program would take too long
•
“It’s going to take a while, I need to be able to use it with a spare ten
minutes.”

Ambivalence about starting
•
“It’s in the background, I keep it in mind.”

Feeling of content not being relevant to some users
•
“It’s not relevant to me, I don’t take medication.”

These themes were used to inform the refinement and
optimization of the program as discussed in the next section.
The ideas were followed up in subsequent interviews conducted
as part of the evaluation of the final intervention and reported
elsewhere [34].

Design Solutions Resulting From the In the Wild
Testing

The themes identified from the interviews suggested that there
were patient and program factors which influenced program
use. Patient factors such as ambivalence were difficult to
address. However, we were able to shorten the program and

provide users with quicker access to the program with web-based
registration.

Following a discussion among the HDSO team, the following
changes were agreed upon:

1.
Reducing the number of sessions in the program: evidence
from systematic reviews of engagement with digital
behavior change interventions [58] and research on adult
web-based learning [59] suggests that participants disengage
if the intervention is perceived as too long or overly
complicated. The decision about what content to retain and
what to remove was made after discussions with the diabetes

JMIR Hum Factors 2022 | vol. 9 | iss. 1 | e31567 | p. 10

specialist nurses in the HDSO team who were trained
educators and experienced in delivering face-to-face
structured education courses. To determine what content
to retain and what to remove, we discussed the data from
the user experience interviews, reviewed the guidelines on
T2DM management [26], and examined the curriculum
closely. The 8 sessions were cut down to 4 sessions, with
a fifth bonus session available at the end. Despite comments
about its irrelevance to newly diagnosed patients, all aspects
of the management of T2DM were retained because it was
considered important to give people a good overview and
understanding of the types of treatment they might receive
in the future. Topics including managing my diabetes when
I’m ill, working with diabetes, and driving with diabetes
were taken out of the main course and moved to the fifth
bonus session. The final 4-session intervention is described
elsewhere [60] and contains the following sessions: getting
started, self-management, improving my health and
well-being, and taking control of my diabetes.
2.
Reducing the number of questionnaires: we decided to
reduce the number of questionnaires from 3 to 2 by
removing the AdKnowl questionnaire. The AdKnowl
(knowledge) questionnaire [61] was removed because it
was significantly longer and more time-consuming than the
other 2 questionnaires. Patient feedback suggested that they
found the questionnaire burdensome and off-putting; the
evidence we found from systematic reviews of diabetes
self-management education programs suggests that there is a
lack of a consistent positive relationship between knowledge
and glycemic control and that factors other than knowledge are needed to achieve long-term behavior change
[21]. Therefore, we prioritized the changes in distress and
self-efficacy.
3.
Web-based self-registration: it was decided to change to
web-based registration to save time and to make it easier
for patients to access the program quickly. The
self-registration page included a demographic questionnaire,
which allowed for the collection of baseline data. Telephone
support from the HDSO team was still available for those
who had difficulty registering on the web or using the
program.

We decided to offer the program to everyone with T2DM and
not just people who were newly diagnosed. The HDSO program
was developed in line with the national clinical guidelines for
GPs advising them to offer patients with T2DM structured
education at and around the time of diagnosis [26]. However,
we knew from the National Diabetes Audit that not all patients
were offered structured education at the time of diagnosis, and
of those who were offered it in 2016-2017, only 7.1% attended
[29]. Therefore, many patients with T2DM who were not newly
diagnosed have not received structured self-management
education and are in need of it. In addition, data on the incidence
and prevalence of T2DM in the United Kingdom show that
T2DM prevalence rates have more than doubled between 2000
and 2013, but incidence rates have increased more slowly
[62,63]. This suggests that there are more people being
diagnosed younger and living longer rather than new diagnoses,
which consequently suggests that it would be possible to recruit
people who were not newly diagnosed to the HDSO program

than people who were newly diagnosed. We decided to offer
the program to everyone with T2DM and collect data on the
duration since diagnosis. This allowed us to compare completion
rates between newly diagnosed and non–newly diagnosed
patients.

Discussion

Principal Findings

We have described the stages of the development of a web-based
structured education program for people newly diagnosed with
T2DM, HDSO. Methods from HCI and health research were
used in combination at every stage. Methods from HCI put more
emphasis on understanding user requirements and determining
uptake. The in the wild testing allowed us to identify low
completion rates, which were not picked up in the usability
testing because it was conducted with highly motivated patient
volunteers. The methods from health and the MRC framework
for complex interventions emphasized the impact of the
intervention. This helped us to understand the potential
effectiveness of the intervention. The iterative development
process that we went through with the intervention, in contrast
to traditional piloting and feasibility studies conducted in health
research [64], resulted in an intervention that was more stable
and appropriate for a definitive trial than the earlier iteration.
Proceeding to a trial too early can be problematic because trials
do not detect whether the lack of intervention effect is due to
implementation failure or genuine ineffectiveness [65].
Randomized controlled trials also fail to permit iterative
improvements to the design and updates to technology [66].

Comparison With Previous Work

The existing reporting of complex behavior change interventions
is limited, and this prevents successful replication of successful
interventions 
[14]. 
Reviews 
of 
web-based 
T2DM
self-management 
interventions 
have 
reported 
extreme
heterogeneity of interventions [67] and poor descriptions of the
theoretical bases and active ingredients of the interventions [39].
This makes it difficult for researchers to identify and understand
successful intervention components and to be able to design
and implement successful interventions. The field of digital
health research and web-based diabetes self-management is
evolving rapidly, and it is important for future research that
lessons can be learned from existing studies. This description
of the development and content of HDSO helps add to the
understanding of how and why web-based interventions for
diabetes self-management (and other long-term conditions)
work and can be used to inform future research in this area. In
addition to describing the intervention, this study also adds to
the understanding of how interdisciplinary methods from health
and HCI can be used to develop a DHI. Previous studies by
Blandford et al [2] and Pagliari [11] have described the
challenges in using interdisciplinary research in the development
and evaluation of DHIs, and this paper illustrates some of the
concepts described in the literature using the example of a
web-based diabetes self-management program.

Strengths and Limitations

The strength of this research is the use of methods from both
health and HCI. We combined the theory of living with
long-term conditions and a user-centered design to understand
and meet user requirements. This meant that users of different
age groups, education levels, and ethnic backgrounds could use
the intervention, as demonstrated by the analysis of the usage
data from subsequent studies [68]. A weakness of the
interdisciplinary approach in this study was the emphasis on
time and resources when conducting qualitative interviews with
program users. This meant that we conducted rapid user
experience studies at several stages, with smaller sample sizes
and limited depth and duration of interviews.

Another weakness of our approach was patient involvement.
More extensive patient involvement could have been used in

the design of the interview guide for the telephone interviews
in the user experience study and data analysis. The patient
volunteers could also have been asked to make their own
suggestions for refinements to the first iteration of the program,
instead of relying solely on the data.

Conclusions

This paper describes how interdisciplinary methods can be used
to develop a web-based structured education program for people
newly diagnosed with T2DM. Methods were combined from
human-computer research and health research. The reporting
of the development processes for DHIs needs to continue,
especially when interdisciplinary methods are used, for
researchers to be able to learn from each other and create
user-centered interventions.