Requirements specification, design, and evaluation of dental
image exchange and management system with user‐centered
approach: A case study in Iran

Bahlol Rahimi1
Sajjad Karimian2
Aisan Ghaznavi3
Mohammad Jafari Heydarlou4

1Health and Biomedical Informatics Research
Center, Urmia University of Medical Sciences,
Urmia, Iran

2Student Research Committee, Urmia
University of Medical Sciences, Urmia, Iran

3Department of Oral and Maxillofacial
Radiology, School of Dentistry, Urmia
University of Medical Sciences, Urmia, Iran

4Department of Oral and Maxillofacial
Disease, School of Dentistry, Urmia University
of Medical Sciences, Urmia, Iran

Correspondence

Sajjad Karimian, Student Research Committee,
Urmia University of Medical Sciences, Urmia
Iran.

Methods:
This
cross‐sectional
study
was
conducted
in
four
phases,
each

corresponding to different stages of SDLCs. User‐needs data were used to gathered

by interviews and observations. A prototype was developed using object‐oriented

programming and presented to users for feedback. Finally, focus group was used to

finalized the prototype into the desired system.

Results: User needs were identified and prioritized from the outset, with ease of use,

security, and mobile apps being their most essential requirements. The prototype

underwent several iterations of design and evaluation in focus group sessions until

users were satisfied, and their feedback was incorporated. Eventually, the prototype

was refined into the final system with users' consent.

Conclusion: The study revealed that instant access to information, voluntary

participation, user interface (UI) design, and usefulness were critical variables for

users and should be integral to any system. Successful implementation of such a

system requires careful consideration of end‐users' needs and their application to

the system. Moreover, integrating the system with electronic health records can

further enhance the treatment process and the efficiency of medical staff. The

voluntary perspective of users played a significant role in achieving an exemplary UI

and overall satisfaction with the system. Developers and policymakers should

consider these aspects in similar system development projects.

2
METHODS

The current situation in dentistry clinics studied for exchanging radiology

images is traditional. Patients visit the dentist, receive an X‐ray order, and

then go to a dental imaging center where X‐ray images are taken and

printed. After obtaining the images, they return to their doctors to show

the results. In the past, image sharing was possible through certain social

messengers, but these platforms encountered issues and are no longer

operational. Currently, dental images are sent to the dentist either in hard

copy or soft copy, like a CD, without any information exchange between

the private sector and the Iranian government. By developing such

systems, we aim to facilitate information exchange and enhance access to

comprehensive EHR systems. Presently, the Iranian EHR system, known

as “SEPAS,” only contains demographic and insurance information in its

initial stage of development, and it gathers data solely from hospitals.

However, future plans aim to include all patient information to create a

comprehensive EHR system.

The present system was designed and developed iteratively, based

on prototype development. In the first phase, users' requirements were

gathered through ethnographic methods
such as interviews and

observations to design and develop the necessary system. Interviews

were conducted to collect information on system features, user interface

(UI), user needs, and expectations. Observations were utilized to

understand users’ workflow and activities. In phase 2 (system design),

great emphasis was placed on creating a prototype using object‐oriented

programming (OOP), unified modeling language (UML) analysis, and a

prototype software model based on the information gathered in phase 1.

This led to the production of a system prototype. Phase 3 (prototype

implementation) involves evaluating the prototype in a focus group

session and revisiting the previous two processes to finalize the

2 of 14

prototype. Lastly, in phase 4 (system implementation and evaluation), the

system will be implemented in the real world with actual users and

subsequently evaluated for usability.

2.1
Phase 1

In
the
study,
user‐centered
approaches
such
as
interviews
and

observations were employed to gather user requirements. Face‐to‐face

semistructured interviews were conducted to gain a comprehensive

understanding of users' needs and their expectations from the system to

this end we used sample size by availability of population in this study. A

total of 25 academic staff from the Urmia University of Medical Sciences,

specializing in various fields of dentistry including endodontics, pedodon-

tics, periodontics, oral medicine, orthodontics, restorative and esthetic

dentistry, prosthodontics, oral and maxillofacial surgery, and oral and

maxillofacial radiology, participated in the study. Two individuals from

each specialized group were selected for the interviews, totaling five

dentists, radiology assistants, and patients. Interviewees were carefully

selected based on their experience and willingness to participate in the

study. Each interview lasted between 20 and 35 min and focused on four

key aspects of the system: system features, UI, public oral health

education, and users' workflow (Table 2). These questions were designed

by the research team and were considered crucial in the system's design

process. Before conducting the interviews, permission was obtained from

all participants to record their voices and transform the recordings into

textual data for analysis. The interviews were conducted by one of the

researchers who had prior knowledge of software development.

Additionally, information regarding dentists' workflow in their private

clinics and how they order exams was gathered through observation

methods. This data was collected to further inform the design and

development of the system.

2.2
Phase 2

The prototyping methodology was employed to design the required

prototype based on the users' needs, as discussed in the previous

section. Using this approach, the necessary prototype was quickly

developed to obtain feedback and comments from users. UML was

used to analyze users' needs and visualize their requirements and

expectations in the use case diagram. Subsequently, the prototype

was developed through OOP. The entity–relationship diagram was

removed in this phase as the prototype design was completed,

aligned with users' expectations and needs.

The web‐based prototype was primarily designed using hypertext

preprocessor (PHP), an open‐source dynamic scripting language that

offers various frameworks for programming. These frameworks enhance

data management, security, and coding efficiency. A self‐made framework

was utilized to develop this prototype.17 The architecture followed the

model–view–controller pattern for better control of databases, displaying

information, and efficient coding.18 The web application's display was

achieved using the Bootstrap framework developed by Twitter, which

ensures compatibility across different devices such as mobile phones,

tablets, laptops, and others.19 To address the need for a faster system,

Asynchronous JavaScript and XML technology were highly recommended

and implemented to speed up the display of information and events on

the client side without the need for refreshing.20 To ensure security, a

JSON Web Token was utilized for the secure connection of the

application program interface (API) in the retrofit system. Additionally,

Secure Socket Layer was used for secure data transmission between the

API and other devices. In anticipation of the necessary integration with

mobile applications, API was applied, allowing the creation of a web

application for the mobile platform.21 The targeted mobile operating

system for this study was the Android open‐source operating system,

given budget constraints, as opposed to iOS. The web‐based system was

designed to run on Android mobile devices by installing a program to

display information to the dentists and provide a limited set of features.

The data storage utilized the MySQL database, which is free of charge.

We have been considering all of the security measurement we could

applied in our system to protect our data.

2.3
Phase 3

After designing the prototype, the implementation process for the

previous phases was carried out. We invited all of the users but only

10 users were participated which they were active users in the

interview section for a focus group meeting. During this session, the

prototype system was presented, allowing users to interact with it,

explore the system UI, and provide their feedback and comments.

Following this phase, their input was carefully considered, and the

users ultimately agreed that this prototype would serve as their final

system. After finalizing the design, this web‐based system was hosted

on a local Linux web server and showcased during the focus group

session. Any issues or computer bugs that arose were thoroughly

examined by the system's programmer and analyst after redesigning

and reimplementing the users' requirements.

2.4
Phase 4

As the final stage of the system's life cycle, the last method involves

implementing it in the real world with actual patient data. The initial step

is to create user accounts for dentists and radiologists. Subsequently,

separate training sessions are conducted for radiologists and dentists,

where they are shown how to use the system in each section. Staff at the

radiology center are also provided with the necessary training. On the

first day, four dentists started using the system, and over the following

days, the number of dentists visiting the radiology center increased to

eight. Additionally, a second radiology center was introduced to the

system on the first weekend (as dentists are not in the office on

Thursdays, resulting in lower radiologists' workloads). Like the first center,

many dental patients entered the system. Within 4 weeks, a total of four

radiology centers joined the system to familiarize themselves with the

workflow and data entry process.

3 of 14

During the process, patients associated with the dentists who are

members of the system were admitted. Patients were informed about

the new method and provided informed consent. After taking the

radiologic images, the radiography images were sent to their

respective dentists through the system. Patients were given hard‐

copy photos along with usernames and passwords to access their

soft‐copy images through the provided interface. Dentists, on the

other hand, could access their patients' information through the

system and refer them to other dentists or radiologists if needed.

In the first month of implementing the system, a formative

evaluation was conducted to prevent any system failures. Subse-

quently, a self‐made questionnaire based on the technology accep-

tance model, unified theory of acceptance and use of technology,

task‐technology fit, and diffusion of innovations theory was designed

to evaluate the system.22–32 The questionnaire consists of three

parts: demographic information, information technology (IT) knowl-

edge, and system evaluation, which includes efficiency, ease of use,

quality of UI, quality of communication, reliability, system satisfac-

tion, and voluntary usage of the system (See APPENDIX A for more

information). Data were analyzed using SPSS 16 and tested with

backward multivariate linear regression and Pearson Correlation. The

validity of the questionnaire was checked by four faculty members

from the Department of Health Information Technology and two

faculty members from the Dentistry Department. Additionally, the

questionnaire's reliability was assessed using the test–retest method

(Cronbach's α).33,34 Our goal is to determine which of our system

features would be helpful in system design.

3
RESULTS

3.1
Phase 1

3.1.1
Interview results

The demographic information of the interviewees is presented in

Table 1. The interview questions are listed in Table 2. The collected

data from interviews were categorized into four main aspects.

Subsequently, the results were ranked based on repetition rates (low,

medium, high, and very high) and are also shown in Table 3.

3.1.2
Observation results

Based on the observations, the workflow in the clinics follows three

main steps: (A) visiting the patients, (B) ordering radiography if

necessary, and finally, (C) bringing back the radiography image/

images to their dentist. In Urmia, the radiology dental sector is

separated from other sectors in oral health care wards. In some

clinics, imaging radiography is available only for periodical images and

not for other types of dental imaging unless the principles of radiation

protection are required.

3.2
Phase 2

This section presents the logical and physical design of the prototype

and the system. For different users, the login pages feature a

dashboard that provides a brief overview of their work status, such as

the number of unread messages and the number of patients. The

dashboard for radiologists includes features such as adding a patient's

name, last name, national code, address, doctor, birth date, phone

number, disease history, and insurance code for data entry. However,

TABLE 1
Four aspects of interviews
questions asked from users.
Aspects
Questions

The features of this system
a. What do you expect from the system in general?
b. Would you like to have collaborated with other dentists and
your patients?
c. Would you like to transmit only the picture or
anything else?
d. Would you like to run the system on smartphones?
e. Would you like the system to send you notifications?

User interfaces
a. What would you like the system user interface to look like?
b. Would you like a different color scheme for the system?

Public oral health education
a. Would you like the system to educate the patients in
multimedia?

Dentists and radiology
workflow
a. Would you like the system to help you with your tasks?

TABLE 2
Demographic information of end‐users.

Group
Number
Age (average + STD)

Dentists
20
38.69 ± 5.95

Assistants
10
31.43 ± 9.14

Radiology assistants
5
35.80 ± 4.60

Patients
5
24.20 ± 0.84

Total
40

4 of 14

only the patient's name and federal code are mandatory. When a

patient is added, they are listed in the patient list, and by clicking on

their name, the radiography image and its report can be added.

Additionally, any referred patients are visible in the list. The message

section
allows
radiologists
to
send
messages
to
the
system

administrator as part of a help desk function. This dashboard is

demonstrated in Figure 1.

The dentists' dashboard (demonstrated in Figure 2) includes

features such as viewing their patients and their corresponding

images. Additionally, dentists can send their patients' images to any

colleague and access their colleagues' referred patients' radiography

and reports. Furthermore, all pages are designed to be easily viewed

on mobile browsers without any complications, as shown in Figure 3.

3.3
Phase 3

The focus group, consisting of 10 significantly active users identified

during the requirement phase, carefully considered their needs and

expectations before the prototype was presented. During the

interaction with the system and the exploration of its UI, the

participants
shared
their
opinions.
Notably,
due
to
the
easy

accessibility of mobile devices, the demand for a developed mobile

app was strongly recommended by a majority of the participants

(n > 6). Additionally, there was a significant need for radiological

reports and their graphical representation.

Among the other significant demands expressed by the focus

group, a referral system for radiologists, the ability to add radiologic

exams for patients, and the inclusion of a feature allowing users to

create a mark on the photo to convey their meaning more easily to

the radiologist or dentist's colleague (3 > n > 5) were highlighted.

Subsequently, the system was modified to accommodate these

requests, and the updated version was presented to another focus

group. In this session, users expressed their level of satisfaction with

the system's operation, data entry process, minimum data set

requirements, and overall system workflow. Their feedback was

carefully evaluated and taken into account by the team working on

the system.

TABLE 3
The result of the interviews in four categories.

Aspect
Subfeature
Low
(n < 10)
Medium
(11 < n < 19)
High
(20 < n < 30)
Very
high (n > 31)

System feature
1—Speed
✓

2—Security
✓

3—Communication
✓

4—Notification
✓

5—Image processing
✓

6—Paramedicine
information
✓

7—3D picture
✓

8—2D picture
✓

9—Patient access
✓

UI
1—User‐friendly
✓

2—Easy to use
✓

3—Well‐designed UI
✓

Workflow
1—Online reservation
✓

2—Beneficial for
dentist's workflow
✓

3—Beneficial for
assistant's
workflow

✓

4—Beneficial for
patient's workflow
✓

Abbreviations: 2D, two dimensional; UI, user interface.

5 of 14

3.4
Phase 4

In this study, the system was implemented with the participa-

tion of 4 radiology centers, 9 dentists, and 50 patients during

the first month. The questionnaire used in the study showed

high internal consistency, with a Cronbach's α of 0.986. The

correlation between the variables is presented in Table 4, and the

results of the multivariate linear regression analysis are shown in

Table 5.

A total of 40 end‐users willingly completed the questionnaire,

representing different user categories: 22.5% dentists (n = 9), 10%

radiologists (n = 4), 52.5% patients (n = 21), and 15% radiologist's

assistants (n = 6). The participants' age had a mean of 33.30 ± 6.42

(mean ± standard deviation). In terms of education, 17.5% had a

diploma (n = 7), 37.5% held a bachelor's degree (n = 15), 12.5% had a

master's degree (n = 5), and 32.5% had a PhD (n = 13). Regarding their

field of study, 5% were periodontists (n = 2), 22.5% were radiologists

(n = 9), 5% were orthodontists (n = 2), 5% were oral medicine

specialists (n = 2), 7.5% were general dentists (n = 3), and 55% fell

into other categories (n = 22).

Regarding training, 50% of the users had received training for

using the system (n = 20), while the other 50% had not engaged in

any training activities (n = 20). Among those who were trained,

50% received in‐person training for using the system (n = 20).

FIGURE 1
Radiologist's dashboard.

6 of 14

As for system usage, 90% of users used the system for less than

7 h a week (n = 36), while only 10% used it for more than 21 h a

week (n = 4), mainly comprising radiologists and their assistants.

In terms of device usage, 52.5% accessed the system through a

PC via the website (n = 21), 40% used a mobile phone (n = 16), and

7.5% utilized a tablet (n = 3).

Correlations between following variables are significant (confi-

dence interval = 95%, p <= 0.05):

• Beneficent with UI, interaction, reliability, satisfaction, voluntary,

and IT knowledge.

• UI with beneficent, interaction, satisfaction, and IT knowledge.

FIGURE 2
Dentist's dashboard.

7 of 14

• Interaction
with
beneficent,
UI,
reliability,
satisfaction,
and

voluntary.

• Reliability with beneficent, interaction, satisfaction, and voluntary.

• Satisfaction with beneficent, UI, interaction, reliability, voluntary,

and IT knowledge.

• Voluntary with beneficent, interaction, reliability, and satisfaction.

The different numbers in the correlations table indicate that

some parts of the questionnaire were not answered by patients and

assistants, resulting in an N of 19 for their responses.

4
DISCUSSION

In this study, a user‐centric approach was employed in designing the

system, ensuring that users' opinions were taken into consideration

at each stage of the system development, including analysis,

development, and evaluation. Ethnographic methods such as inter-

views, field studies, and focus group sessions were used to assess

users' needs and gather valuable feedback for system development. It

worth to mention that this system was created based on the

limitation of a study.35

The first phase was users' needs regarding their working

settings
in Urmia City
were
categorized
into
four general

categories. The first category focused on the features of the

system, including user needs related to communication with

colleagues, sending images or reports to physicians, using a

mobile application, and messaging functionalities. Some articles

assess the usability of digital imaging or the accuracy of its

technology, often focusing solely on one phase of system

development for evaluation.36 In contrast, we made a concerted

effort to include users at every stage of our study, aiming to

comprehend their needs and enhance the system—an aspect not

observed in our reviews.

FIGURE 3
Android application.

8 of 14

The appearance and UI were considered as important factors in

the second category. The third category encompassed the patients'

economic and welfare perspective, which played a significant role in

determining the system's success. To reduce project costs, free

programs and methods, such as Linux Web Server, PHP programming

language, Android application, and MySQL database, were utilized.

Another aspect of our data gathering phase was interview. To our

knowledge, there has been no report on the use of low‐cost

programming methods. If programming languages have been em-

ployed, they have been integrated into the respective hospital's HIS

as these were pre‐ordered PACS. Moreover, the adoption of

telemedicine in rural areas has successfully reduced the costs

incurred by both patients and hospitals, enabling a more active

referral system.36

The results from dentistry faculty members at Urmia University

of Medical Sciences emphasized the importance of a mobile

application, having a report of images, ease of system use, and a

user‐friendly interface. Speed, security, communication with others,

notifications, and image processing were among the key aspects of

the system that were highly solicited by users.

On the other hand, the need for paramedical information, three‐

dimensional imagery, and an online booking system were considered

minor requirements in users' needs analysis. The study revealed that

dentists, radiologists, and their assistants were looking for a system

that could provide quick results for patients without requiring

extensive prior training. Thus, easy accessibility on mobile devices

was a major factor contributing to the system's popularity among

users. Utilizing mobile phones with new PACS systems mostly

doesn't necessitate the use of any applications as they are primarily

web‐based. However, we developed our own mobile application, and

users expressed satisfaction with its UI and speed. In the initial years

of
introducing
PACS,
there
were
concerns
regarding
system

TABLE 4
Variables correlations.

Benefits cent
Ease of use
UI
Interaction
Reliability
Satisfaction
Voluntary
IT knowledge

Beneficent
Pearson correlation
1
0.206
0.590**
0.487*
0.543*
0.634**
0.674**
0.624**

Significant (two‐tailed)
0.398
0.008
0.034
0.016
0.004
0.002
0.004

N
19
19
19
19
19
19
19
19

UI
Pearson correlation
0.590**
−0.174
1
0.666**
0.178
0.642**
0.358
0.642**

Significant (two‐tailed)
0.008
0.282
0.002
0.465
0.000
0.132
0.000

N
19
40
40
19
19
40
19
40

Reliability
Pearson Correlation
0.543*
−0.028
0.178
0.524*
1
0.643**
0.664**
0.154

Significant (two‐tailed)
0.006
0.910
0.465
0.001
0.003
0.002
0.528

N
19
19
19
19
19
19
19
19

Voluntary
Pearson correlation
0.674**
0.079
0.358
0.523*
0.664**
0.752**
1
0.298

Significant (two‐tailed)
0.002
0.749
0.132
0.002
0.002
0.000
0.215

N
19
19
19
19
19
19
19
19

Abbreviations: IT, information technology; UI, user interface.

**Correlation is significant at the 0.05 level (two‐tailed).

*Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (two‐tailed).

9 of 14

agreements and the utilization of such systems. Additionally, once

these systems were developed, the predominant concerns shifted

toward the examination of new technologies. However, implement-

ing a human‐centered approach to such systems was not very

prevalent.36

The
disadvantages
of
the
system
from
the
end‐users'

perspective included the lack of a suitable plan in the office for

quick viewing of images, the inability to upload photos from

radiology center images due to high workload, and the prolonged

treatment process. However, the system also brought various

advantages,
such
as
eliminating
medical
clips,
centralized

image storage, reduced chances of clips being lost or destroyed,

and
decreased
patient
exposure
to
radiation.
Additionally,

implementing this system could lead to improvements in work-

flow and potentially eliminate the need for physical data in

the oral health sector. This system stood out from others due to

the active involvement of users at all stages, the use of cost‐

effective open‐source programming languages, the development

of
a
user‐friendly
mobile
application,
and
the
absence
of

compulsory usage.

The analysis of Pearson's correlation demonstrated that ease of

use had a nominal impact on other variables. In contrast, the nature

of usage—whether voluntary or compulsory—and IT knowledge

exhibited significant influence over other variables. This result implies

a preference among users for voluntary system usage, and it

highlights how their IT knowledge significantly affects their satisfac-

tion and ease of operation with the system.

5
CONCLUSION

In general, the success of the IT system in the private dental sector in

Urmia City relies on providing the appropriate infrastructure and

adopting a user‐centric approach with voluntary deployment of these

systems. This approach can yield cost and health benefits for the

stakeholders in this sector, and it has the potential to enhance the

patient's treatment process by facilitating the establishment of an

EHR in the private sector and promoting collaboration with the

governmental sector. Consequently, the government can use this

methodology to develop a successful strategy for implementing new

systems in the public sector, such as the Iranian EHR. By establishing

a strong relationship between the private and public sectors, the EHR

can achieve a comprehensive level of integrity. As expected, when

users willingly embrace a system, it leads to increased collaboration

with developers and positive outcomes. Policymakers should be

mindful of how their decisions impact users, as this can significantly

influence the system's overall effectiveness in a positive manner.

5.1
Limitation

An Android mobile application was developed because there

were issues with publishing the IOS app. Additionally, there was a

lack of patient cooperation with the research team. Moreover,

the patients were from the private sector, whereas this study was

intended for an academic setting. Also, cross‐sectional study can

TABLE 5
Multivariate linear regression.

Dependent variable/independent variables
Unstandardized coefficients
Standardized coefficients
t
Significant
R2
B
Standard error
β

Beneficent
UI
0.334
0.145
0.340
2.297
0.035
0.981

Voluntary
0.599
0.135
0.657
4.443
0.000

UI
Interaction
0.420
0.152
0.396
2.763
0.013
0.972

Beneficent
0.611
0.146
0.600
4.192
0.001

Reliability
Voluntary
0.815
0.037
0.982
21.751
0.000
0.961

Voluntary
Ease of use
0.253
0.117
0.262
2.169
0.045
0.992

Interaction
−0.342
0.168
−0.299
−2.032
0.049

Satisfaction
1.090
0.246
1.031
4.433
0.000

Abbreviations: IT, information technology; UI, user interface.

10 of 14

show the potential correlation but it cannot define direct cause,

therefore a cohort study and a root cause will be required to

understand the root cause.

Bahlol Rahimi: Conceptualization; data curation; formal analysis;

investigation; methodology; project administration; resources; super-

vision; writing—original draft; writing—review and editing. Sajjad

Karimian: Conceptualization; data curation; formal analysis; investi-

gation; methodology; writing—original draft; writing—review and

editing. Aisan Ghaznavi: Conceptualization; methodology; writing—

original
draft;
writing—review
and
editing.
Mohammad
Jafari

Heydarlou: Conceptualization; project administration; resources;

writing—review and editing.