Original Paper

A Novel Method for Digital Pain Assessment Using Abstract
Animations: Human-Centered Design Approach

Nema Rao1, MDes; Sophy Perdomo2, MS, PhD; Charles Jonassaint2, MHS, PhD

1Microsoft Inc, SharePoint Spaces, Seattle, WA, United States
2Center for Behavioral Health and Smart Technology, Department of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United States

Charles Jonassaint, MHS, PhD
Center for Behavioral Health and Smart Technology
Department of Medicine
University of Pittsburgh
230 McKee Pl Suite 600
Pittsburgh, PA, 15213
United States
Phone: 1 4125869850

Methods

Setting

The human-centered design process that resulted in the
development of a Painimation prototype took place from January
2015 to May 2016. Key stakeholders were recruited from the
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, metropolitan area and included
patients with acute and chronic pain, clinicians, clinical
researchers, and design students. All participants were 18 years
of age or older. This project was approved by the University of
Pittsburgh’s and Carnegie Mellon University’s Institutional
Review Boards.

Phase I: Inspiration (Empathize, Understand, and
Define)

Overview

Human-centered design is inherently an empathic process that
attempts to set aside the investigators’or designers’assumptions
about the world and gain insight into their users’ lived
experience, perspectives, pain points, and needs [26]. The goal
of Phase I was to empathize with the target user and understand
how pain is experienced and communicated. The next step was
to define
the most prominent barriers to effective
patient–provider communication, assessment, and treatment of
pain in the health care setting. To accomplish this, we conducted
one-on-one, in-depth, in-person interviews with patients with
acute and chronic pain, clinicians, and researchers (Table 1).

Table 1. Questions from interviews using directed storytelling and modified think-aloud protocol.

Clinician and clinical researcher
User and stakeholder

The pain assessment protocol I follow is BRIEF OVERVIEW
A successful experience I’ve had with a clinician around my pain assess-
ment and management was SHORT STORY

Pain assessment is part of every interaction I have with a patient YES/NO
I describe the pain communication between myself and my clinician as
ADJECTIVE

I use the following tools LIST/DESCRIBE
I summarize my clinician’s understanding of and assessment of my pain
as ADJECTIVE

I document in the following way ADJECTIVE
I describe my communication ability as ADJECTIVE

(Numeric) pain scales are an effective/ineffective CHOOSE tool because
REASON
I have been asked to rate my pain intensity on a scale like this YES/NO

The experience of using the scale was ADJECTIVE

During that interaction, I communicated the pain intensity that I felt
YES/NO

User and Stakeholder Interviews

Interviews were conducted using directed storytelling [28], a
design ethnography method, which allowed patients with a wide
range of pain experiences to be interviewed, and yielded
information about the contexts in which they had experienced
pain as well as descriptions of successful and unsuccessful
interactions with their clinicians.

The next part of the patient interviews consisted of a modified
version of the think-aloud protocol [29], a method during which
participants verbalize their thought process while doing specific
tasks. The aim of this portion of the interview was to understand
how patients think through 2 current pain scales: the
Wong–Baker faces scale and the Numeric Rating Scale [18,30].
Additionally, patients were given a recall interview prompt to
understand how they have used these scales in the past to
describe their pain to medical providers.

Clinician and Clinical Researchers Interviews

As with the patient interviews, clinician interviews were
conducted using directed storytelling to learn about their
expertise and experiences in interacting with and treating
patients with pain. All interviews were transcribed for later
analysis.

Phase II: Ideation (Generate Concepts and Designs)

Overview

The goal of Phase II was to develop solutions to the problem
defined in Phase I: how to best allow patients to express their
pain and facilitate pain communication with health providers.

Ideation and Concept Development

Analysis of the interviews from Phase I combined thematic
analysis and the constant comparison method [31,32]. Codes
were developed via open coding of the transcripts to determine
topics 
and 
themes 
that 
emerged. 
Input 
from 
the
designers/investigators on relevant topics was also integrated,
resulting in a simultaneously inductive and deductive analysis
process. Based on the topics identified in Phase I, we developed
a set of criteria that needed to be met for a pain communication
solution to be considered successful. These criteria served as
design principles that guided the ideation stage where the

designers generated a large number of concepts, or creative and
innovative solutions to the pain communication problem.

Once several solutions, or concepts, are developed in an
unrestricted brainstorm, all of the concepts are evaluated based
on the design principles defined earlier. Any concepts that do
not meet all of the design principles are discarded. The
remaining concepts are ranked relative to 2 axes or factors:
importance (ie, potential to impact the problem) and then
difficulty (eg, cost, feasibility, scalability). Final concepts are
selected based on their relative importance/difficulty and
developed using generative storyboards to illustrate how the
concepts might function in various scenarios. To test each
concept, we conducted needs validation sessions, a design
method for working with stakeholders to validate or disprove
early ideas, to select a viable concept, and to transition it to the
user evaluation stage.

Painimation Drawing Exercises

The process of developing the painimations began with the
words used to describe the qualities of pain on the McGill Pain
Questionnaire Short Form [11], a pain assessment method that
measures pain intensity and quality using 15 descriptors of pain.
Drawing exercises were conducted with a group of 16 design
students from Carnegie Mellon, to develop visual depictions of
the more commonly used pain adjectives. For this exercise, the
design students were given a list of qualitative words that are
currently used on the McGill Pain Questionnaire Short Form,
such as stabbing, pounding, and shooting, and were asked to
draw those words, creating a low or medium version, and a high
version for each word. The selected words were those most
frequently presented by patients and clinicians in Phase I
exercises.

Painimation Development

Words from the McGill Pain Questionnaire Short Form [11]
were clustered into a few groups, with the idea of creating
painimations that would depict and represent different
sensations. The first 3 types we explored were throbbing,
shooting, and cramping. Deep and dull are terms that could be
applied to other qualities, so these were clustered separately.
Next, the visual variables that the painimations would represent
or communicate were listed. The final list included speed,

saturation, focus, and size (Figure 1). Changing these variables
would change the intensity of the pain depicted. These
painimations were sent out to the design students in a survey
with the question, “What kinds of pain do you believe these

animations evoke?” The goal was to understand how participants
would describe the qualities of these painimations, given the
context of pain.

Figure 1. Visual considerations for painimations.

Wireframe Creation

A new set of 11 participants—patients with a history of pain,
clinicians, and researchers—were recruited by word of mouth
and asked to evaluate the painimations as well as the context
of use through the think-aloud protocol. Basic wireframes for

the pain assessment app were created to provide context for the
painimations (Figure 2). The participants were asked, “How
effective do you think this tool is in aiding your pain
communication?” via a modified version of the think-aloud
protocol. Similarly, clinicians and clinical researchers were
asked “Would something like this work? Why or why not?”

Figure 2. Painimation wireframe early sketches.

Phase III: Implementation (Prototype, Test, and
Iterate)

Overview

The goal of Phase III was to develop a minimally viable product
to test with a small number of users. Once the painimations
were refined based on user input from Phase II, we used an agile
development process to build a fully functioning prototype of
an app that utilized the painimations (ie, Painimation). A final
set of 8 painimations was developed and subjected to testing
and further design iteration. The designers labeled the
painimations based on what pain adjective the painimations
were intended to represent. Two independent, graduate-level
design students were asked to identify what pain type each
painimation represented. Confirmation that the painimations
approximated the pain adjective they were meant to represent
would allow us to transition to pilot testing; otherwise, the
painimations would go through another design iteration.

Pilot Testing Using a Case Patient Population: Adults
With Sickle Cell Disease

The use-case scenario for Painimation was the assessment and
treatment of sickle cell disease (SCD) pain. SCD is a genetic
blood disorder that is characterized by unpredictable

vaso-occlusive episodes that lead to severe acute pain often
called “crisis” and can result in long-term organ damage, chronic
pain, and other complications [33]. Patients living with SCD
experience pain crisis as early as infancy, and the pain can
transition to chronic pain during adolescence and young
adulthood. Further, SCD primarily affects underserved,
racial/ethnic minorities, and patients often experience
discrimination in the medical system [34]. Thus, adults with
SCD have long, many times difficult, historical experience with
pain and communicating pain to medical providers; these
conditions informed the development of this tool.

Participating adult patients with SCD and self-reported chronic
pain were presented the 8 painimations and asked, “Would you
find this animation applicable to your pain?” These patients
were also asked about what types of pain they experience, how
they track pain, and their history of pain communication
interactions with providers.

Results

Phase I: Inspiration (Empathize, Understand, and
Define)

User and Stakeholder Interviews

In total, 10 patients were interviewed, 6 with acute pain (mean
age 42.5 years; range 25-50; 50% [n=3] female) and 4 with
chronic pain (mean age 40.0 years; range 24-58; 75% [n=3]
female). Participants with acute pain had experience with
temporary bouts of pain lasting no more than a few days, and
patients with chronic pain had a range of pain experiences all
lasting more than 3 months. Participants with acute pain
experienced a hairline fracture, kidney stones, a pulmonary
embolism, postsurgery pain, a root canal, and a urinary tract
infection, whereas those with chronic pain experienced
migraines, fibromyalgia, vulvodynia, and chronic back pain.
Patients with acute and chronic pain both reported having
experience communicating pain with clinicians in the medical
setting.

Directed storytelling interviews revealed that patients with acute
and chronic pain both felt their exact pain was impossible to
communicate due to its subjective nature and the individual

response to it, both physical and mental. Patients with chronic
pain expressed that they particularly struggled to find clinicians
who knew and accepted their conditions.

Patients described communication about pain with their health
provider as “successful” if they felt heard and understood.
Likewise, 
pain 
communications 
were 
described 
as
“unsuccessful” if there was a lack of understanding, feelings of
being dismissed, or intimidated. Textbox 1 displays extracted
quotes from these interviews.

The think-aloud protocol revealed that patients with chronic
and acute pain both expressed some confusion around traditional
pain scales because they felt these scales were “vague” and
“ambiguous.” For example, several patients stated they had “no
clue” what “worst possible pain” in the numerical pain scale
meant.

Additionally, patients felt that traditional pain scales “lack
specificity” and do not accommodate detailed answers. For
example, on the numerical pain scale, one might want to say,
“It’s an 8 when I am applying pressure, and a 7 when I am
resting, and a 10 early in the morning.” Patients said that they
used these scales to communicate their pain intensity because
they had to; 5/10 respondents said their numerical pain rating
did not feel accurate.

Textbox 1. Extracted descriptors for clinical communication.

Successful

•
Personable, friendly

•
Professional

•
Dead-on

•
Light at the end of a tunnel

•
Calming

•
Relieving

•
I felt in control

•
I was actually being heard

•
Improved over time

Unsuccessful

•
Zero understanding

•
Accused me of lying

•
Impossible

•
Dismissive

•
Limited

•
Intimidating

•
I felt stupid

Clinician and Clinical Researchers Interviews

A total of 7 individuals were interviewed, 4 clinicians (mean
age 36.3 years; range 30-50 years, 50% [n=2] female) and 3
clinical researchers (mean age 50.7 years; range 36-58 years;
33% [n=1] female). Clinicians had experience in emergency
medicine, general medicine, and physical therapy while clinical

researchers had experience in clinical psychology, hematology,
and anesthesiology. Clinicians had experience caring for patients
with chronic and acute pain, while clinical researchers provided
their clinical experience as well as a rich perspective into current
research, challenges, and opportunities.

Directed storytelling interviews revealed clinicians’and clinical
researchers’ perspectives on traditional pain scales. Clinicians
explained that a numeric value on the Numerical Pain Rating
Scale is only meant to represent one person’s pain: “one person’s
5 can be compared to their 9, but you cannot compare two
individuals’ 9’s.”

A numeric value is useful for communications between
clinicians and provides a system that is well understood
universally across the medical system. Numeric scales are
especially useful in the context of postsurgery pain when
clinicians are not as interested in the number itself as in whether
the medication or treatment has been effective in reducing pain.
In fact, the numeric scale was designed to provide a system for
clinicians to note progression in acute and curable pain. Still,
some clinician participants stated that in the emergency room,

there is some aversion to the numeric system, because patients
may exaggerate or falsify their pain score to receive treatment.
There was a general belief from respondents that the emergency
room sustains the problem of addiction because they cannot
deny opioid treatment to patients who report high pain scores,
especially if they have an outpatient opioid prescription.

Phase II: Ideation (Generate Concepts and Designs)

Painimation Concept Development

Based on the thematic insights taken from analysis of the user
and stakeholder interviews, we established a set of design
principles as criteria to support the creation of concept
storyboards. A successful solution to the pain communication
problem would meet all criteria listed in Textbox 2.

Textbox 2. Design principles as criteria.

Aid patient in describing pain

Given the scope of this project, the attempt was not to remove patient description or report altogether (with automated pain detection, for example)
but rather to support that verbal description.

Quantitative representation of pain

Patients want to know that their qualitative experiences matter as much as the quantitative selection. Clinicians, by contrast, required a number of
some type that can indicate pain severity and show treatment-related improvements.

Personalized

Patients need to feel that assessment is personalized to them and their pain thresholds. With chronic pain it is all the more important to allow conversations
to address the patient’s individual journey and take into account changes in their pain experience over time or even moment to moment.

Concise

Because time is limited (and pain assessment is just one part of the interaction between the patient and clinician), the procedure needs to be short and
simple to complete, yet provide the necessary data to guide diagnosis and treatment.

Facilitate the conversation

Based on the study findings, the most prominent stakeholder need was for a tool that would improve the patient–provider interaction by making the
communication surrounding pain symptoms easier, and helping patients feel heard and understood. The relationship between the patient and clinician
was viewed as the most important aspect of the medical encounter.

From the ideation session and concept selection process as
described in the “Methods” section, 3 final concepts were
selected and then developed out using generative storyboards
to illustrate how the principles might fit into various scenarios.
The 3 concepts were (1) expressive pain painimations, where
patients would use animations to describe their pain to providers;
(2) a personalized pain threshold scale, where rather than being
restricted to a 0-10 scale patients would use an app to set their
highest and lowest pain based on their own descriptors, words,
or numbers; and (3) communication-style matching, where
patients would be matched with a provider that fits their
communication style. Needs validation sessions revealed that
only the painimation concept qualified as both desirable and
feasible for both patients and clinicians. Patients felt the
painimations were more expressive than words or images alone,
had an emotional quality, and even incorporated the fluctuations
of pain over time. Clinicians and clinical researchers believed
the painimation concept could work in their clinic and felt the
concept would help create rapport between patients and
clinicians.

In terms of feasibility, patients felt there might be individuals
who prefer words over images or may not understand the
painimations. It was evident that any tool would need to be very
easy to understand. Clinicians and clinical researchers expressed
that they would still need a number and method to translate the
painimations into a score that can indicate severity or be used
to compare with the traditional 0-10 numeric pain scale, or other
pain assessment measures.

Painimation Drawing Exercises

As part of the painimation development process, a total of 16
graduate design students participated in a drawing exercise
where they were asked to draw a series of pain adjectives from
the McGill Pain Scale. The student drawings were then clustered
based on approach and also arranged according to intensity.
This exercise resulted in drawings that were quite similar. The
drawings were grouped by similarity, and the final groupings
were used to inform the initial set of painimations (Figure 3).

Figure 3. Clustering of participant drawings.

First, a low-medium intensity version was created for the initial
3 painimations (throbbing, cramping, and shooting). Next, 2
new painimations (pounding and tingling) were created, each
with a high and medium value. These 2 words came from the
original list and were created to provide more variety in the
painimations to allow for a range of responses.

Painimation Development

In addition to the drawing exercise session, the graduate design
students participated in a survey to evaluate a preliminary set
of painimations based on early findings. The “what kinds of
pain do you believe these animations evoke?” survey of
throbbing, cramping, and shooting painimations revealed rich
language within the responses, which were organized into

emergent themes: recall, time + change, and representation
(Textbox 3). Participants used the painimations as a starting
point to recall pain incidents and memories. They mentioned
the temporal or changing nature of pain. Additionally,
participants indicated satisfaction and comfort using these
painimations to represent a sensation.

The throbbing painimation had the highest responses of 1
particular word, which was “throbbing” (n=11). For the shooting
painimation, “quick” and “sharp” had the same number of
occurrences (n=5). The cramping painimation had a tie between
“dull,” “deep,” and “slow” (n=2). Because of this lack of
convergence, the cramping painimation was revised. Multimedia
Appendix 1 displays word frequency in responses.

Textbox 3. Emergent themes from survey of painimations.

RECALL

Participants used the animations as a starting point to recall certain pain incidents and memories.

Example quotes:

Reminds me of when I was having my broken arm bent by a pair of nurses to be put into a cast.

Like when I come in from outside when it is cold and my ears heat up uncomfortably, or if I jam my finger and it swells to the point I can feel my
heartbeat in my finger.

TIME + CHANGE

Participants mentioned the temporal or changing nature of pain.

Example quotes:

Pain that fluctuates in intensity.

Very erratic pulsing.

Something that starts out in one area and spreads across the body.

Coming up and then dying back down.

Slowly beginning with mild intensity, rising in a crescendo to a near-blinding, wince-inducing pain.

REPRESENTATION

Participants indicated satisfaction and comfort with using these animations to represent a sensation.

Example quotes:

This feels like it could describe that pain well.

I think the strong visuals might really speak to some people.

This could easily resemble how I felt when I got my wisdom teeth out.

Creation and Evaluation of Wireframes for a
Painimation app

A new group of 5 patient participants and 4 clinician researchers
was asked to interact with wireframes of an app that used
painimations to measure pain. Feedback included participants
wanting to see the whole set of painimations, so they knew how
many choices they had. They also preferred that the intensity
be depicted through a slider.

To resolve participant concerns, we created an instruction page
to precede the viewing of actual images, on how to choose the
painimations and increase and decrease the intensity; thumbnails
of all painimations were shown on each screen with textual
description, and arrows were replaced with a prominent slider.
To provide users with feedback after making their selections,
a panel was added at the bottom where the chosen painimations
could be dragged and dropped (Figure 4).

Figure 4. Painimation selection wireframe.

Phase III: Implementation (Prototype, Test, and
Iterate)

Final Set of Painimations

Based on user feedback throughout Phase II, a final set of 8
painimations were developed and then independently reviewed
by 2 graduate design students outside of the investigative team
(see example 2 in Multimedia Appendix 2).

The 2 graduate students were asked to label each painimation
using a provided set of pain adjectives. Their labeling of the
painimations approximated the intended representations,
confirming that a broad set of pain types was depicted as unique
feature sets, with no overlap between them.

These final 8 painimations (Figure 5) were then reviewed by
the patients (n=5) and clinical researchers (n=4). Patient
participants felt these painimations would aid in their pain
communication, and several statements suggested that the
painimations resonated. Participants would look through the set
of painimations, choose 1 or 2, and make statements such as

“This one really feels like my headache, exactly!” Other general
comments about the idea itself included “These painimations
feel like the aha moment for me. Hopefully, doctors will see it
soon, too,” and “Just knowing that doctors are asking us this
question with a tool that comes closer to what we’re feeling,
shows that they are being empathetic and less dismissive.”

While patients acknowledged the benefits of seeing something
more qualitative and contextual, they were also concerned about
the limitations of the current system: “What is to stop me from
getting frustrated with this system in the same way that I
currently get frustrated with the number system [wanting to
increase the value of the slider to more than what is possible]?”

The clinical researchers’main concern was that the painimations
needed validated numerical values of intensity. Although each
painimation entry produced a numerical value of 0-100 on the
slider and the painimation quality type (eg, “throbbing”), these
values would need to have reliable and credible numerical
correlations with the traditional numerical pain scale (eg, a
particular painimation calibrated at a certain level would equal
an 8/10 on the numerical pain scale).

Figure 5. Final set of painimations.

Pilot Testing Painimation With Adults With Sickle Cell
Disease

To confirm the acceptability and usability of the painimations,
we tested a prototype of a Painimation app designed in Phase
II with a use-case sample (adults with SCD-related pain). Six
African American adults (age range 24-32 years, 67% [n=4]
female) with SCD and self-reported chronic pain completed a
pain entry using the prototype Painimation app and were asked
to provide a verbal evaluation of all 8 painimations in a modified
think-aloud protocol.

The adults with SCD reported that the Painimation app is more
engaging, easier to use, has less entry burden, and leads to more
of a conversation compared with other pain assessment forms
they have used in the past.

In response to the question, “Would you find this animation
applicable to your pain?” 6/6 patients with SCD responded
“Yes” for electrifying; 5/6 for stabbing; 4/6 for burning; 3/6 for
cramping; 2/6 for shooting; and 1/6 for throbbing, tingling, and
pounding. Interestingly, 1 participant mentioned that the burning
painimation looks like beginning stages of sickle cell crisis.
Another patient felt that most painimations were not “severe”
enough to represent her pain.

The types of pain seemed to differ between patients; however,
many of the patients described their pain as stabbing and
pulsating, and they consistently described some of their pain as
continuous. In terms of pain tracking, 3/6 patients tracked their
pain in their phone or journal, while 2 only documented pain
crises, rather than daily pain. One patient said his pain did not
change, so he did not feel the need to track it.

These patients echoed what patients with chronic pain in our
earlier interviews reported regarding communicating with
providers about pain. They liked when they felt like doctors
listened and cared but were discouraged when they did not feel
heard, when doctors seemed as if they did not have empathy,
or did not understand their condition.

Discussion

Application of Painimation

Successful medical care depends on effective communication
between patients and clinicians regarding the patients’ health
symptoms and the most appropriate therapeutic path [35].
Providers are unable to deliver quality medical care when they
lack the tools to appropriately assess or interpret patient
symptoms that are critical to diagnosis and treatment. This is
especially true for the assessment and treatment of pain.

Through a human-centered design approach, our study
discovered that patients with pain frequently have negative
interactions with providers characterized by misunderstandings,
negative accusations, and intimidation. A major cause of this
breakdown in the patient–provider interaction is the challenge
in communicating pain and feeling understood. Patients,
clinicians, and researchers in this study reported that the current
pain assessment approaches used in the medical setting fail to
accurately capture or communicate patients’ pain experience,
have limited effectiveness for guiding diagnosis and treatment,
and may exacerbate breakdowns in communications between
patients and providers. Other studies have also reported that
measures oversimplifying the pain experience may lead to
patients’ personal legitimacy being undermined and result in
clinicians 
inadvertently 
contributing 
to 
chronic 
pain
stigmatization [36]. Given the importance of patients feeling
respected and supported by their clinicians, it is imperative to
improve patient–clinician communication regarding pain [37].

To address this gap, the current human-centered design study
resulted in the development of a novel pain assessment approach
that leverages digital animations. The use of pain animations
or painimations showed promise with a use-case clinical sample
of adults living with SCD-related chronic pain. Our prior
published study found that patients’ selection of painimations
were correlated with their scores on validated scales, and yielded
some evidence that painimations may have better diagnostic
potential than traditional multidimensional pain scales [17].

Given that pain is incredibly complex and its qualities are
particularly difficult to express [8], there have been efforts to
improve communication of pain [38-41]. For example,
presenting abstract or literal pain images to patients with chronic
pain during pain consultations was associated with clinician
warmth and empathy, improving the patient–clinician rapport
and communication [38]. Another example is Pain QuILT (a
newer version of the Iconic Pain Assessment Tool), a web-based
and mobile-accessible tool for the visual self-report and tracking
of pain that offers 16 pain qualities, such as burning, electrical,
and stabbing [39,40]. Pain QuILT was rated significantly easier
to use than both the McGill Pain Questionnaire and the Brief
Pain Inventory and was associated with fewer barriers to
complete [40]. Our findings support and extend this work.

Abstract painimations can capture the experience of pain in a
comprehensive manner. These painimations can be visually
configured to reflect pain location, quality, and intensity.
Moreover, they allow users to interpret the painimations instead
of restricting them to specific/labeled pain quality options. The
abstract and nonverbal nature of the painimations is also
important because it helps level the playing field for
marginalized or underserved populations. Patients with lower
health literacy, communication disorders, or cultures/languages
different from those of the providers have previously faced a
communication gap that put them at a disadvantage when
seeking medical care. While there are complicated power
dynamics between a patient and a clinician, it benefits the patient
to have a tool that does not rely on literacy or language, upon
which to build conversation and allow patients to more
effectively report their symptoms. As evidenced by this project,
providing something that is removed from medical jargon or
systems (which were not designed from a patient-centric
perspective) allows patients to express themselves comfortably,
knowing that their comments are valued, heard, and hopefully
understood. Furthermore, these painimations address the
disparities that current pain assessments perpetuate due to their
use of complex words that may alienate individuals with low
literacy, 
disabilities, 
cognitive 
impairment, 
or 
other
communication barriers [12,13,42].

Relevance and Importance of Human-Centered Design
Work

Human-centered design and evidence-based data, together, have
significant potential for disease prevention and management
[43]. Patients need to have the opportunity to participate as true
partners in their health care [44]. Utilizing user-centered
participatory approaches allows the evaluation of which
elements work best for which populations in which contexts
[45]. Thus, application of human-centered design in health care
will exponentially improve the effectiveness of medical care
and disease prevention [43].

Human-centered design is gaining traction in health care and
the proliferation of mobile technologies expands opportunities
for innovation, particularly because of the wide access to
smartphones in clinical populations [23,46-48]. Mobile
technologies have been shown to be beneficial in reducing pain
severity and are well liked by patients and clinicians [49]. In
fact, a study of perspectives of patients with chronic pain on

methods of assessing pain found that 80% favored use of a
digital version of body template/diagram, and 43% favored use
of technology [50]. However, most mobile pain technologies
(around 70%) still do not systematically engage patients with
chronic pain as end users during app development, nor do they
involve clinicians [51]. To ensure short- and long-term
engagement of mobile app or digital health interventions, it is
critical to include patients and clinicians in all stages,
particularly the development stages [48,52-54].

Strengths and Limitations

This study has several strengths, including a rigorous
human-centered design approach that involves target users and
stakeholders at each phase. A major limitation of this study
approach, however, is the small sample and thus limited age,
genders, ethnicity/race, and number of pain conditions that were
represented by the user and stakeholder groups. For example,
only a small number of African Americans with SCD tested the
app. Consequently, the generalizability of our findings is limited.
The Painimation concept will need to be tested by a larger, more
representative sample in terms of age, gender, and ethnicity/race
with a broad range of pain types, to determine if all pain
experiences are represented in the current set of 8 painimations
or if additional painimations need to be designed.

Finally, the reflexivity of the investigators and consultants needs
to be considered and was systematically evaluated. It is likely
that prior experiences and biases may have influenced the
direction of designs and how the findings were interpreted.
Future work in this area will benefit from more objective
evaluations of the tool and the results.

Future Directions

This study demonstrates the process of human-centered design
to build empathy for the end user and ultimately develop and
implement an innovative solution for a prominent problem in
medical care. Further research is needed to establish whether
developing animations that explicitly measure affect and
emotion would be beneficial. Additionally, how particular pain
characteristics (conditions) might influence the further
development of alternative methods (including this one) needs
to be considered.

While these painimations have proven to have resonance with
participants in this study, there is potential with augmented and
virtual reality to develop the pain assessment experience further.
For example, a doctoral project at the Norwegian University of
Science and Technology in Trondheim is exploring how virtual
reality can help nurses develop and sustain their empathy, as
clinicians may become desensitized. It simulates morning
sickness (nausea and dizziness, for example) through a headset
that nurses wear. In relation to this project, the use of
painimations in the virtual reality space, recreating the nausea
or disorientation that patients with pain would experience, could
lead to an intervention that would increase the empathy of family
members, friends, and providers towards pain patients.

Finally, with the current data, it is unclear whether Painimation
is a tool to replace other measures or to be used in conjunction
with other forms of pain assessment. Further, in clinical
medicine the 0-10 scale is well-established as the status quo,

and health professionals will need to be convinced that using
painimations offers useful and relevant information that can
improve their clinical practice. Changing the pain assessment
landscape is challenging and there are significant barriers to
implementing new tools into routine clinical care. The current
body of studies does not address how the pain conversation can
be changed in this radical new direction; however, this is a
starting point with potential to encourage and inspire other pain
researchers to explore novel methods for assessing pain.

Conclusions

This study provides evidence that employing a human-centered
design approach in clinical research has the potential to change
how medical care is practiced. Currently, most electronic
patient-reported outcomes measures for pain are essentially
digital copies of paper–pencil questionnaires. Computer adaptive
testing has helped streamline assessments, but the fundamental
method of assessing symptoms and outcomes with words and
numerical scales has not advanced along with the digital era.
There is a need for more human-centered design studies to
explore how technology can be leveraged to radically improve
and advance how patient-reported pain outcomes are assessed.