Original Research Article

MDM Policy & Practice
2023, Vol. 8(1) 1–11
 The Author(s) 2023
Article reuse guidelines:
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
DOI: 10.1177/23814683231153378
journals.sagepub.com/home/mpp
Translating an Economic Analysis into a
Tool for Public Health Resource Allocation
in Cancer Survivorship

Zachary Rivers
, Joshua A. Roth
, Winona Wright
, Sun Hee Rim, Lisa C. Richardson,
Cheryll C. Thomas, Julie S. Townsend, and Scott D. Ramsey

Methods

Overview

We followed user-centered design principles (https://
www.usability.gov/what-and-why/user-centered-design.ht
ml) to construct this cost-effectiveness model as opposed
to a noniterative, waterfall modeling approach, moving
through the steps of ideation, prototyping, and iteration
to arrive at a design solution (Figure 1).5 Ideation
involved defining the model parameters with the model-
ing team from Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center, APHA,
and the CDC. This step also involved identifying the tar-
get end users, the intended use, and overall goals of the
model/tool. Prototyping included the process of building
the model from a basic concept to a complete design.
And the iteration stage was defined by usability testing
with actual users and the continuous evaluation and
improvement process. Prototyping and iteration occurred
through focus groups, with the initial prototyping and
iteration step engaging end users at the state cancer
control level and the second iteration step engaging users
at the national organization level.

Ideation

Model structure. We constructed a model in Microsoft
Excel to simulate health outcomes and costs of a vari-
ety of postcancer diagnosis survivorship interventions
(e.g., smoking cessation, psychological counseling, cancer
surveillance, dietary modifications, and physical activity),
described in more detail in the Appendix. The model was
designed to compare the impact of different cancer

Division of Public Health Sciences and Hutchinson Institute for Cancer
Outcomes Research, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center, Seattle, WA, USA
(ZR, WW, SR); Division of Cancer Prevention and Control, Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, USA (SHR, LCR, CCT,
JST); Director, Value and Evidence, Hematology and Biosimilars, Pfizer,
New York, NY, USA (JAR). JAR is currently employed at Pfizer but was
an associate professor at Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center when he made
his contributions to this article. The authors declared no potential conflicts
of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of
this article. The authors disclosed receipt of the following financial support
for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: Financial
support to the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center for this study was provided
by a subcontract from the American Public Health Association, which
received support from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC) through cooperative agreement 6NU38OT000294-01-02. The find-
ings and conclusions in this article are those of the authors and do not
necessarily represent the official position of the CDC. The following
authors are employed by the CDC: Lisa Richardson, MD, MPH; Sun Hee
Rim, PhD, MPH; Cheryll C. Thomas, MSPH; and Julie S. Townsend,
MS. Use of trade names is for identification only and does not imply
endorsement by the US Department of Health and Human Services.

2

survivorship interventions with the current standard of
care to assess the value of implementing these interven-
tions. Our decision model follows a dynamic cohort of
cancer survivors diagnosed with female breast, colorectal,
lung, or prostate cancer over a 10-y time horizon (2006–
2016). These cancers were selected because they are the
top 4 cancers, excluding skin cancer, occurring among
men and women and accounting for approximately half
of all new cancer cases per year.1 For this study, cancer
survivors were defined as those alive 1 y after diagnosis
and were assigned to a survivorship intervention or the
status quo standard of care. The primary outcome com-
pares the economic return of the survivorship interven-
tion strategy (in net monetary benefit) versus the status
quo care. The model takes the US national perspective,
with options for state-based stratification, and spans a
10-y time frame. We used a dynamic modeling approach,
which identifies and models new cohorts of cancer survi-
vors in each year of the model time horizon. The
willingness-to-pay threshold was set at $100,000 per
quality-adjusted life-year (QALY), as public health inter-
ventions that cost less than $100,000 per QALY are gen-
erally considered as cost-effective.8 Costs and QALYs
are discounted at a 3% annual rate.
Key model input parameters were derived from central
cancer registries and peer-reviewed literature assessing the
impact of various interventions.9–12 Input parameters are
also customizable based on users’ expertise, experience,
or specific program. State-level incidence and survival
data were obtained from the CDC’s National Program of
Cancer Registries (NPCR).1 Due to the granularity of
survival data needed, proxy states were used for states
where data were not available due to data use agreement,

for
example,
Connecticut
(proxy = Massachusetts),
Hawaii (proxy = Florida), Indiana (proxy = Missouri),
Iowa (proxy = Nebraska), Kansas (proxy = Nebraska),
Minnesota (proxy = Wisconsin), New Mexico (proxy = Arizona),
Nevada (proxy = Arizona), and South
Dakota (proxy = North Dakota). For the states where
NPCR data were not available, we assumed a similar
annualized incidence and survival outcomes for neighbor-
ing states with similar sociodemographic composition
(indicated in parentheses).
Survivorship interventions considered for this model
were selected based on available literature and on poten-
tial for high impact, uptake, or perceived need.13–26 The
interventions include smoking cessation, psychological
counseling, dietary changes, physical activity, and cancer
surveillance.13–26 These interventions are described in the
Appendix along with detailed discussions on other key
cost and utility input parameters of the model including
base annual health expenditure per patient, annual cost
of the intervention per patient, change in survival for
patients who received the intervention, base health state
utility for cancer survivors, and impact of intervention
on health state utility.
Model outcomes included change in incident cancer
cases, change in total and QALYs, change in direct mon-
etary expenditure, and change in net monetary benefit.
Each outcome was represented as the number of events
or amount of money or life-years accrued under the stan-
dard of care and intervention arms as well as the amount
gained or lost when the intervention was implemented.
QALYs were calculated by multiplying the total number
of life-years accrued in each health state by their corre-
sponding health-state utility value derived from the

• Fred Hutchinson Cancer 
Center, APHA, CDC
• Model conceptualizaon and 
buildout

Ideaon

Prototyping
• Fred Hutchinson Cancer 
Center, APHA, CDC
• Reduce complexity
• Introduce addional input and 
results pages

Iteraon

Prototyping 2.0
• Fred Hutchinson Cancer 
Center, APHA, CDC
• Incorporate changes
• Produce user guide and training 
support

Design Soluon

Figure 1 Feedback and revision framework. APHA, American Public Health Association; CDC, Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention; Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center. Feedback and revision framework adapted from User-Centered Design Basics:
Usability.gov (https://www.usability.gov/what-and-why/user-centered-design.html).

3

literature (details are described in the Appendix). Direct
monetary expenditure was calculated as the annual
amount spent on cancer and noncancer health care,
increased or decreased by the cost and potential financial
benefits of the intervention. Net monetary benefit was
calculated by converting the QALYs accrued over the
time horizon into a dollar amount using the willingness-
to-pay threshold and incorporating the direct health care
costs incurred over the time horizon into a final dollar
amount. The model outcome can help decision makers
in any US state or jurisdiction ascertain the net benefit
(in terms of life-years, QALYs), net costs (direct mone-
tary expenditures) and net monetary benefit of doing a
cancer survivorship intervention versus no intervention
over a 10-y time horizon.

Design framework. The first version of the model’s user
interface allowed maximum user customization of vari-
ous inputs parameters (Figure 2). The input tab included
options for user-directed assumptions about discounting
and willingness-to-pay thresholds and granular custom
inputs for each stage (local, regional, distant)27 of each
cancer site (female breast, colorectal, lung, and prostate),
for hazard ratios, health state utility changes, and medi-
cal
expenditures,
resulting
in
18
different
user-
customizable input values for each of the cancer sites.
This level of customization was selected to allow end
users to identify features they felt were important, as well
as features that were unlikely to be used in day-to-day
use. All model results were displayed on 1 tab/worksheet
in a graphical and tabular format (Figure 3).

Prototyping

Participants and partners. State-level focus group parti-
cipants (n = 7) were recruited through CDC’s National
Comprehensive
Cancer
Control
Program
(NCCCP;
group 1). Group 1 participants were identified from
award recipients of CDC’s request for proposal on
‘‘Increasing
the
Implementation
of
Evidence-Based
Cancer Survivorship Interventions to Increase Quality
and Duration of Life among Cancer Patients.’’28 These
participants were chosen based on their leadership roles
in the state’s comprehensive cancer control program and
interests in implementing evidence-based cancer survi-
vorship programs. Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research
consented participants prior to the online focus group
sessions. Participants from CDC (group 2) were recruited
from among the author’s colleagues and had different

academic
disciplines
and
positions:
epidemiologists,
health services researchers, economists, program consul-
tants, and public health analysts. This research was
found to be exempt from Institutional Review Board
review by Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center.

Feedback solicitation. We engaged potential users in the
prototyping and iteration portion of the design process
(Figure 1). The first round of users (group 1) included
the NCCCP participants. Prior to the first session, we
provided participants with the questions listed in Table 1.
During the first session, we presented the study objective,
described the model inputs and outputs, and demon-
strated how to use the model. Participants provided ver-
bal feedback during the session on questions from the
premeeting handout. Two members of the modeling team
led these discussions, with a third member taking notes
regarding feedback provided.
After this session, we distributed the model and a user
guide that contained specifics on how to navigate the
model. Users were provided with questions focused on
the model’s usefulness, accessibility, and time frame
(Table 2). Users were given 2 wk to review the model
and provide feedback to the modeling team.

Iteration

Feedback from each focus group session was discussed
among the modeling team. Feedback was clustered into
informal themes through a discussion process, identify-
ing similar challenges and potential changes raised by
each end user. Mock-up models were distributed among
the modeling team in between each session, to illustrate
multiple approaches addressing feedback from focus
group participants (both group 1 and group 2). Final
decisions for updated model designs were accepted based
on consensus from most modeling team members.
Updated models were distributed to state-level end users
for a second wave of focus groups, with feedback being
collected via unstructured email responses. Themes and
improvements were identified from this feedback and
used to produce another iteration of the model. This
model was used to conduct focus group sessions with
CDC NCCCP leadership (group 2). These focus groups
followed a similar approach to the state-level groups,
identifying themes and updating the model based on
feedback received in the first group and validating the
usefulness of the changes with the second group.

4

Results

Participant Characteristics

Group 1 participants were split into 2 different sessions,
with the first session including 7 state-level participants,
representative of 5 states (Indiana, Kansas, Michigan,
South Dakota, and Washington). E-mail feedback was
received from 7 individuals and 4 states. The second,
follow-up session included 5 individuals from 3 states.
States
represented
in
the
second
session
included
Indiana, Kansas, and Michigan. Some states were lost to
follow-up due to time constraints, changes in roles, and
changes in availability. Participants were in many cases

the state comprehensive cancer control (CCC) program’s
director, program manager, or equivalent position. These
individuals had a background in public health, program
management, coordination, and evaluating or making
decisions about cancer survivorship interventions.

Participant Feedback

Group 1 participants were interested in the information
this decision-making tool could provide to inform pro-
grams but felt this version was too technical and com-
plex. Because of its complexity, state-level cancer control
planners were uncertain of the benefits of using this

Figure 2 Initial and revised user input. (A) initial: advanced user input – breast cancer and (B) revised: standard user input –
breast cancer. This figure shows the user interface for only 1 of the cancer types for easier viewing. As noted in the article, the
model contains separate input interfaces for each of the listed cancers.

5

model and did not feel comfortable using the model with-
out assistance from someone with a background in health
economics or epidemiology. Group 1 users had no eco-
nomics background, and the language used was above
general health literacy. Plain language for the model
inputs and outputs throughout the model was encour-
aged. These users expressed interest in selecting individ-
ual cancer types, as funding agencies may be targeting
survivors of specific disease types, rather than all cancer
survivors. Overall, group 1 users expressed interest in
using a pared-down and more accessible version of the
model. Due to the limited funding for survivorship pro-
grams, the participants noted that this tool could help
programs be more effective in reaching more survivors in
their respective jurisdictions. Table 3 illustrates how
changes were made with respect to specific feedback.
To address the feedback received, the model was
revised. The revisions included creating a new user inter-
face with 2 user input sections, 1 for the typical use case
and 1 for users with advanced health economics training.

The advanced user input section, seen in Figure 2,
retained all functionality of the original model input
page. The typical user section, shown in Figure 2, was
created to reduce the complexity and depth of data
knowledge required to operate the model. This input
page integrated range-limited drop-down menus, rather
than free-form input, with restrictions based on effect
sizes seen in the literature. The ability to turn each cancer
type on and off was added to allow users to focus on
specific cancers. Each cancer type was split out into indi-
vidual results pages. For ease of viewing, only 1 cancer
site is shown in the figures presented in this article.
Results were updated to return the total net monetary
benefit and QALY gain for each cancer type, aggregating
the impact of the intervention across local, regional, and
distant stage to reduce granularity, as requested by the
CCC program participants.
The main difference between the standard (typical)
user versus advanced user interface is the ability to exam-
ine outcomes by cancer stage. The typical user interface

Figure 3 (continued)

6

Figure 3 Initial and revised model output. (A) initial: advanced user output – breast cancer and (B) revised: standard user output –
breast cancer. This figure shows the user interface for only 1 of the cancer types for easier viewing. As noted in the article, the
model contains separate input interfaces for each of the listed cancers.

7

was designed based on feedback from high-level and
mid-level decision makers/cancer control planners who
were comfortable and preferred outcomes by cancer type
overall. Since most interventions generally broadly target

all cancer survivors, overall outcomes were most palata-
ble and most appropriate for decision making. However,
cancer stage–specific information was retained for the
advanced user interface for situations in which interven-
tions are needed for these subpopulations.
After participants had dedicated time to test the first
revision of the model, they expressed that the modifica-
tions, specifically the Standard User versus Advanced
User sheets, made the model easier to use overall and less
intimidating to navigate. They had a better understand-
ing on how to use and apply the model as a result of the
newly incorporated guidance text. The group stated that
the usefulness of the tool could come down to the clarity
of the instructions in the model and the accompanying
user guide.
Feedback from group 2, the CDC reviewers, focused
on accessible language and support within the model.
Results were simplified to include a sentence that
described what the findings meant for the population
receiving the intervention (‘‘These results mean that for
the [Insert State] population, this intervention generates
[X] QALYs and a net monetary benefit of [Y] billion
U.S. dollars’’). The introduction page was updated to
integrate information from the user guide, including the
benefits of using the model and explaining how to inter-
pret the outcomes generated. The standard user input
sheet was updated to include a reference input table from
the user guide, as well as clearer language around the
summary ranges for each required input value and defi-
nitions of the input values.

Discussion

We adapted a population-level economic simulation
model into a decision aid using an iterative, end-user
focused model development approach. This process

Table 1 Premeeting Focus Group Questions

1.
What type of survivorship interventions do you implement
for cancer survivors?
2.
What are your goals and constraints when thinking about
survivorship interventions? How do you prioritize given
these constraints and goals?
3.
What other factors are you thinking about when making
these decisions?

Table 2 Postmeeting Questions

I.
Model usefulness

What were your overall impressions?

What would make the model more useful to you in
your work?

What was confusing?

What would you like to see in the model that isn’t
currently included?
II.
Accessibility

What is the extent of your familiarity with the terms
used?

Did the language resonate with you?

How user-friendly is the Excel format?

What software or programs are you familiar with for
modeling and decision analysis?
III.
Time frame

What is the time frame in which you make decisions?

Are you making cases for 10-y interventions?

Model currently projects 10 y. What time frame of
results would be useful to you?

How would you use this model to make decisions about
budgets and resource allocations?

Table 3 Key Feedback and Updates

Focus Group Feedback
How the Model Was Modified

Initial model interface is overly complex
Addition of standard user input page
Interest in selecting individual disease states,
as funding agencies may be targeting
survivors of specific disease types, rather
than all cancer survivors

Allow inputs for selected disease states and created
separate output pages for each disease state

Make language in the model and user guide
more accessible
Reworded model file, added definitions to introduction
and input pages
Most users will not open an attached user
guide for instructions due to technology
limitations

Added instructions to model pages, as well as
interpretations on result pages

Confusion about sourcing and magnitude of
model inputs
Added reference table and input ranges to standard
user input page

8

represents an intersection of the decision making and
product development research spaces. Our article contri-
butes to the literature in 2 important ways. First, to our
knowledge, we have developed a novel cost-effectiveness
model that takes into account national, population-
based cancer registry data of US cancer survivors and
follows a dynamic cohort over a 10-y time period,
enabling the ability to compare various cancer survivor-
ship interventions using economic outcomes of life-years
and net monetary benefit. Second, we additionally
describe how we modified an economic analysis to trans-
late it into a decision aid for public health practitioners
and cancer control planners. While it is likely that infor-
mal
user feedback
has been
used
to
refine
cost-
effectiveness models in the past, we believe this is the first
article reporting how feedback was solicited and inte-
grated into model development.
Using cost-effectiveness analysis to inform medical
decision making in the United States has been challen-
ging. There are concerns regarding equity and equality as
well as the ethics of reducing a human life to a dollar
amount.10 There are also challenges related to the quality
of the model, quality of the data, and assumptions made
around input parameters that reflect uncertainty. These
can lead to technical challenges and result in nuanced
and complex models that can be hard to interpret, further
limiting their utility to end users. The primary challenge
we describe here is accessibility: getting the model to a
state where persons who are trained in public health but
not modeling and cost-effectiveness analysis can interact
with a model in a way that allows thoughtful input of
data and ease of interpretation of the results.
Integrating potential end users (in our case, cancer
control planners) into the model design and revision
process highlighted themes to consider when developing
future user-focused models with the goal of increasing
user uptake. The first theme was interface complexity.
The original model was visually ‘‘complex’’ with multiple
input fields for each value for each disease stage and
used health economic terminology, which was viewed as
an additional complication. Although this level of detail
is important from a scientific modeling standpoint, there
can be challenges to adoption, implementation, and
long-term sustainment of use. By adding a second input
page with fewer fields and better explanations of possible
input values, we were able to reduce complexity for
cancer control planners while retaining the original input
page for users who were comfortable with or needed the
increased granularity.
The second theme we identified was ease of use. In
the original form of this model, there was a multipaged

technical report and user guide that contained the exam-
ple interventions, their data, and explanations for how to
locate and input data for other interventions of interest.
This report also contained information about the pur-
pose of the model and how to interpret the results and
integrate them into survivorship program design. Focus
group participants identified that storing this informa-
tion in a separate location from the model, requiring the
users to either print a hard copy or toggle between the
model and user guide on their screen, would serve as a
significant barrier to use. When the information that
focus group participants identified as necessary for
model use was added directly into the model, they felt it
improved the ease of use.
The third theme identified was conceptual complexity.
QALYs and net monetary benefit, outcomes in our
model, were identified as confusing terms by nearly all
participants, as was the use of health state utility values
as an input. These terms are commonly used by research-
ers in the health technology assessment space. However,
given the breadth of information that cancer control
planners are expected to integrate into practice, these
terms may be perceived as technical jargon and become
a barrier to adoption. By providing clear definitions of
the terms embedded within the model, as well as example
ranges for the values needed as inputs (identified from
published literature), we were able to reduce the concep-
tual complexity of the original model. The addition of an
in-model interpretation guide increased understanding of
results, reducing the complexity around using the model
output to inform decision making.
The themes of interface and conceptual complexity, as
well as ease of use, create a distinction between cost-
effectiveness models designed to answer a research ques-
tion and models designed to be used in daily practice by
decision makers. Research-focused models can contain
significant complexity, documentation, and knowledge
requirements, as it is likely that they will be used mainly
by the developers to answer a specific question. Models
that are intended as decision aids and designed to con-
sider additional interventions beyond those used to
develop the model may benefit from consultation with
the end users. This consultation can focus on reducing
complexity in model design and terminology, designing
an interface and output that align with the user’s goals,
and embedding necessary information within the model
itself,
rather
than
in
a
supplementary
user
guide.
Challenges associated with terminology may be addressed
by working with the end users to create agreed-upon
definitions for complex terms and concepts that they feel
would be easily understood by their peers.

9

There were limitations to this work; one of the most
notable was the process used to construct the focus
groups. While it is possible that the 5 states represented
in our focus groups fully represent the opinions and
goals of other US cancer control programs, there is the
potential that other users will encounter additional chal-
lenges or barriers that were not identified. In addition,
these participants may be those who are most engaged
and interested in using this modeling approach to select
interventions, and other potential participants may not
feel they have the capacity or knowledge necessary to use
the model.
An additional limitation is the lack of real-world
follow-up for feedback on model comfort and use. In
both focus group sessions, participants (who were largely
selected for their ‘‘leadership’’ role) identified that they
had been able to afford little time to explore the model,
given competing priorities around public health needs.
As the model design team was present for the focus
group discussions and provided walkthroughs during the
meetings, users may have only identified complexities in
the scenarios presented by the facilitators and not identi-
fied other complexities that would occur with routine
real-world use. Our ability to conduct user-centered
research may have also been hampered by the use of
e-mail and video focus groups rather than in-person
sessions at local and national meetings or from a series
of in-depth interviews with each program where multiple
participants could participate.
Future modeling work for public health decision sup-
port may integrate this iterative and multipartner engage-
ment approach throughout the model development
process. Public health decision makers are faced with
complex decisions regarding the allocation of limited
resources and drawing comparisons between evidence-
based programming. Soliciting feedback from potential
end users throughout the model design and refinement
process allows the model to more accurately reflect their
needs. This approach may also allow a better representa-
tion of the real-world challenges associated with the deci-
sion being modeled, improving the face validity of the
scientific model.

Conclusion

This project provides a perspective on using focus group
methodology to refine and disseminate a cost-effectiveness
model to assist in selecting public health interventions.
We view this approach as an opportunity to remove bar-
riers for evidence-based program selections in public

health interventions and as a step forward in translating
cost-effectiveness modeling into real-world use.