Case Report

Development of a computer-aided text message platform
for user engagement with a digital Diabetes Prevention
Program: a case study

Danissa V. Rodriguez
1, Katharine Lawrence
1, Son Luu1, Jonathan L. Yu1,
Dawn M. Feldthouse
2, Javier Gonzalez2, and Devin Mann1,2

1Department of Population Health, NYU Grossman School of Medicine, New York, New York, USA and 2Medical Center Informa-
tion Technology, NYU Langone Health, New York, New York, USA

Received 28 January 2021; Revised 3 September 2021; Editorial Decision 6 September 2021; Accepted 9 September 2021

PAMS STUDY OVERVIEW AND RESEARCH
DESIGN STRATEGY

The PAMS intervention was designed and developed as part of a fed-
erally funded multiphase research project assessing the impact of
targeted engagement interventions on adherence to dDPP.19 In Phase
1 of the study, which resulted on the development of PAMS, we uti-
lized a user-centered design (UCD) approach to identify the core fea-
tures of the engagement system—including its technical build,
message content, message cadence, and delivery mode—design the
intervention, and test the early prototypes. Phase 2 deploys a single-
armed pilot among patients with prediabetes to assess the prelimi-
nary effectiveness of the intervention and refine the tool. In Phase 3,
a randomized controlled trial (RCT) evaluates the impact of the in-
tervention tool plus the dDPP platform versus the dDPP platform
alone on health outcomes (eg, weight, BMI, hemoglobin A1c) and
engagement in dDPP.19 Institutional Review Board (IRB) approval
was obtained for each phase of the research. This paper focuses on
Phase 1 of the study and its implication in the development of
PAMS.

PAMS TECHNICAL DEVELOPMENT

The technical development of PAMS follows an agile software de-
velopment approach based on an incremental process where feature-
based builds are delivered in iterative cycles of 2 weeks (sprints).
Each iterative cycle consists of requirement planning, design, devel-
opment, and testing of a specific set of functional features, making
sure each subsequent iterations incorporates improvements based on
user feedback.
To develop and evaluate PAMS in clinical context, we partnered
with Noom, a prominent commercially available dDPP mobile ap-
plication (“app”) that provides the evidence-based CDC-based dia-
betes prevention curriculum through tailored lesson plans, tracking
features (eg, meals, exercise and physical activity, and weight), and
virtual group and individual coaching support. The Noom curricu-
lum is derived from the DPP, which itself represents an amalgam-
ation of behavior change strategies designed to promote behavior
modifications to improve self-management of diabetes risk factors.31

Rationale for “in-house” PAMS build
Prior to the decision to build PAMS, a Request for Information was
issued to 5 different vendors with experience in establishing commu-
nication with patients via mobile devices, including short message

service (SMS) and graphics intercharge format (Gif). Vendor
responses were evaluated based upon various criteria with 4 of criti-
cal importance; enterprise architecture integration; alignment with
IT infrastructure and strategy; scalability; and robust customer suc-
cess support. Based on the evaluation criteria, very few vendors met
requirements at a desired cost. Potential outcomes of PAMS devel-
opment may include unique components and innovative applica-
tions that could expand our research beyond supporting dDPP, to
explore potential solutions in other healthcare problem areas. As a
result, the decision was to build PAMS in-house to achieve the most
cost-effective solution with more control and flexibility for customi-
zation to support specific research objectives. At a minimum, for the
initial phase of the study with a limited number of patient partici-
pants, it was within our internal capability to build PAMS that will
meet all early-stage requirements. Yet, gaining a good understanding
of existing vendors’ capabilities at this time can help inform our de-
cision in the future as research priorities and technical requirements
for PAMS evolve over time.

PAMS content and features development
The core components of PAMS were identified, prototyped, and
evaluated among key stakeholders through a series of semistructured
group and individual interviews, design thinking workshops, and
user testing sessions during Phase 1 of the study. Stakeholders in-
cluded patients with prediabetes, primary care providers (PCPs),
health technologists, behavioral change theorists, and product devel-
opers and coaches. Table 1 outlines the various data collection
methodologies, insights, and core PAMS features and requirements.
To develop the language and content of the PAMS system as
well as initial PAMS features to be transformed in technical require-
ments, we applied the “double diamond” framework from Design
Thinking to drive the theory and empirically driven development of
our intervention35 (see Figure 2). Key features of the double dia-

mond method include both divergent (eg, discover, develop) and
convergent (eg, define, deliver) stages of intervention development
and iteration. In divergent stages, message content was creatively ex-
plored and developed among various stakeholders (eg, patients, pro-
viders, content experts), using strategies such as content workshops,
personas, and brainstorming sessions. In convergent stages, mes-
sages were reviewed by content and theory experts (eg, dDPP
coaches, behavior change theorists), refined, and compared to rele-
vant behavior change theories and techniques.
From this work, a complete library of theoretically and empiri-
cally derived messages was developed. Messages were periodically
reviewed by stakeholders and tested in near-live and live environ-
ments for feedback, which were used to refine and add messaging
content. Sample messages and their associated behavior change de-
terminant20 grouping, and technique20 are shown in Table 2.

PAMS technical requirements
Following the data collection period, a set of user requirements were
written to guide the development of PAMs and then refined to iden-
tify the “minimum viable product” (MVP) that was developed,
piloted, and further refined.30,36 The initial requirements document
was divided into small portions and deliverables of the system were
presented periodically for further revisions and to address possible
changes as agile development suggests.37 Main requirements involve
the capacity to query, store, and safely manipulate patients’ data;
calculate engagement levels; categorize patients’ according to en-
gagement level; read, store, and manipulate a behavioral science-
based message pool; send personalized messages based on patients’
engagement, and generate a reporting dashboard for providers. As
part of the requirements, high-security data manipulation standards
need to be applied. All data consumed and generated by PAMS need
to be strictly documented, organized, and stored for future evalua-
tion. PAMS would also be able to provide necessary data to

researchers on the effect of messages in achieving engagement for
further analysis. Message content was developed based upon
insights from user research activities and refined based upon clinical
content experts to achieve engagement.

PAMS architectural design
Internal PAMS functionality includes data collection, data analysis,
message selection, and message delivery processes. PAMS has a
modular design where each module is independent and governs a
specific activity or functionality within the system. Figure 3 illus-
trates PAMS architectural design. The blue-highlighted area in the
figure represents PAMS itself, to include the associated modules, we

use symbols. Components outside the blue-highlighted area are ex-
ternal systems and operations that interact with PAMS. These in-
clude external applications and research activities that produce data
to support PAMS’ functionalities or utilize data coming from
PAMS. Arrows in the figure show directions of data flows.
The patient registration module checks the Noom application
programming interface (API) to verify if our patients have registered
to the dDPP vendor and updates patients’ information in RedCap.
The Noom data processor module, which is triggered weekly,
queries raw data from the dDPP vendor (Noom), processes it, and
extracts meaningful information such as achieved values for exer-
cise, meals, group activities, messages, and weight. The engagement
calculator receives preprocessed data from the Noom data processor

module and it uses 3 different algorithms to generate an engagement
score. This engagement score or adherence value is consumed by the
message selector module which governs categorizing patients
according to different engagement level categories/trends such as
newly low, newly high, persistent high, and persistent low engager,
and selects the message to be sent based on the patient’s recent
trends and phase of the user journey. This module provides data to
the patient outreach which is in charge of preparing the text content
to be passed to Twilio (eg, the SMS gateway) API. Incoming mes-
sages are managed by the patient outreach module. PAMS has a cal-
endar
feature
called
PAMS
schedule
which
sends
messages
according to defined time rules such as birthdays, 1 week after the
start of the program, 3 months into the program, and so on, to com-
plement user engagement. PAMS has a number of databases for
storing data consumed and produced by the modules. Databases
store the message pools, patient engagement data, and a registry of

messages sent and received. PAMS has a researcher dashboard that
enables monitoring of the participants’ journey, retrieval, and analy-
sis of data, as well as idea generation for optimizations to PAMS.
As part of the PAMS and EHR integration, the Epic provider
dashboard allows PCPs to follow the diabetes prevention journey,
evaluate the impact of messages on engagement levels, and make de-
cision about new strategies to help patients meet their goals. This
dashboard is embedded into the Epic platform to facilitate accessi-
bility, and it supports provider–patient communication. Provider
dashboard design is the result of an interview process to better serve
provider’s needs.

PAMS technical build
Amazon web services (AWS) were utilized for the development of
PAMS.38 With our microservice approach design using an event-

driven model,39–40 the main components of PAMS are AWS Lambda
functions which are triggered by different events such as updates to
S3 buckets, modifications on DynamoDB tables, or CloudWatch
events. The versatility of Lambda functions allows for collaboration
among developers. Since all the microservices communicate using
events, they are fully functional as a module, and they abstract pro-
gramming languages intercommunication and data transferring.
Most of the Lambda functions were developed using Python or Scala
programming languages. Lambda functions produce and consume
events that allow the total integration of the system. Lambdas read
and write in our databases to manipulate and update data. External
interactions of PAMS use API calls, which secure effective data
transfer.

PAMS automation
The initial stage of the study involved highly manual processes illus-
trated in Figure 4. Given all the required tools, it takes approxi-
mately 50 min for a research staff to perform all data handling steps
and execute SMS triggering for each of the patients on a weekly ba-
sis. With 9 initial study subjects enrolled to support early-stage de-
velopment, manual processing of user data was manageable;
however, as the number of participants increases, manual processing
would quickly become unsustainable. Study documentation has also
shown instances of human errors. PAMS went through rigorous test-
ing to ensure zero errors and system bugs while automating all the
features in Figure 4.
Another important factor that makes the automation capability
of PAMS promising is the ability to access patient engagement infor-
mation, which typically is not readily available. PAMS abstracts the
implementation of features in Figure 4 and presents an integrated
dashboard in Epic with the relevant information for PCPs such as
engagement data including health outcomes, patient’s category, and
messages sent. Providers can then provide support tailored to each
patient’s behavior change journey, enabled by auto-triggered SMS
capability. PAMS has the potential to allow for providing additional
support outside of in-person visits, without significant time commit-
ment from PCPs. This potential has been uncovered from user re-
search insights that identified an opportunity to incorporate dDPP
workflows into existing provider workflows as a way to operation-
alize this protocol. This has been achieved through the development
and integration of dDPP tools within the EHR system. Such time-
consuming manual activities would incur significantly high cost
when considering tailored care for a large patient base developing

healthy self-care behaviors. Due to PCP time constraints, manual
manipulation of patient data is not feasible and PAMS provides a
time-friendly, promising, and effective solution.

DISCUSSION

Current status and future directions
Currently, the first version of PAMS has been deployed into produc-
tion status; PAMS 1.0 includes the MVP. A second phase of develop-
ment is planned for refining PAMS features and expanding its
functionality, which will be deployed in the single-arm pilot (Phase
2) of the study. Further iterations based on learning from Phase 2
will be incorporated into the final product, to be deployed in the
RCT (Phase 3). Additional features and functionality of PAMS iden-
tified to be potentially deployed in future phases include flexible
rules for triggering messages, a smart chatbot, an improved provider
dashboard, and increasing capacity for individual message content
and delivery personalization.
Further future development includes a more intelligent approach
utilizing machine learning (ML) for providing the smart-driven se-
lection criterion for messages to dynamically address patients’ needs
and find better engagement results is also planned for development
during Phase 3.41–43 The goal for PAMS 2.0 is to incorporate ML to
select the messages that positively impacted some patients and iden-
tify the common characteristic to extend findings to new patients.
The ML classifier is planned to be trained with features such as mes-
sages score given by patients from 1 to 5 where 5 represent the high-
est positive feedback, message impact in the patient engagement
represented by the engagement trend followed by the text, and data
patient demographics data (legal sex, race, employment status, age).
Data related to message scores will be used for the ML classifier and
are currently being collected as part of PAMS 1.0. Finally, Phase 2
and 3 will focus on the implementation of the PAMS intervention,
with a focus on implementation outcomes (eg, acceptability, sustain-
ability, cost),44 as well as access, equity, and inclusion.

Technical challenges and limitations
During the development of PAMS, some technical difficulties and
limitations were encountered. High data security standards were
enforced, which introduced challenges with some AWS features and
interoperability across platforms. Some inbound requests and data
transfers were blocked by the firewall as an attempt to secure data,
challenging the Twilio-AWS connection for the reception of the in-

coming messages and the AWS-Epic integration for the secure de-
ployment of the provider dashboard; protected health information
(PHI) data were also carefully handle to overcome enforced AWS se-
curity standards such as the restriction of storing sensitive data on
dynamo databases or s3 buckets; and times delays in updating builds
that are dependent on third parties such as with Epic. Our develop-
ment team worked diligently to overcome these challenges and pre-
sent alternative solutions to achieve the desired results while
maintaining data integrity such as allowing AWS to securely check
external API instead of allowing inbound call, securing PHI data in
RedCap, and actively working with third party teams. PAMS is the
result of an ongoing study aiming to design a platform that
addresses user feedback and learnings, frequent changes challenged
the efficiency of our small development team, but PAMS modular
design facilitated the delivery of the system on time.

CONCLUSION

PAMS is an innovative message platform developed using UCD and
agile methodologies to provide a user-friendly and effective mecha-
nism to address challenges with engaging patients with a digital dia-
betes prevention platform and healthy behavior change. Integrating
evidence-based behavior change theories for the prevention of dis-
ease with UCD strategies and novel digital technology development
systems can facilitate the development of dynamic, usable, and effec-
tive digital health tools. PAMS is built to be applicable to a variety
of dDPP platforms and EHR partners, and meets with strict data se-
curity and PHI standards, and has potential applications to a
broader spectrum of healthcare conditions and technology interven-
tions. The design of PAMS encourages scalability of the system and
the easy integration of further modules and iterations as part of on-
going research, which allows for continued iteration and innovation
with an eye toward maximizing effectiveness and use while minimiz-
ing disruptions to patient experience or care. Future versions of
PAMS will involve the inclusion of ML and refined features of
PAMS 1.0, as well as more general research to explore continuous
personalization of the patient experience, its integration with other
digital health tools, and its impact on patient outcomes.