ORIGINAL ARTICLE

Design of a novel wearable system for healthcare applications:
applying the user-centred design approach to SensHand device

Erika Rovini1,2
· Guenda Galperti2 · Lucrezia Lorenzon2,3
· Lorenzo Radi2 · Laura Fiorini1,2
·
Matteo Cianchetti2,3
· Filippo Cavallo1,2

Received: 13 May 2022 / Accepted: 18 November 2023 / Published online: 14 December 2023
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag France SAS, part of Springer Nature 2023

2 Materials and methods

The multistep co-creation process applied in this work is
reported in Fig. 2 and detailed in the following paragraphs.

2.1 SensHand wearable device

SensHand is a wearable inertial device designed and devel-
oped by the Assistive BioRobotics Lab (Scuola Superiore
Sant’Anna, Italy) for acquiring and analysing motor data
from upper limbs. The device is composed of four sensing
units: the coordinator unit, included in plastic ABS pack-
aging, is placed on the wrist, while the other units are
placed on the thumb, index, and middle ﬁngers. The sen-
sor boards of the ﬁnger’s units are included in an epoxy
(E-30, Prochima) and inserted in silicone ﬁnger thimbles
(Plastil gel silicone rubber 25) to be worn on the ﬁngers’

594

Fig. 2 The applied multi-step
co-creation process for design,
testing, evaluation, and
reﬁnement of SensHand in this
work

tip. Data synchronization among units are ensured by the
CAN-bus standard through customized spiral cables. Each
unit is equipped with a microcontroller (STM32F103RE
ARM®Cortex™-M3 32-bit, STMicroelectronics, Italy) and
an inertial measurement unit (IMU) iNEMO-M1 (STMicro-
electronics, Italy). The coordinator unit has also a Blue-
tooth module (SPBT2632C1A V3.0, STMicroelectronics,
Italy) for wireless data transmission to a docking station,
and a rechargeable LiPo battery for the system supply
(Fig. 3). SensHand was tested in hospital settings with more

than 400 users during previous studies approved by ethi-
cal committees: “Design and implementation of a sensory
motion analysis platform” (Massa, Italy, n°1148/12.10.10),
and CASANOVA PD-study (Area Vasta Nord Ovest, Italy,
n°13055/09.10.18), within the DAPHNE project (Tuscany
Region, J52I16000170002). SensHand acquired data for PD
motor symptoms assessment. The results demonstrated the
high accuracy of the device in identifying the motor signs that
characterize the disease [42], the motor decline in PD patients
due to disease progression [43], and the motor response to
pharmacological treatment in early diagnosis [44].

595

Fig. 3 SensHand (v.0) wearable device: a SensHand worn; b detail on the thimbles case for the ﬁngers sensor unit; c detail of ABS packaging of
the wrist unit; d detail on the ﬁnger sensor unit; e set of proposed thimbles sizes

In Olimpia project (Ricerca Salute 2018, Tuscany Region,
J44I20000760009), an upgrade of SensHand is ongoing
with customized electronics boards (9-axis IMU LSM9DS1,
STMicroelectronics, Italy) to reduce size and weight of the
device. Furthermore, the Bluetooth Rigado BMD-350 was
selected to improve connectivity while reducing power con-
sumption. Accordingly, a new design of the package is also
required, which is the scope of this work as detailed in the
next sections.

2.2 Workshops sessions for SensHand refinement

Two virtual workshops were organized between Febru-
ary and March 2021 by the engineers of the Assistive
BioRobotics Lab involving 6 Italian neurologists. Two engi-
neers led the workshop sessions facilitating the discussions,
while other two were in charge of noting. These neurolo-
gists had directly used SensHand v.0 in hospitals during the
abovementioned studies. The use of a Google Presentation®
with shared virtual posters and posts-it favoured the active
participation from the clinicians. Indeed, they were asked to
report their experience with the prototype focusing on the
wearability and usability aspects highlighting the tops and
ﬂops as well as to suggest any improvements, from the hard-
ware to the data visualization. Results were prioritized by

neurologists in a matrix according to urgency and impor-
tance and ranked accordingly. On that base, in this paper, we
deal with the improvement of the device hardware, primarily
focusing on the physical ergonomics factors related to human
anatomic, anthropometric, and biomechanical characteristics
[45].

2.3 The first prototyping process

SensHand v.1 was realized by implementing the main hard-
ware requirements derived from the co-creation sessions. A
new ring-shaped solution for ﬁxing the ﬁnger sensor units on
the distal phalanxes in replacement of the thimbles was con-
ceived, and the wearability of the wrist unit was improved.
Preliminary trials were performed to select the most appro-
priate stiffness and hardness of the material to be employed
in the new design. The tested elastomeric materials are pro-
duced by Smooth-On Inc. and belong to the series Ecoﬂex,
Dragon Skin and Smooth-Sil. Finally, the Smooth-Sil 950
(SS950) was selected for its high stiffness, while the Dragon
Skin 10 (DS10) was preferred for its elasticity. SS950 was
used for realizing the full MOD-1 prototype (Fig. 4). Then,
we designed MOD-2 and MOD-3 that used SS950 in the
fabrication of both the ring structure and the upper-case lodg-
ing used to accommodate the sensor unit. Additionally, they

596

Fig. 4 The ring designed to be
worn on the distal phalanges of
the thumb and the foreﬁnger for
placing the sensor units able to
acquire the ﬁngers motion:
MOD-1 made of SS950; MOD-2
made of SS950 with the SS1DS1
insert; MOD-3 made of SS950
with the SS1DS3 insert. The
upper-case lodging allows the ﬁt
of the sensor unit

included an insert in the lower part of the ring, correspond-
ing to 25% of its circumference. The insert was made of a
mixture of SS950 and DS10 in proportion 1:1 (named here
SS1DS1) for MOD-2, and 1:3 (named here SS1DS3) for
MOD-3, respectively. This novel design aims at maximizing
the wearability and ﬂexibility of the ring solution as much as
possible to the different anatomical dimensions of people’s
hands. Indeed, the mixture of two materials allows both a
ﬁne-tuning of the material properties [46] and guarantees a
good integration between the insert and the ring structure.
The fabrication technique is simple casting: SS950 for
the case and the ring structure, and SS1DS1 or SS1DS3 for
the insert. For each ring size, a three-part mold (Fig. 5) was
designed in SolidWorks (Dassault Systèmes SE, France) and
then 3D printed in ABS (Zortax M200, Olsztyn, Poland). To
manufacture the MOD-1 (Fig. 5, ﬁrst row), the SS950 mate-
rial was poured into the mold obtained from the assembly of
parts 1 and 2. Then, part 3 was inserted. After curing, the ring
is extracted from the mold. To create the insert part (Fig. 5,
second row) the ring was manually cut, removing 25% of
the circumference. The prototype was then inserted again
in the assembly of parts 1 and 2, and the described casting
procedure was repeated, by pouring a mixture of SS950 and
DS10.
Four different ring sizes (XS, S, M and L) were designed
for each model. As for the ring thickness, a dimension of
1.5 mm was selected as a tradeoff between wearability,
robustness, and feasibility from a fabrication point of view
(Supplementary Materials, Sect. 3).
Moreover, the electronic boards of the ﬁnger units were
included in the material SS950, instead of the hard epoxy,
creating silicon sensor units (Fig. 9d). This prevents direct

contact between the electronics and the user, while allowing
a secure wedging of the sensor unit in the ring case (Sup-
plementary Materials, Sect. 3). As regards the wrist unit, a
new smaller case was designed and 3D printed in ABS with
Zortax M200; it was slightly concave in the area that goes in
contact with the user’s wrist, to enhance the comfort while
wearing it.

2.4 The first evaluation loop

To assess the acceptability of the solution and its possible
employmentinclinicalapplications,SensHandv.1wastested
both as regards the mechanical properties of the constituting
materials and for collecting the users’ feedback in terms of
wearability and user experience.

2.4.1 Mechanical testing

Firstly, the materials employed in the ring fabrication were
mechanically characterized using the Universal Testing
Machine (Instron, Norwood, MA, US). Three standard dog-
bone samples [47] for each of SS950, DS10, SS1DS1, and
SS1DS3 materials were tested to characterize their tensile
properties and identify the differences in Young’s Modulus.
Cyclic tensile tests over ﬁve cycles were performed, applying
a maximum strain of 100% at 100 mm/min. The ﬁrst cycle
was discarded from the data analysis to account for Mullin’s
effect [48], and the stress–strain data were averaged over the
remaining four cycles.
In addition, the response of the ring to cyclic solicitations
was investigated with a cyclic tensile test over 3 samples for
each model (MOD-1, MOD-2, and MOD-3). We aimed at

597

Fig. 5 A graphical representation of the steps followed for the ring fabri-
cation. On the ﬁrst row, the procedure to obtain the ring made of SS950,
MOD-1. On the second row, the procedure to add to the previous proto-
type the insert composed of a mixture of DS10 and SS950, in different
proportions, to obtain the MOD-2 and MOD-3

Fig. 6 a, b Set-up for cyclic
tensile tests with the ring ﬁxed
between the clamps of the
Universal Testing Machine;
c One XS ring, cut to be tested

598

identifying the weakest points of the rings and the potential
most common failure modes. The ring case was longitudi-
nally cut and ﬁxed between the clamps (Fig. 6). A cyclic
tensile test was performed over a maximum of 1000 cycles,
applying a 50% strain at 2000 mm/min.

2.4.2 Users’ testing

ThirtypeopleamongtheresearchersoftheBioRoboticsInsti-
tute (Scuola Superiore Sant’Anna, Pisa), were recruited for
the ﬁrst evaluation session (Table 1).
Before starting the data collection, all participants were
informed that their participation was based fully on their free
consent and that the collected data would be aggregated and
analyzed exclusively for scientiﬁc purposes. If they agreed,
they could continue with the study; otherwise, they could
have withdrawn from the study without any consequences.
The UCD approach was applied during the evaluation ses-
sion to point out the user’s needs and feedback. The ring
units of the prototyped SensHand v.1, properly sanitized,
were placed on a table, and differentiated for size and model.
Participants were asked to wear on their own the rings on the
distal phalanx of the index and thumb of the dominant hand.
They had to select and motivate the choice of the best option
in terms of both size and model. The only constraint was to
choose the same model for both ﬁngers.
The evaluation session included interviews and question-
naires. The interview protocol (Supplementary Materials,
Sect. 1) lasted 15 min and mainly investigated users’ per-
spectives about wearability and comfort as well as collected
design requirements suggestions. Two online questionnaires
(Supplementary materials, Sect. 2), provided through the
Google Form platform and GDPR compliant, were admin-
istered to the users. The wearability questionnaire (WQ),
adapted from Francés-Morcillo et al. [49], consisted of 16
items to be evaluated on a 5-point Likert-scale and clustered
into 10 parameters: shape, breathability, hygiene, size, obtru-
siveness, weight, resistance, harm, anxiety, long-term use. In
this paper, median and interquartile range (IQR) were com-
puted for each parameter for each group of participants.
Then, participants were asked to complete the attrac-
tiveness and the novelty sub-scales of the User Experience
Questionnaire (UEQ) [50]. The attractiveness sub-scale mea-
sures the overall impression of the product with 6 items, and
it is a pure valence dimension. Each item is represented by
two terms with opposite meanings and scaled from 1 (most
negative) to 5 (most positive). In this study, we excluded
two items (i.e., attractive/unattractive; friendly/unfriendly)
as they were not applicable. The novelty sub-scale provides
a score, based on 4 items, about the innovativeness and cre-
ativeness of the product and evaluates whether it meets the
interests of the users. Median and IQR values were computed
for each subscale for each group of subjects. The reliability

of both questionnaires was assessed by Cronbach’s Alpha
(α); values higher than 0.70 were deemed reliable [51].

2.5 The second prototyping process

All data collected during the ﬁrst evaluation loop led us
toward the realization of the prototype v.2. We added one
more size and rescaled over ﬁve sizes, in the range of internal
diameters previously selected. Moreover, a very soft silicone
buffer (Ecoﬂex 00–20) was placed between the coordina-
tor unit case and the user’s wrist to increase comfortability
(Fig. 9c) (Supplementary Materials, Sect. 3).

2.6 Second and third evaluation loops

The second round of testing was set up with SensHand v.2
to ﬁnally select the best solution.

2.6.1 Mechanical testing

Tensile and cyclic tests were made to investigate poten-
tial causes of mechanical weakness and failure for the ring
models with the inserts. Rectangular-shape samples (length
60 mm, width 8 mm and thickness of 1.5 mm, Supplemen-
tary Materials, Sect. 4) were tested by applying a 50% strain
at a 2000 mm/min, over 500 cycles at the Universal Test-
ing Machine (Instron, Norwood, MA, US). The edges of the
sample are made with SS950, while the central part (length
13 mm, as in size M) reproduces the insert of the ring. Five
samples for each MOD-2 and MOD-3 were tested.

2.6.2 Users’ testing

The participants of the ﬁrst session were called back to exper-
iment SensHand v.2. The second round of testing followed
the same methodology as the previous loop (see Sect. 2.4.2).
The aim was to understand if prototype v.2 overcame draw-
backs highlighted during the ﬁrst evaluation round and if
users were satisﬁed by the reﬁnements. Users were free to
discuss the new design and to point out any remark that might
improve the device. Finally, another unbiased group consist-
ing of 10 naïve users was involved (Table 1) as a validation
group in a third evaluation loop to test the ﬁnal developed
SensHand v.2 (Fig. 9). The aim was to investigate if the ﬁnal
prototype is conﬁrmed by a new group that has not been
included in the co-design process. A Wilcoxon signed-rank
test was applied to investigate whether signiﬁcant differences
in questionnaire results were carried out between evaluation
loops I and II, while a Mann Whitney test was used for com-
paring the groups of the second and third loops. A p-value <
0.05 was considered signiﬁcant.

599

Table 1 Participants involved in the co-creation sessions at the BioRobotics Institute; I round refers to the ﬁrst evaluation loop, II round regards the
retested group, III round is the validation group

I loop (evaluation) (n 
30)
II loop (evaluation) (n 
29)
III loop (validation) (n 
10)

Demographics

Male sex, n (%)
18 (60)
18 (62.1)
6 (60)

Age, interval (%)
25–29 (83.3)
25–29 (82.8)
25–29 (70)

30–34 (16.7)
30–34 (17.2)
30–34 (30)

Experience with previous versions of SensHand
(%)
30
100
0

Experience with wearables (%)
50
50
70

Table 2 Results from the co-creation workshop sessions and improvements for prototype v.1

Features
Issues
Design requirements
Improvements for prototype v.1

Weight
The ﬁnger stalls inertia can cause
brakes or bounces during the
movements

The device should be light to avoid
motion artefacts
The thimbles are replaced with
ring-shaped units using light soft
materials

Size
The 3 designed sizes (S, M, L) of the
ﬁnger stalls do not ﬁt all the
patients’ ﬁngers. The patients did
not ﬁnd their thimbles size,
experiencing discomfort, either
due to tight-ﬁtting or loose thimble

The device should comply with the
anatomical size of the users’ ﬁngers
as much as possible

Four different ring sizes, i.e., XS, S,
M and L, whose internal diameters
are 12, 15, 18 and 21 mm,
respectively are designed. An
insert in the lower part of the ring
(using soft materials in different
combinations with increasing
elasticity) is designed to improve
the wearability and best conform
to the users’ ﬁngers. We realized
three models named MOD-1,
MOD-2, and MOD-3 (Fig. 4,
Sect. 2.3)

Encumbrance
The device appeared quite
cumbersome in performing some
tasks (e.g., repetitive hand
opening/closing) that are included
in the clinical evaluation scale for
motor assessment

The device should be easy to avoid
hindrance during motor tasks
The middle ﬁnger unit was removed.
The patient ﬁngertips were left
uncovered to allow a more natural
sensing experience while wearing
the device

Ergonomics/shape
The wrist unit did not ﬁt the shape of
the forearm and elicited pain for
long-term use
The ﬁnger unit did not ﬁt the shape
of the nail
The hard epoxy used to include the
electronic boards of the ﬁnger unit
elicited pain to the ﬁngers for
long-term use

The wrist unit should be lighter and
more comfortable when the band is
ﬁxed
The shape of the ﬁnger’s unit should
be slightly concave in the lower part
(on the nail)
The electronic boards of the ﬁnger
units included in an epoxy cause
complaint to the ﬁngers during the
prolonged use of the device

The wrist unit has a slight concave
shape to better ﬁt the wrist and it is
smaller in size and weight than the
previous prototype
The new ring-shaped units are
concave on the nail
The electronic boards of the ﬁnger
units are included in a stiff silicone
case to avoid complaints in using
them while allowing the stable
wedge of the sensor unit inside the
ring case

600

3 Results

3.1 Co-creation workshops: feedback
from neurologists

The 6 involved neurologists (N01-N06) reported about their
experience on the ﬁeld with SensHand providing also feed-
back from the patients focusing on wearability, usability and
intention of use. Although the results underline a positive
response from both neurologists and their patients (“Re-
ceived feedback from patients that had tested the device was
always positive”—N04; “Nobody was annoyed to use the
device”—N05; “The system has been deﬁned ergonomics”-
N06), some limitations were highlighted from the partic-
ipants. A summary of the requirements aroused from the
workshopsandplannedimprovementstoovercomethedraw-
backs is reported in Table 2.

3.2 Prototype v.1 and results from the first
evaluation loop

Based on the requirements reported in Table 2, SensHand v.1
was realized as detailed in Sect. 2.3.

3.2.1 Mechanical testing: characterization of the materials

The mechanical characterization of SS1DS1 and SS1DS3
showed they have intermediate stiffness characteristics com-
pared to the standard silicones provided by the manufacturer
(SS950 and DS10) (Fig. 7a). The Young’s modulus was cal-
culated in the ﬁrst linear part of each loading curve, and it
resulted 1.08 MPa for the SS950, 0.49 MPa for the SS1DS1,
0.29 MPa for the SS1DS3 and 0.15 MPa for the DS10.

3.2.2 Mechanical testing: tensile tests on rings

The tensile and cyclic tests demonstrated the ability of MOD-
2 and MOD-3 to resist to repetitive solicitations. An example
of the results obtained on the size M rings is reported in
Fig. 7b. While the MOD-1 broke before reaching 100 cycles,
MOD-2 and MOD-3 exceeded 500 cycles, particularly the
latter completed the cyclic test reaching 1000 cycles, while
MOD-2 broke at the 712th cycle. Complete results are in
Supplementary Materials, Sect. 4.
3.2.3 Users’ testing: ﬁrst evaluation

Twenty-four rings, according to the size (XS, S, M, L) and the
model (MOD-1, MOD-2, MOD-3), were presented. Those
who had already experienced SensHand v.0, reported pos-
itive feedback and noticeable improvements regarding the
wearability of the rings compared to the previous thimbles.
The users mostly conﬁrmed the high wearability offered by
this device. Indeed, 90% of them reported that they easily

wore the rings, and none had problems taking off the device.
Three users (10%) had some difﬁculties in wearing the rings
due to the size or refer fear of breaking the rings while wear-
ing them. In this regard, two rings out of 24 were broken due
to an overstretching near the insert. Most of the users (86.7%)
hadnoissues withthedeviceabout comfortability, whileonly
4 subjects referred discomfort concerning size, breathability,
or sweat-related issues. Considering the weight, 76.7% of
the users found the rings lightweight, 13.3% would prefer a
lighter solution, however, this did not inﬂuence the overall
experience, and 10% suggested that rings are lightweight, but
they might be cumbersome when performing daily move-
ments. In this regard, simple motor tasks proposed to the
subjects, such as repetitive opening/closing of the hand or
pronosupination, highlighted three main criticisms: (i) size
of the rings: regarding the possibility to lose the ring units
when they are too large; (ii) discomfort due to the wrist unit:
it is heavy and might hurt the wrist; (iii) the cables between
the wrist and the ﬁngers’ units: they can hamper the move-
ments and hurt the proximal phalanx if they are too tight,
while in other cases they are too loose and oscillate. A sum-
mary of feedback from the ﬁrst evaluation loop and planned
improvements for prototype v.2 is reported in Table 3.
As for the WQ, the scale consistency evaluated through
Cronbach’s alpha was not sufﬁcient (α  0.52). Neverthe-
less, the rings were overall positively perceived, by ﬁtting
the anatomy of the ﬁnger (Table 4, I loop). Concerning the
user experience questionnaire (UEQ), Cronbach’s alpha was
computed for the two subscales separately obtaining α 
0.68 for the attractiveness and α  0.85 for the novelty. Both
subscales were positively evaluated by the users (Table 4).
60% of the participants chose the MOD-3 ring (Fig. 8a)
as it is the most comfortable, it is soft, and it adapts well to
the ﬁnger. The 26.7% preferred the MOD-2 ring as the best
trade-off between being too soft and too tight. Finally, only
13.3% of the users selected the MOD-1 ring because they
preferred a stiff interface.

3.3 Prototype v.2 and results from second and third
evaluation loops

To address the criticisms aroused during the ﬁrst evaluation
loop, SensHand v.2 was designed and developed according to
the fabrication processes detailed in Sect. 2.5 and the users’
feedback (Table 3), thus proceeding with the MOD-2 and
MOD-3 options only.

3.3.1 Mechanical testing: tensile test on samples

The results of the cyclic tensile tests on samples conﬁrmed
that the insert materials (SS1DS1 and SS1DS3) are compat-
ible with the material of the ring structure (SS950) and the
interfaces between them are stable. Indeed, none of the tested

601

Fig. 7 a Results of the tensile tests on the four materials employed in the
prototype: Dragon Skin 10 (DS10), Smooth-Sil 950 (SS950), and their
combinations in proportion 1:1 (SS1DS1) and 1:3 (SS1DS3); b Force-
strain results for the ring size M, in MOD-1, MOD-2 and MOD-3. The

ﬁrst ten cycles are full lines, while the last ten cycles before rupture are
dashed

Table 3 Results from the I evaluation loop and improvements for prototype v.2

Features
Verbatims
Design requirements
Improvements for prototype v.2

Size
“I was not able to ﬁnd my size, I
would prefer an intermediate size
between the M and S, as well as
between the XS and S “—C29
“During the pronosupination
movement, I had the feeling of
losing the rings. Consequently, I
modulate the movement”—C25
“I would not wear the system more
than 30 min, because the rings are
too tight-ﬁtting”—C1

The rings should ﬁt the anatomical
dimensions of all users’ ﬁngers to
avoid slipping and enable natural
movements, but also, they
shouldn’t be too tight and hurt

Addition of one more size and
rescale over ﬁve sizes in the range
of internal diameters previously
selected. The new ring sizes, named
XS, S, M, L and XL, have an
internal diameter of 12, 14, 16.5, 19
and 21 mm, respectively (Fig. 9e)

Wearability/shape
“The ring is uncomfortable, it is too
stiff and does not ﬁll well, I feel it
as unnatural (MOD-1)”—C25
“The ring is ergonomic and adapts
well to the ﬁnger (MOD-2) “—C23
“The ring is very soft, it is very
comfortable and natural
(MOD-3)”—C2

The rings should adapt and conform
to the user’s ﬁnger to improve
comfort and wearability

MOD-1 ring can be discarded
because it exhibited both
inadequate mechanical behaviour
(i.e., all the samples went over
during the cycling tensile tests) and
poor end-user satisfaction (chosen
only by 13.3% of users Fig. 8a)

Ergonomics/comfort
“The case at the wrist is
uncomfortable and should be of the
same material as the rings”—C2

The case on the wrist should be
softer, more compliant and
conform to the anatomy of the
wrist

To enhance the comfort of the wrist
unit: we added a soft silicon buffer
with Ecoﬂex under the lower
concave part of the wrist case unit
to avoid the rigid plastic case being
in direct contact with the forearm
(Fig. 9c)

602

Table 4 Results of questionnaires from the I, II, and III loops

Questionnaire
Parameter
I loop
II loop
III loop

Median (IQR)
Median (IQR)
Median (IQR)

WQ
Shape
4.63 (0.50)
4.50 (0.50)
4.50 (0.75)

Breathability
3.50 (1.50)
4.00 (1.00)
3.25 (1.00)

Hygiene
5.00 (0.00)
5.00 (1.00)
5.00 (0.00)

Size
4.00 (1.00)
4.00 (1.13)
4.00 (0.50)

Obtrusiveness
4.50 (1.00)
4.50 (0.50)
4.00 (0.50)

Weight
4.50 (1.00)
4.00 (1.00)
4.00 (2.00)

Resistance
5.00 (0.00)
5.00 (1.00)
4.50 (1.00)

Harm
5.00 (0.00)
5.00 (1.00)
4.00 (1.00)

Anxiety
5.00 (0.00)
5.00 (0.00)
5.00 (0.00)

Long-term use
4.00 (2.00)
4.00 (2.00)
3.50 (2.00)

UEQ
Attractiveness
3.75 (0.75)
4.00 (0.56)
4.25 (0.50)

Novelty
4.00 (0.75)
4.00 (0.75)
4.13 (0.25)

The 10 parameters from the WQ and the subscales attractiveness and novelty from the UEQ are reported as median values and interquartile range
(IQR)

samples showed signiﬁcant changes in the mechanical prop-
erties or signs of degradation or rupture at the interface after
500 cycles (Supplementary Materials, Sect. 4).

3.3.2 Users’ testing: second evaluation

Twenty-nine users participated in the second evaluation loop
(Table 1), while a person dropped-out because of the Covid-
19 infection. Twenty rings, i.e. one pair for each combination
of size (XS, S, M, L, XL) and model (MOD-2, MOD-3),
were presented. During the interviews, most of the subjects
reported an overall improvement in their experience with the
device. They appreciated the presence of the soft interface
below the wrist unit, which increased its comfort, especially
during the movements. Only 2 users reported some difﬁcul-
ties in wearing the rings due to the size and in 2 cases, the ring
broke at the interface, due to an overstretching of the device
while wearing it. All the others were satisﬁed with the new
range of ring sizes. The 4 users that had chosen the MOD-1
during the ﬁrst round were still fulﬁlled: 3 of them chose the
MOD-2, and one preferred the MOD-3. The drop-out user
had previously chosen MOD-3. Overall, 62.1% of the group
selected the MOD-3 (Fig. 8b), preferring more natural, softer
and ﬂexible rings that adapt well to the ﬁngers. The remain-
ing 37.9% opted for the MOD-2, as they looked for more
stable and rougher rings.
The wires connecting the wrist unit to the ﬁngers’ units
remain the main bottleneck because in some cases they ham-
per and constrain natural movements. Finally, 20% of the
users still would not wear the device for one hour or more,
even if they could use it in a dedicated trial lasting 15–20 min.

Fig. 8 Choice of ring prototype model (MOD-1, MOD-2, MOD-3)
among all the users during the ﬁrst (a) and the second (b) evaluation
loops

The scale consistency of the questionnaires for this session
was acceptable for both the WQ (α  0.73) and the UEQ
(attractiveness: α  0.79; novelty: α  0.78). The results of
the WQ mostly conﬁrmed those obtained in the I loop with
a positive enhancement concerning breathability and a slight
decrease in weight and shape, despite good insights from the
interviews. In terms of user experience, users increased the
sense of attractiveness, while conﬁrming the level of novelty
of the solution (Table 4, loop II). However, no signiﬁcant
differences were found in the Wilcoxon test for the UEQ
items between the ﬁrst and second evaluation loops.

3.3.3 Users’ testing: ﬁnal validation

The 10 naïve users, who had not ever tested the SensHand
device before, provided generally positive feedback and con-
ﬁrmed their preference for the MOD-3, selected as the best ﬁt

603

Fig. 9 The ﬁnal developed
prototype: a SensHand worn;
b detail on the ring-shaped case
for the ﬁngers sensor unit;
c detail of the soft buffer under
the wrist case; d detail on the
ﬁnger sensor unit; e ﬁnal set of
proposed ring sizes

from 8 out of 10 subjects. MOD-3 is preferred for the high-
est comfort and softness because the ring perfectly adapts
to the ﬁnger without slipping off (Fig. 9). Notably, the only
user who would refuse to wear the device for more than one
hour because of excessive ﬁnger compression and difﬁculty
in performing natural movements after some time was one
of those who chose the MOD-2. As concerns the question-
naires, the consistency of the WQ was good (α  0.87), as
well as the attractiveness (α  0.83) and the novelty (α 
0.81) from the UEQ. Remarkably, both attractiveness and
novelty received higher scores than during the previous loops
(Table 4, loop III). Moreover, users appreciated the shape and
the size. Also, the obtrusiveness and the weight parameters
received good scores. Overall, they mainly conﬁrmed the
results of the previous evaluation loops both for wearability
and user experience. No signiﬁcant differences were found
in the Mann–Whitney test between the loops II and III.

4 Discussion

In this paper, we reported the co-design process that allowed
ustoreﬁneawearabledevice,namedSensHanddevelopedby
the Assistive BioRobotics Lab (Scuola Superiore Sant’Anna,
Pisa, Italy), for the ﬁne motion analysis of upper limb move-
ments in clinical applications. This study aimed at going
beyond the state of the art by applying a UCD approach
for developing and reﬁning a technological solution to be
used in clinical practice for objectifying the motor symptoms

evaluation in neurodegenerative disorders (e.g., Parkinson’s
disease). Based on the UCD approach, this paper presents a
guideline for the design of speciﬁc wearable hand systems,
considering both the mechanical properties that the materials
must satisfy and the user’s perspective, in terms of weara-
bility and user experience. The involvement of neurologists
that already tested in clinical settings a preliminary proto-
type through co-creation workshops represents the starting
point of the process. Indeed, they provided useful feedback
from the ﬁeld to improve the prototype, ensuring a multi-
disciplinary approach that is a key point when designing
medical devices to bridge the gap between engineers and
clinicians. This work takes into consideration ergonomics
aspects, focusing on physical ergonomics factors, putting
most of the attention to the anatomical, biomechanical, and
anthropometric human requirements.
Beyond the solutions found in the state of the art, mostly
dedicated to the design and development of digital platforms
[23, 25] or wearable sensors for wrists and trunk [21, 24,
39] to support care management of people with PD, this
research study proposes to design and prototype a novel
wearable system able to catch the motion from the upper
limbs, including the ﬁne movements of the ﬁngers. The need
to develop such a solution is driven by a clinical challenge
related to improve the motor assessment of patients during
the neurological examination for Parkinson’s disease evalua-
tion. In particular, in this study, the novelty relies on the new
proposed design for the rings and the materials adopted for

604

fabrication. The design of the solution proposed is innova-
tive because meets the problem to place the sensors on the
ﬁngers, in particular on the distal phalanxes that is a require-
ment from the neurologists to better observe and quantify the
motorcapabilitiesoftheParkinson’sdiseasepatients.Indeed,
most of the devices currently available on the literature and
on the market include device placed on the wrist and none is
able to measure the movement of the ﬁngers. Additionally, to
improve the ﬂexibility of the ring in order to accomplish the
adaptability of the solution on different anatomical shapes
and sizes of the users’ ﬁngers, novel mixed materials were
realized, characterized and tested to ensure their mechanical
properties (including under tensile stress) are appropriate for
this wearable solution.
As for SensHand, the sensor units represent the most
critical part. Indeed, most of the efforts spent during the
design and development process are related to the realiza-
tion of the rings that must include the sensor units to record
information from the ﬁngers. The placement on the distal
phalanx, indeed, is quite unconventional for a ring, but it
is required by neurologists to evaluate speciﬁc motor tasks
that usually are assessed during neurological examinations
(e.g., thumb-foreﬁnger tapping, alternate movements of the
hands). Differently from a traditional placement of the rings
(i.e., on the proximal phalanx), the authors must consider
that they need to be sufﬁciently adherent to the ﬁnger por-
tion without slipping off and without causing misalignment
between the electronic sensor and the case. On the other hand,
the anchorage must be such that it does not cause pain and
appears comfortable to the user. For this reason, in the present
work, the authors also worked hard to ﬁnd suitable sizes and
materialsforsuchrings.Additionally,afurtherexpedientwas
devised,namely,tomakeaportionofthering(i.e.,theportion
thatispositionedatthedistalﬁngertip)usingadifferentmate-
rial, realized from the combination of other two, to make the
solution even more adaptable and ergonomic. The mechani-
cal tests allowed for characterizing the employed materials,
including the two novel mixed ones (SS1DS1 and SS1DS3)
developed to realize the insert of the rings (in MOD-2 and
MOD-3). A mixture of SS950 and DS10 was selected for the
insert as the best trade-off between the stiffness of SS950, the
elasticity of DS10, and the integrability with the rest of the
ring [46]. While the upper-case and the ring part itself must
be ﬂexible yet capable of maintaining the shape to guarantee
the sensor stability during the movements, the insert must
be elastic and easily deformable, to best adapt and conform
to the users’ ﬁngers. In addition, the insert material must
be chemically compatible with the ring material, to ensure
a correct integration and limit the chances of a break at the
interface.Duringthecyclictestsonrings,weappliedtoallthe
samples a 50% strain considering the initial length between
the clamps (Fig. 6). However, each model was subjected to
an actual different local strain, depending on the stiffness of

the insert material. In MOD-2 and MOD-3, the elasticity of
the insert part implied an outstretching of that portion with
respecttotherestoftheringandboththemodelscompletedat
least 500 cycles. Conversely, MOD-1, that do not present the
insert, did not result able to resist repetitive solicitations, and
all the samples broke. Therefore, the elasticity of the insert
part is needed to also minimize the chances of breaking. Nev-
ertheless, during the user evaluation loops, 4 out of 44 rings
broke down. We aimed at investigating the causes of this
accident during the second loop of mechanical tests. Since
none of the tested samples showed signiﬁcant changes in the
mechanical properties or signs of degradation at the interface
between the insert and the rest of the sample after 500 cycles
of tensile test, we can reasonably hypothesize that the cause
of the failures observed in a few rings after multiple testing
might be the defects introduced during the fabrication phase
of the rings. Indeed, the imperfections introduced by the 3D
printing of the molds with the Fusion Deposition Modeling
(FDM) technique contributed to an increased likelihood of
breakage. This phenomenon is pointed out also by Loepfe
et al. [52], who stated that cracks most frequently occurred
in regions where the 3D printed molds created a step joint
due to the spaghetti-like printing. In the future, using 3D
printers with higher resolution will increase the mechanical
resistance of the prototypes.
As for the users’ evaluation, the iterative process over mul-
tiple loops allowed us to improve the device step by step.
The users participating in the virtual workshops as well as
in the evaluation loops have been directly involved in the
co-design process, becoming active actors in the reﬁnement
of the solution. Their feedback were considered for the next
prototype, and indeed users appreciated the improvements
as highlighted during the interviews. Positive results were
obtained for the wearability parameters as well as for the
user’s experience in terms of attractiveness and novelty with
median values around and above 4 out of 5 during all the
evaluation loops. In particular, the ﬁnal positive evaluation
of the validation group, even if limited in sample size, is a
conﬁrmation that the device is overall promising for future
applications, especially in clinical protocols, where the time
of use is limited.
As for the limitations, the spiral cables connecting the
wrist and ﬁnger units remain the main weakness of the Sen-
sHand. In this direction, we are already working to make the
device fully wireless and modular, making each sensor unit
autonomous. Furthermore, because of restrictions due to the
Covid-19 pandemic, this study presents a strong limitation in
participants’ recruitment. Indeed, we could perform the eval-
uation loops of the study involving only people working in
our university. Actually, it was not possible to organize phys-
ical meetings and involve external participants during the last
two years. Also, Cronbach’s alpha value might be affected by
low sample sizes [53]. However, Cronbach’s alpha was not

605

sufﬁcient during the ﬁrst evaluation loop only. In the next
future, we are planning to directly test the ﬁnal prototype on
patients with Parkinson’s disease to collect their feedback
to validate or further improve the device for clinical appli-
cation collaboratively. Moreover, we want to continue using
the co-design approach to develop and ﬁnalize the other com-
ponents of the system, i.e., the user interfaces for acquiring
motor data and for visualizing the results of the motor perfor-
mance. The cognitive ergonomics factors will be taken under
consideration as well during this further work. For example,
the proper path of execution of the motor tasks will be identi-
ﬁed,toavoiddeteriorationoftheneuromuscularperformance
caused by both muscular and mental fatigue [45]. Moreover,
the interfaces will be designed to minimize the visual fatigue
of the operators and patients that will use them [45]. Clini-
cians and patients that are expected to be the ﬁnal users of
this system for supporting motor symptoms assessments in
neurodegenerative disorders will be included in the study for
ensuring the UCD approach and enhance the real application
of such a system in the clinical practice, increasing the sam-
ple in order to achieve the ﬁnal validation of the prototype,
projecting it to be a product to be certiﬁed and entered in the
market.

5 Conclusion

This study presents a user-centred approach process to reﬁne
SensHand, a wearable device for ﬁne motor analysis of the
upper limbs in clinical applications. The users were actively
involved through virtual workshops and multiple evaluation
loops to collect feedback and implement improvements in
a real co-design process. Mechanical tests were also per-
formed to characterize novel mixed soft materials developed
for this speciﬁc application and guarantee the reliability of
the designed innovative solutions. Based on the outcomes of
the evaluation loops, the major improvements made to the
SensHand device are summarized as follows: we realized
a ring-shaped solution for the ﬁnger unit and the soft sili-
con pad below the wrist unit to increase the wearability; we
identiﬁed 5 different sizes to improve the adaptability to the
anatomical ﬁnger size; we developed an insert in the lower
part of the ring to increase the elasticity and conformability;
we removed the middle ﬁnger unit to lighten the system and
reduce clutter; we included the electronic boards of the ﬁnger
units into the material SS950 to remove the not biocompat-
ible hard epoxy. Further improvements will be investigated
testing the solution with clinicians and patients in the next
studies to favour the use of this system in clinical applica-
tions.