AN INTEGRATED APPROACH TO USER-CENTERED 
DESIGN: MOBILE BRAIN/HEART IMAGING  
IN VIRTUAL REALITY 

ASMAA BARAKAT, HANY AYAD & ZEYAD EL-SAYAD 
Department of Architecture, Faculty of Engineering, Alexandria University, Egypt 

ABSTRACT 
Poor communication between architects and end-users of the built environment has been implicated as 
the main barrier to improving design quality and end-user satisfaction. User-centered design (UCD) is 
an important approach to communication and reaching the end-user affective state. This study aims to 
develop a new integrated approach for achieving an enhanced user-centered design. UCD is a process 
of three stages: understanding end-user needs, creating design solutions, and evaluating designs. The 
new approach is concerned with the built environment’s impact on the user’s affective state in the early 
design stage. The mobile brain/heart imaging technology is used to record users’ electroencephalogram 
(EEG) and heart rate variability (HRV) while they navigate the design proposal in non-immersive 
virtual reality (VR). In this context, the Farsi Lecture Hall in the Faculty of Engineering at Alexandria 
University was selected to be redesigned. The adopted methodology is based on understanding the 
needs of architecture students (end-users) through questionnaires and evidence-based design (EBD). 
Six design proposals were proposed and presented with still images. First, the students were asked to 
rate each proposal on a 5-point Likert scale. Then they were asked to select the best visualization 
technique, and the majority chose the 360-panorama. At last, the students sat in Farsi Hall for 3 minutes 
navigating the best proposal panorama on a full HD laptop screen wearing EEG headband that records 
EEG and HRV. The SAM test and 5-point Likert stress scale were recorded and compared to EEG and 
HRV results. The findings of this study show that there is a significant relationship between SAM 
ratings, EEG, and HRV. Furthermore, 360-panorama is an effective visualization tool for presenting 
design. Finally, involving mobile brain/heart imaging to induce the end-user affective state while 
navigating design proposals in VR could enhance design quality and end-user satisfaction. 
Keywords:  user-centered design (UCD), virtual reality, electroencephalogram (EEG), heart rate 
variability (HRV), stress, relaxation, emotions, valence, visualization, mobile brain/heart imaging. 

1  INTRODUCTION 
In recent years, architects and spatial designers have discovered a common interest in how 
spatial design and the built environment can influence end-user performance and satisfaction. 
This interest reflects the importance of considering end users’ needs and desires in the early 
design stage, as well as the ongoing demand for new approaches to architecture design that 
include the end-user in the design process. For decades, understanding user needs and 
behavior has been regarded as a critical issue that must be considered in product design, 
giving rise to the term “user-centered design” (UCD) [1]. Many terms for UCD have 
emerged, including “user/client-oriented design”, “people-centered design”, “human-
centered design”, “universal design” and “person-centered design” which are defined as a 
cycle that starts from the beginning of any design process to its end [2], [3]. UCD is a process 
of three stages: understanding end-user needs, creating design solutions and evaluating 
designs [4]. 
     However, UCD appears to have developed and established at a slower rate in the field of 
architectural design, particularly in large-scale public buildings such as organizations, 
schools, university buildings, and so on because of two factors. First, designers do not meet 
with end-users early in the design process. Second, architects (and other key players in the 

Eco-Architecture IX  201

 

doi:10.2495/ARC220171

spatial design process such as interior designers, engineers, and others) have traditionally 
been trained in functional and aesthetic conditions, concerning the various factors that 
comprise the building as a construction.  
     In this respect, no clear methodology or framework exists for implementing UCD in 
public buildings that serve a diverse range of end-users. For example, university buildings, 
which designed to accommodate and support several academic activities such as teaching, 
learning, and research. Staff and student productivity, health, and behavior are all affected 
by the effectiveness of the university spaces. So, university buildings have to provide 
appropriate facilities and spaces that meet the needs of their end-users (students and staff) 
[5], [6]. Similarly, lecture halls are an integral part of the physical learning environment in 
the university and can impact the entire learning process, as well as students’ well-being, 
comfort, and productivity. The overall performance of a lecture hall is determined by specific 
parameters [7].  
     This study aims to develop a new integrated approach for achieving enhanced user-
centered design in designing and retrofitting spaces in public buildings to meet the needs of 
end-users. The new integrated approach is concerned with the built environment’s impact on 
the user’s affective state in the early design stage. To accomplish this aim, we employed two 
affective state measures: self-report measures and physiologic measurements (mobile 
brain/heart imaging). Following that, we compared the two measures to determine the best 
method for evaluating design proposals and quantifying end-users affective states during the 
early design stage.  
     The first part of this paper (theoretical study) investigates the evidence-based design of 
the educational rooms in general. Particularly, this paper focuses on four design elements: 
colors, lighting, biophilic design, and furniture. Affective state measures, such as self-report 
and physiologic measurements, are also reviewed. The second part of this paper (empirical 
study) discusses the adopted methodology which is based on proposing six design proposals 
for the Farsi Lecture Hall and asking the students (end-users) to select the optimum proposal. 
At last, the students sat in Farsi Hall for 3 minutes navigating the best proposal panorama on 
a full HD laptop screen wearing a mobile brain/heart headband that records EEG and HRV 
and filled self-report questionnaire. The results of this study depict that there is a significant 
relationship between self-reporting, EEG, and HRV. Furthermore, 360-panorama is an 
effective visualization tool for presenting design. Finally, involving mobile brain/heart 
imaging to induce the end-user affective state while navigating design proposals in VR could 
enhance design quality and end-user satisfaction. 

2  LITERATURE REVIEW 

2.1  Evidence-based design (EBD) 

A long-standing challenge in lecture hall design is how to influence the built environment to 
improve cognitive performance, affective state, relaxation, and stress reduction. As a result, 
the literature on stress and relaxation in the built environment was reviewed. A study was 
conducted to determine the effect of classroom wall colors on student attention. Purple wall 
color conditions were found to have the highest levels of attention, followed by blue, green, 
yellow, and red wall colors [8]. Similarly, according to another study, students preferred the 
colors yellow, dark blue, red, and light blue in that order [9]. Later, a study found that blue 
is the most popular color among students, followed by green, violet, orange, yellow, and red 
[10]. As a result, for our case study, we used light blue for the walls and dark blue and yellow 
for the furniture. 

202  Eco-Architecture IX

 

In terms of lighting, previous research has shown that using the standard lighting setting 
which is characterized by average horizontal illuminance measured at desk level is 300 lx, 
the CCT is 3000–4000 K, and the standard white light can improve concentration and 
alertness, and increasing productivity [11]. Furthermore, higher correlated color temperature 
LED lighting has a perceived positive impact on behaviors and emotional/mood responses, 
with bluer/higher kelvin temperatures improving alertness, focus, and arousal [12]. As a 
result, we chose LED lighting for our case study; the illuminance measured at the desk level 
is 300 lx, the CCT is 3000–4000 K, and the light is standard white.  
     According to the reviewed literature, students benefit from biophilic design in terms of 
cognitive function, emotional/mood responses, relaxation, and stress reduction [13], [14]. 
There are many patterns of biophilic design. We chose two major biophilic concepts for our 
research: nature in space patterns and natural analog patterns. Nature in space can be 
represented in visual connection with nature, plants, and dynamic and diffused lighting. 
Meanwhile, natural analog patterns can be represented in finishes, and objects with 
biomorphic and fractal forms [15].  
     Concerning furnishing, student responses gathered during the event “What makes a 
classroom great?” held as part of the transforming the instructional landscape (TIL) as a 
major classroom redesign at the University of Toronto, revealed that the FT20 chair was 
strongly preferred. The FT20 was popular because of its cushioning and attached desk [16]. 
As a result, we used the FT20 chair for our case study. 

2.2  Affective state evaluation 

The process of measuring a user’s specific emotions is known as affective state evaluation. 
It has been extensively researched, and numerous techniques have been developed. There are 
various types of evaluation; however, for this study, we only used self-report measures and 
physiological measures (mobile brain/heart imaging). 

2.2.1  Self-reporting measure 
Self-reporting necessitates the user verbally or nonverbally reporting his or her feelings. The 
only way to measure the first component of emotion: a person’s subjective feeling, is through 
self-reporting. This study will employ various self-reporting techniques, including the Patient 
Health Questionnaire-9 (PHQ-9), the 5-point Likert scale, and the Self-Assessment Manikin 
(SAM). First, the PHQ-9 is the depression module, in which scores of 5, 10, 15, and 20 
indicated mild, moderate, moderately severe, and severe depression, respectively. Second, 
the 5-point Likert scale was chosen as the primary instrument in all stages of this study 
because it is the simplest and most practical way to measure the strength of satisfaction and 
stress [17]. Finally, we used the SAM which has two dimensions, valence (negative/positive 
emotions) and arousal or activation (low/high), and every emotion can be placed on these 
two-dimension of SAM. For example, “fear” would be an emotion with a high level of 
activation and negative valence, while “calm” would be a low-activation positive-valence 
emotion. Furthermore, high arousal and positive valence are associated with feelings of 
happiness, excitement, and alertness. Conversely, low arousal and positive valence translate 
as calm, relaxed, content, and serene [18].  

2.2.2  Mobile brain/heart imaging (physiological measure) 
The most commonly used physiological measures of affective state are autonomic nervous 
system indicators, such as heart rate variability (HRV), and electrodermal measures, such as 
electroencephalography (EEG). We chose a biometric sensor that can measure EEG and 

Eco-Architecture IX  203

 

HRV after considering several factors. First, we decided to use a simpler single-electrode 
EEG headband because it is easier to manage, smaller, participants are not afraid to use it, 
and it could be compatible with a VR headset if it is used [19]. Second, we plan to use a 
consumer EEG headset that will be widely used in the future, and searchers and architects 
are unconcerned about high costs. Third, we preferred an EEG headset that produces real-
time affective states such as stress and relaxation, so that searchers and architects could use 
it without the need for a programming team or complicated analysis. Furthermore, the 
literature review supported our considerations by revealing that low-cost EEG headbands can 
be used to detect emotion in virtual reality [20], [21].  
     For our experiment, we chose the Flowtime Biosensing Headband which measures EEG 
and HRV. The output raw data from the Flowtime headband includes EEG absolute 
brainwave rhythm (dB) and power ratios (alpha α, beta β, delta δ, Theta θ, Gamma γ), heart 
rate variability (HRV), attention, relaxation, and stress levels. The higher the alpha and theta 
waves, the greater the relaxation level. While beta and gamma waves are associated with 
being active and thinking or when a person is highly focused during meditation. On other 
hand, delta wave refers to deep sleep. Furthermore, the higher the HRV, the greater the 
relaxation. We tested the Flowtime headband on a 30-year-old male participant who wore 
the Flowtime headband and watched IAPS emotional pictures of mirth, disgust, and fear, as 
well as different videos of natural scenes and slums without any sound. We discovered that 
EEG oscillations, HRV, stress, and relaxation levels varied depending on what was watched. 

3  METHODS AND TOOLS 
In order to achieve the previously mentioned aim, developing a new integrated approach for 
achieving enhanced user-centered design in designing and retrofitting spaces in public 
buildings to meet the needs of end-users, the following steps were adopted (Fig. 1): 

1. Understanding the needs of end-users through questionnaires and evidence-based 
design. 
2. Creating various design proposals. 
3. Evaluation of the proposals to select the optimum proposal. 
4. Using Mobile Brain/Heart Imaging and self-reporting measures to quantify the optimal 
proposal’s end-user affective state.  

 

Figure 1:  The integrated new approach to the UCD framework. 

204  Eco-Architecture IX

 

Our vision is to integrate biometric sensors into non-immersive virtual reality to measure 
EEG and HRV responses. Besides integrating self-reporting measures such as the SAM and 
a 5-point Likert scale to evaluate how users feel while interacting with the design proposal 
in non-immersive VR. Finally, statistical methods are used to quantify the sensor raw data 
captured throughout the experiment, as well as SAM and the 5-point Likert scale of stress 
results. The scope of this paper is limited to the affective states of stress, and relaxation in 
VR, and the biometric sensor data captured and analyzed are EEG and HRV only.  

3.1  Study location: Farsi Lecture Hall  

This study was conducted in the Farsi Lecture Hall at Alexandria University’s Faculty of 
Engineering to be redesigned to meet the needs of students while adhering to UCD principles. 
The Farsi Hall is a large, traditional classroom that can accommodate 100–150 students. The 
Farsi Hall is distinguished by wood-clad walls, parquet floors, a white ceiling, and artistry 
drawings on the upper part of the walls. Tiered seating is provided, with fixed bench tables 
and movable leather chairs as illustrated in Fig. 2.  
 

 

Figure 2:  (a) The real Farsi Hall perspective; and (b) Farsi Hall plan. 

3.2  End users’ needs (questionnaire) 

In this phase, we randomly distributed and collected 65 questionnaires. Among them, 60 
(92.3%) questionnaires were valid. Participants included 12 male and 48 female architecture 
students, who were randomly chosen from the department of architecture in the Faculty of 
Engineering at Alexandria University. All students were aged between 21 and 25 years old. 
The students’ educational backgrounds varied, with 11 being postgraduate students and 49 
being undergraduates. The questionnaire was carried out in Farsi Hall. It began with 
demographic information and was followed by the PHQ-9. Five participants scored > 5 in 
PHQ-9, and they were all eliminated. The questionnaire then presented a 5-point Likert scale 
of satisfaction to determine the satisfaction level with the Farsi interior component such as 
color, textures, walls, ceiling, lighting, furnishing, and environmental aesthetics. Finally, the 
question of whether biophilic design should be integrated into Farsi Hall was raised.  

3.3  Creating design proposals 

Six design proposals were proposed based on end-users’ needs questionnaire results and 
evidence-based design. All of the proposals follow the biophilic design. They all share the 
principle of nature in space, which is represented by plants outside on the window wall “The 

Eco-Architecture IX  205

 

visual connection to nature” and motorized, perforated, and translucent roller blinds that print 
window plant shadows “Dynamic and diffused lighting” (Fig. 3(a)). Furthermore, they all 
adhere to biomorphic forms and patterns achieved by graphic abstract leaves covering the 
board wall, floor carpet with prairie grass print, front table made of 3D vertical tiles carved 
into the shape of a wave, and board wall wood cladding material. In terms of furniture, they 
all use the FT20 chairs with blue cushioning and a wood back (Fig. 3(b)). 
 

 

Figure 3:    (a) Translucent window blinds and outside plants; and (b) Graphic leaves wall 
cover, prairie grass print on floor carpet with, 3D carved waves front table, and 
board wall wood cladding.  

 

Figure 4:  (a) Proposal 1; (b) Proposal 2; and (c) Proposal 3.  

206  Eco-Architecture IX

 

Moreover, the LED lighting illuminance at the desk is 300 lx, the CCT is 3000–4000 K, 
and the standard white light is approved for all proposals. Whereas the walls of proposals 1, 
3, 5, and 6 are white (RAL 9010), and the walls of proposals 2 and 4 are blue (RAL 5012). 
Indoor 19 plants were selected from the guidance set out by Wolverton in his publication 
“How to grow fresh air” [22] are used in proposals 3, 4, 5, and 6) while the mural photographs 
of woodland on the two-sided walls in the front part of the hall are applied in proposals 1, 2, 
and 6 as Figs 4 and 5. Finally, wood cladding of two-sided wall and ceiling is used in 
proposals 5 and 6 as indicated in Fig. 5. 
 

 

Figure 5:    (a) Proposal 5 front elevation; (b) Proposal 5 side elevation; (c) Proposal 6 front 
elevation; and (d) Proposal 6 back elevation.  

Eco-Architecture IX  207

 

Proposal 1 is identical to proposal 2, except that the walls in the proposal 1 are white and 
the walls in proposal 2 are blue. Proposals 3 and 4 are the same, with the proposal 3 in white 
and proposal 4 in blue. Meanwhile, proposal 5 is identical to the proposal 6 in that both  
use wood cladding on two-sided walls and ceilings, with the exception that proposal 6 uses 
mural photographs of woodland and indoor plants in the back, whereas proposal 5 only 
employs indoor plants. All the previous design considerations are presented in Table 1 and 
Figs 3 and 4. 

Table 1:  Overview of proposals’ design considerations. 

3.4  Proposals evaluation to select the optimum proposal 

At this stage, all of the proposals’ different still images were printed on one A0 sheet to 
facilitate comparison and hung in the foyer in front of Farsi Hall. We randomly distributed 
and collected 75 questionnaires. Eleven participants scored > 5 in PHQ-9, and they were all 
eliminated. 64 participants included 15 male and 49 female architecture students, who were 

208  Eco-Architecture IX

 

randomly chosen from the Department of Architecture in the Faculty of Engineering as Fig. 
6. All students were aged between 21 and 25 years old. The questionnaire began with gender 
and age questions, followed by a 5-point Likert scale of satisfaction to determine the level of 
satisfaction with each proposal. Then comes the question of which proposal is the most 
favorable. Finally, we inquire about the most preferred visualization technique (still image, 
360-panorama, walkthrough video, and so on).  
 

 

Figure 6:  Proposals evaluation to select the optimum proposal. 

3.5  Mobile brain/heart imaging and affective state 

Based on the previous stage’s results, proposal 6 was selected as the optimum proposal and 
presented as a 360-panorama on a full HD laptop wearing EEG Headband that records EEG 
and HRV. The laptop screen was chosen based on the findings of the study that discovered 
computer screen visualization (non-immersive VR) maintains a higher perceived quality than 
an immersive environment [23]. In the first, the PHQ-9 questionnaire was randomly 
distributed and collected from 42 students from the department of architecture in the Faculty 
of Engineering. Among them, six participants scored > 5 and they were eliminated. The 36 
students who completed the experiment ranged in age from 21 to 25 years old. They spent  
3 minutes in Farsi Hall navigating a 360-panorama of the best proposal 6 on a full HD laptop 
screen while wearing a Flowtime headband that recorded EEG and HRV Fig. 7. The SAM 
test and a 5-point Likert scale of stress level were recorded and compared to the results of the 
EEG and HRV. 
 

 

Figure 7:  Participants navigating proposal 6 panorama wearing EEG headband.  

Eco-Architecture IX  209

 

4  RESULTS 
The data analysis results from the experiment stages are summarized below.  

4.1  End-users’ needs questionnaire  

IBM SPSS Statistics v26 and MS Excel were used to generate descriptive statistics of the 
end-users’ needs questionnaire. Total scores, distribution of percentages, and weighted mean 
were all analyzed. Weighted means were calculated for the Likert scales, ranging from very 
unsatisfied = 1 to very satisfied = 5, to determine the tendency of the composite scores. Based 
on the reviewed studies, the weighted mean results can be interpreted to show how satisfied 
(or dissatisfied) students are [17], [24]. The findings revealed that the majority of students, 
42 of 60 (70%), are very satisfied with the artistic drawings on the upper part of the walls, 
with a weight mean score of 4.52. The wood texture of the walls and floor received the next 
highest weighted mean score of 3.47, indicating that the students are satisfied with it. The 
weighted mean score for artificial and natural lighting was 3.37, indicating neutral. 
Furnishing is also neutral, with a weighted mean of 3.1. On the Other hand, 60% of students 
were dissatisfied with environmental aesthetics, and 28.3% chose neutral with a weighted 
mean of 2.25 to represent dissatisfaction as shown in Table 2. Finally, when the students 
inquired about applying biophilia principles to the redesign process, 36 of 60 (60%) students 
strongly agree, 16 (26.7%) agree, 2 (3.3%) chose neutral, and 6 (10%) disagree. The weighted 
mean of applying biophilia principles is 4.3, indicating a strong agreement. 

Table 2:  The end users’ needs questionnaire result.  

4.2  The optimum proposal questionnaire 

The optimum proposal questionnaire data were also analyzed using IBM SPSS Statistics v26 
and MS Excel. Weighted means were calculated for the Likert scales, ranging from very 
unsatisfied = 1 to very satisfied = 5, to determine the tendency of the composite scores. 
According to the findings, the weighted mean of the proposals 5, 6, and 3 indicates that the 
students are satisfied. Furthermore, the weighted mean of the proposals 1, 2, and 4 indicates 
neutral as shown in Table 3.  

Table 3:  Proposals evaluation results. 

Interpretation 
Neutral 
Neutral
Satisfied
Neutral
Satisfied 
Satisfied 
 
     According to the results of the best proposal question, the proposal 6 is preferred by the 
majority of students 25 of 64 (39.1%). Proposal 3 was the second most popular proposal, 
with 17 of 64 students (26.5%) choosing it. Whereas proposal 5 was chosen by 13 students 
(20.3%). On the other hand, proposal 1 was chosen by five students (7.8%), proposal 2 by 

210  Eco-Architecture IX

 

one student (1.6%), and proposal 4 by three students (4.7%). As a result, proposal 6 is 
regarded as the best proposal for the end-users. Proposal 6 is characterized by using mural 
photographs of woodland, indoor plants in the back, and wood cladding of two-sided wall 
and ceiling as illustrated in Fig. 8. Finally, 43 out of 64 students (67%) chose 360-panorama 
as the best visualization technique.  
 

 

Figure 8:  Proposal 6 which is selected as the optimum proposal. 

4.3  The results of mobile brain/heart imaging stage 

According to SAM results for the proposal 6 design, 15 of 36 students (41.7%) chose the 
highest level of valence (very positive emotions), while 18 of 36 students (50%) chose the 
second positive degree of valence (positive emotions), and three students (8.3%) selected 
neutral, while there is no one selected negative emotions. In terms of arousal, two students 
(5.6%) chose the highest level of arousal (very high arousal), eight students (22.2%) chose 
the second-highest level of arousal (high arousal), six students (16.7%) chose neutral, 10 
students (27.8%) chose low arousal, and 10 students (27.8%) chose very low arousal. On a 
5-point Likert scale of stress level, 50% of students chose “no stress”, 27.8% chose “low 
stress”, and 22.2% chose “neutral”. The raw data from the Flowtime headband is then 
analyzed, and their weighted means are calculated and compared to the weighted means of 
SAM and 5-point Likert scale stress level results. 

5  DISCUSSION 
The findings revealed that when participants in the SAM test have high arousal and positive 
valence (meaning high excitement and low relaxation), HRV, relaxation, alpha α-power ratio, 
and beta β-power ratio are all low, but they are all higher when participants have low arousal 
and positive valence (meaning high calm relaxation) as shown in Fig. 9. These results are 
associated with literature. But there is no relationship between these results and theta θ, 
gamma γ power ratios. Besides, there is a clear link between weighted means of 5-point 
Likert scale stress and headband calculations of HRV, stress, and relaxation. According to 
the literature, HRV is high when a person is in a relaxed state; HRV is high in participants 
who said they have no stress and decreases in participants who said they have low and 
moderate stress, respectively. Moreover, weighted means of 5-point Likert scale stress and 
weighted means of calculated headband stress have a directly proportional relationship. while 

Eco-Architecture IX  211

 

weighted means of 5-point Likert scale stress and weighted means of calculated headband 
relaxation have an inverse proportion relationship as illustrated in Fig. 10. On the other hand, 
there is no relationship between 5-point Likert scale stress and the analysis of alpha α, beta 
β, delta δ, theta θ, and gamma γ raw data. As a result, the Flowtime headband is effective in 
stress interpretation by relying on its app equations of HRV, relaxation, and stress.  
 

 

Figure 9:  The SAM results and the output of the EEG headband. 

 

Figure 10:  5-point Likert stress results and the output of EEG headband.  

     While the methods used in this study are novel for the user-centered design approach, 
some limitations should be considered. One of the most important considerations in designing 
this study was the participant’s affective mood state; they should not have a high level of 

212  Eco-Architecture IX

 

depression in order for the results of EEG and HRV to be unaffected by depression; thus, 
PHQ-9 is required to decide whether to use mobile brain/heart imaging or not. Another issue 
is participants’ willingness to wear the EEG headband without fear of being electrically 
shocked, as some students claimed; thus, the type of headband is critical to be simple and 
familiar in shape. This study aimed to use a consumer EEG headset that generates real-time 
affective states such as stress and relaxation so that searchers and architects could use it 
without the need for a programming team or complicated raw-data analysis of brainwaves. 
Future research should test other EEG headbands with more affective states, such as 
happiness, sadness, and so on, as well as simpler data analysis methods.  

6  CONCLUSION 
To summarize, the findings of this study show that a user-centered design approach is 
effective in built-environment design and leads to end-user satisfaction with the built 
environment. Furthermore, self-reporting measures such as questionnaires and a 5-point 
Likert scale can be used to determine end-user needs and evaluate design proposals. A 360-
panorama displayed on a full HD laptop computer screen (non-immersive VR) is also the 
most appealing visualization technique for study participants. While end-users navigate non-
immersive virtual reality, it affects their EEG and HRV and generates different affective 
states depending on the design. HRV, relaxation, and stress output of mobile brain/heart 
imaging while navigating 360-panorama have a direct relationship with a 5-point Likert scale 
of stress. Likewise, when participants in the SAM test have high arousal and positive valence 
(meaning high excitement and low relaxation), HRV, relaxation, alpha-power ratio, and beta-
power ratio are all low, but they are all higher when participants have low arousal and positive 
valence (meaning high calm relaxation). Finally, using mobile brain/heart imaging to induce 
an end-user affective state while navigating design proposals in nonimmersive VR could 
improve design quality and end-user satisfaction.