26  | THE PERMANENTE JOURNAL

Codesigning Online Continuing Medical 
Education on Social Health Integration 
and Social Risk–Informed Care for 
Primary Care Providers

Meagan C Brown, PhD, MPH1,2; Andrea R Paolino, MA3; Katheen A Barnes, MD, 
MPH4; Dea Papajorgji-­Taylor, MPH, MA, CCRP5; Loel S Solomon, PhD, MPP6; 
Cara C Lewis, PhD1,2; Elizabeth Bojkov, MPH, BSN, RN2; Katie F Coleman, 
MSPH1

Perm J 2024;28:23.113 • https://​doi.​org/​10.​7812/​TPP/​23.​113

‍
‍ MCB, 0000-0001-6090-5635

Abstract

INTRODUCTION: Adapting clinical care decisions for patient-­reported 
social risks is essential to social health integration and patient-­centered 
care. Most research in this area focuses on awareness and assistance 
(social-­needs-­targeted care), such as screening and referral to food, 
financial, and other resources. Limited evidence for adjustment 
strategies (social risk–informed care) or adapting care for social risks 
made it difficult for Kaiser Permanente to implement new initiatives. 
This article describes a codesign process to build a novel, adjustment-­
focused continuing medical education course.

METHODS: The authors codeveloped the online continuing medical 
education course with patients and clinicians using user-­centered 
design. Transcripts from codesign activities were coded and analyzed 
by thematic analysis to identify major themes, including perceptions of 
social risk–informed care and barriers to care adjustment.

RESULTS: Practical hurdles for implementing social risk–informed care 
emerged, including clinicians’ concerns about the ethics of adjustment 
as substandard care, particularly without robust assistance activities. 
However, patients expressed a desire for their care to be adapted to 
their social circumstances, to allow for more realistic care plans.

DISCUSSION: Implementation barriers identified from the codesign 
were addressed through an interactive, case-­study approach. Existing 
evidence on contextualized care and shared decision making informed 
a general framework for primary care providers to engage in awareness 
and adjustment activities, paired with 3 interactive case studies based 
on real-­world, clinician-­supplied scenarios.

CONCLUSION: The authors recommend that multiple stakeholder 
perspectives be incorporated during the development of social 
health integration initiatives, particularly adjustment. Education 
complemented by active, nuanced, flexible implementation strategies 
may be necessary for the successful uptake of care-­delivery-­based 
social health integration activities.

Meagan C Brown, PhD, MPH 
​Meagan.​C.​Brown@​kp.​org

Author Affiliations
1 Kaiser Permanente Washington Health 
Research Institute, Seattle, WA, USA

2 University of Washington School of 
Public Health, Seattle, WA, USA

3 Kaiser Permanente Colorado Institute 
for Health Research, Aurora, CO, USA

4 Washington Permanente Medical 
Group, Seattle, WA, USA

5 Kaiser Permanente Northwest Center 
for Health Research, Portland, OR, USA

6 Kaiser Permanente Bernard J. Tyson 
School of Medicine, Pasadena, CA, USA

All authors participated in the concep-
tualization, critical review, drafting, and 
submission of the final manuscript, as 
well as the design and implementation 
of the online CME.