User-centered development of a hypospadias decision aid 
prototype

Katherine H. Chan, MD, MPHa,b, Rosalia Misseri, MDa, Aaron Carroll, MD, MSb, Richard 
Frankelc, Courtney M. Moore, BFAe, Brandon Cockrum, MFAe, Sarah E. Wiehe, MD, MPHd,e

aDepartment of Urology, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana

bDepartment of Pediatrics, Center for Pediatric and Adolescent Comparative Effectiveness 
Research and Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana

cDepartment of Medicine, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana and 
Cleveland Clinic Learner Institute, Cleveland, Ohio

dDepartment of Pediatrics, Children’s Health Services Research, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana

eResearch Jam, Indiana Clinical and Translational Sciences Institute, Indianapolis, Indiana

Extended Summary

Introduction—Many parents who choose hypospadias repair for their sons experience decisional 
conflict (DC) and decisional regret (DR). We previously found that parental decision-making 
about hypospadias surgery is a complex process characterized by cyclic information-seeking to 
alleviate anxiety and confusion.

Objective—The objective of this study was to engage parents of hypospadias patients and 
pediatric providers in the co-design of a decision aid (DA) prototype to facilitate shared decision-
making about hypospadias surgery and address DC and DR.

Methods—From August 2018 to January 2019, we conducted three co-design workshops with 
parents of hypospadias patients, pediatric urology and general pediatric providers to discuss their 
recommendations for a DA prototype. Activities were audio recorded and professionally 
transcribed. Transcripts and worksheets were analyzed by six coders using qualitative analysis to 
identify key aspects of a hypospadias DA desired by stakeholders. We conducted a collaborative 
design and prototyping session to establish key features and requirements, created a content map 
visualizing this work, and then developed a DA prototype.

46202, Phone: 216-269-7878; Fax: 001-317-944-7481; Chan: kchubert@iupui.edu. 
Conflicts of Interest
None of the authors have any conflicts of interest to disclose.

Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our 
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of 
the resulting proof before it is published in its final form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered 
which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

HHS Public Access
Author manuscript

Published in final edited form as:
J Pediatr Urol. 2020 October ; 16(5): 684.e1–684.e9. doi:10.1016/j.jpurol.2020.07.047.

Results—Parent participants included 6 mothers and 4 fathers: 8 Caucasian, 2 African-
American; median age 31 years. Providers included pediatric urology (n=7) and general pediatric 
providers (n=10): median age 47.5 years, 83.3% Caucasian, 58.3% male, 58.3% MD’s and 41.7% 
nurse practitioners. Participants created user-friendly, interactive DA prototypes with “24/7” 
availability that had three key functions: 1) provide accurate, customizable, educational content, 2) 
connect parents with each other, and 3) engage them in a decision-making activity. The prototype 
consisted of five modules (Extended Summary Figure). “Hypospadias Basics” includes 
epidemiology and a hypospadias severity scale. “Surgery Basics” includes goals, illustrated steps, 
and pros/cons of surgery. “Testimonials” includes videos of parents and adolescents discussing 
their experiences. ”Help me Decide” includes a decisional conflict scale and a decision-making 
activity (i.e. values clarification method). “Frequently Asked Questions” covers general 
hypospadias information, perioperative expectations and a review of postoperative care.

Discussion—To our knowledge, this is the first DA prototype developed for a pediatric urology 
condition using a human-centered design approach to engage many key stakeholders in the 
development process. One limitation of this study is the small population sampled, which limits 
generalizability and means that our findings may not reflect the views of all parents or pediatric 
providers involved in hypospadias decision-making.

Conclusions—We created a parent-centered hypospadias DA prototype that provides decision 
support in an online, interactive format. Future directions include further testing with usability 
experts, providers and parents.
Graphical Abstract

Extended Summary Figure: site map of the Hypospadias Homepage consisting of five modules

Keywords

Decision making; pediatrics; hypospadias; qualitative research

Introduction

Parents considering hypospadias repair for their sons face an irreversible choice with 
potentially lifelong consequences. They must consider the trade-offs of possible cosmetic 
and functional improvement of the child’s penis in light of the potential for postoperative 
complications. Recent studies have identified decisional conflict (DC) and decisional regret 
(DR) as a problem for a many parents who have elected surgical repair during childhood.[1–
3] Shared decision-making (SDM) addresses the issues of DC and DR through joint 

Chan et al.
Page 2

involvement of patients and health care providers in making health care decisions that are 
informed by the best available evidence regarding possible options and potential benefits and 
harms and that consider patient preferences and values.[4] The American Urological 
Association has endorsed this model of care in several recent guidelines on complex 
urologic topics.[5] Decision aids (DA) are tools designed to facilitate SDM by providing 
balanced information and helping patients construct, clarify and communicate what is 
important to them in making healthcare choices.[6–8] The goal of DAs is to promote high-
quality decisions that are informed and consistent with the patient’s values and preferences.
[9]

The current study is part of a multi-year project whose goal is to improve the care of 
hypospadias patients by developing an evidence-based DA to promote SDM in hypospadias 
care. In our previous qualitative work, we conducted a needs assessment of parents 
considering hypospadias surgery for their sons in order to investigate their decision-making 
process, knowledge gaps and information-seeking behavior.[10, 11] We found that parental 
decision-making about hypospadias surgery is a complex and multi-faceted process 
characterized by an initial period of information-seeking about the condition in order to 
alleviate anxiety and confusion.[11] Parents noted that online information about hypospadias 
has questionable reliability and limited relevance to their contexts and concerns.[11] Their 
informational needs remained salient from the time of diagnosis through the postoperative 
period, encompassing the initial diagnosis, clinic visit, day of surgery and beyond. In 
addition to demonstrating that parents wanted clear, reliable information on hypospadias, we 
also identified a number of specific knowledge gaps including the causes of hypospadias, the 
spectrum of severity, penile anatomy, and the definition of chordee.[10] Using this 
preliminary data as a guide, the objective of this study was to engage parents of boys with 
hypospadias, pediatric urology and general pediatric providers in the co-design of a DA 
prototype to help parents make informed, values-based decisions about hypospadias surgery.

Material and Methods

Theoretical framework and quality criteria

We used the Ottawa Decision Support Framework (ODSF) to inform the design of a 
hypospadias decision aid (DA) prototype, synthesizing data from parents and providers and 
the hypospadias literature.[12] [13] According to this framework, unresolved decisional 
needs (e.g. DC) adversely affect decision outcomes (e.g. decision quality). Decision support 
can improve decision outcomes by addressing decisional needs using clinical counseling, 
decision tools and/or decision coaching. In addition, we followed a set of quality criteria 
published by the International Patient Decision Aid Standards (IPDAS) collaboration.[12] 
Finally, we incorporated more recent evidence from the IPDAS regarding design of values 
clarification methods, strategies for risk communication and inclusion of patient narratives in 
DAs.[14–16]

Study participants

Parents—We identified English-speaking parents/caregivers (≥ 18 years old) whose sons 
(ages 1 week to 5 years) were diagnosed with hypospadias at a pediatric urology clinic 

Chan et al.
Page 3

appointment between October 2017 and August 2018. Parents of postoperative patients 
(surgery <6 months prior) and those awaiting repair were eligible for inclusion in the study 
in order engage them at various times during which they might use a DA. We excluded 
parents <18 years old and those who were not fluent in English given that language 
translation would not be feasible during a group discussion. We contacted eligible parents 
via telephone to discuss study participation and, if interested in participating, obtained 
verbal informed consent to participate in a co-design workshop to design a hypospadias DA 
prototype.

Providers—We used convenience samples of pediatric urology and general pediatric 
providers due to their availability and ease of access. We recruited pediatric urology 
providers, including attending physicians, fellows and nurse practitioners, from our 
academic medical center via e-mail. We excluded residents and medical and nursing 
students because of their presumed limited experience with hypospadias decision-making in 
clinical practice. We recruited general pediatric providers from a list of 49 registrants for a 
statewide pediatric continuing medical education (CME) conference for primary care 
providers at our academic medical center in January 2019. We contacted providers via email 
on two separate occasions, one week apart, to discuss study participation and obtained 
informed consent. We included general pediatric providers in the study because they are 
typically the first point of contact for parents after the diagnosis of hypospadias in the 
newborn period and may influence parental decision-making about hypospadias. The study 
was reviewed and approved by our Institutional Review Board (protocol # 1511846401).

Data collection

We conducted three separate “co-design workshops” from August 2018 to January 2019 at 
our academic medical center with parents of sons with hypospadias, pediatric urology 
providers, and general pediatric providers respectively to discuss their recommendations for 
a DA prototype. A co-design workshop is an in-person group session consisting of a series 
of guided activities during which a facilitator leads participants through the design process 
in order to create prototypes of a product or service. Provider workshops were incorporated 
into existing academic/CME activities to maximize the number of participants and minimize 
their absence from patient care. Each workshop lasted approximately 90 minutes. All 
activities were audio recorded and professionally transcribed, and participants’ responses 
were de-identified except for gender. We recorded participant gender in order understand 
whether any of the comments captured the unique perspective of fathers versus mothers. 
Transcripts were reviewed for accuracy and reconciled prior to data analysis. Two members 
of the research team took extensive field notes during the sessions. Participants were 
compensated for their time.

The facilitation team consisted of two human-centered design researchers (one male, one 
female). They have a Master of Fine Arts Degree in Human-centered Design Research and a 
Bachelor of Fine Arts Degree in Visual Communication Design, respectively, and have 
extensive experience planning research activities, facilitating group discussions and 
collaborative activities and analyzing data.[17] In order to reduce the facilitating researcher’s 
bias from influencing the workshops and subsequent data analysis they engaged in “critical 

Chan et al.
Page 4

self-reflection and transparency” about their preconceptions regarding decision-making 
about surgery, relationship dynamics with participants and analytic focus.[18] For example, 
they asked participants open-ended questions during the co-design workshops in order to 
limit the influence of their own values and opinions on data collection. They also involved 
peers in design and analysis of the co-design workshops and prototyping session.

Our approach was qualitative in nature and informed by human-centered design 
methodologies. Human-centered design is a form of qualitative research that includes 
elements from product development and participatory design, using abductive reasoning to 
start with a set of observations and find the simplest and most likely explanation for these 
observations.[19] Key practice components of human-centered design are building empathy, 
thinking by doing, making things visual, combining divergent and convergent approaches, 
and fostering collaboration and empowerment amongst stakeholders.[20] Human-centered 
design is appropriate to this work because it collaboratively explores an area about which 
little is known and uses guided group discussion and prototype development as part of its 
methodology in the design of stakeholder-centered tools.[21]

Each workshop consisted of worksheets and group discussions led by the workshop 
facilitators. A multi-disciplinary team with expertise in communication design, pediatric 
urology, and health services research developed the workshop guide based on previously 
identified themes from our interviews with parents. We asked teams of 3–4 participants to 
create a “device…anything real or imaginary,” to help parents of boys with hypospadias 
make decisions about surgery for their sons. We asked them to complete a “device co-design 
worksheet” consisting of a series of guided prompts regarding possible locations where they 
would use the device, format, function and any additional features of the device. They 
completed “device prototype” worksheets in their small groups focusing on format, function 
and content (Figure 1). The facilitator concluded the workshop with a group discussion to 
clarify their respective suggestions for the prototype.

Data analysis—First, our multi-disciplinary team of six coders analyzed the data from 
each of the three co-design workshops using qualitative content analysis informed by 
human-centered design methodologies to establish key features and requirements of the DA. 
We separated pieces of data from the paper transcripts and the participants’ worksheets onto 
individual slips of paper to facilitate data grouping and sorting. Our team collaboratively 
grouped all of the pieces of data by similarity, identifying key themes and labeling them to 
describe their content. We resolved disagreements by group discussion. Finally, we 
collaboratively organized these key themes by how they related to each other, creating a final 
affinity diagram; a visual representation of data groupings and relatedness.[22] Team 
members compared the affinity diagrams from all three workshops, identifying key aspects 
of a hypospadias DA desired by the included stakeholders. Data saturation was confirmed by 
examining the themes to determine that no new themes emerged. Next, we conducted a 
collaborative design and prototyping session with multi-disciplinary team members, 
including web developers, where we established key DA features and requirements and 
created a content map visualizing this work followed by a DA prototype.

Chan et al.
Page 5

Results

Demographics

The first co-design workshop included 10 parents (6 mothers, 4 fathers) of hypospadias 
patients: median age 31 years; 8 Caucasian, 2 African-American. Six were married, 2 were 
single, 1 was separated and 1 did not disclose his/her marital status. Two had a graduate or 
professional degree, four had a Bachelor’s degree, two had some college, one was a high 
school graduate and one did not disclose his/her educational level. The second and third co-
design workshops included pediatric urology (n=7) and general pediatric providers (n=10), 
respectively: median age 47.5 years, 83.3% Caucasian, 58.3% male, 58.3% physicians and 
41.7% nurse practitioners.

DA co-design workshop

Participants in the three groups created user-friendly, interactive DA prototypes with “24/7” 
availability that had three key functions in common: 1) provide accurate, customizable, 
educational content about hypospadias, 2) connect parents to each other, and 3) engage them 
in a decision-making activity (Figure 1). They suggested that the DA might be used at home, 
work, daycare or the doctor’s office. Key educational content included a multimedia 
overview of hypospadias and goals of hypospadias surgery with illustrations, photos, videos, 
and statistics to suit a variety of learning styles. They also recommended an illustrated 
severity scale with customizable information based on the degree of hypospadias severity, a 
summary of the pros/cons of surgery and a review of postoperative care/recovery to share 
with family members and childcare providers. Finally, they suggested parent testimonials 
about surgical decision-making and the day-of-surgery experience. Both provider groups 
recommended the inclusion of pre- and postoperative images and 3-dimensional models. 
General pediatric providers suggested implementing the DA in the newborn nursery and 
incorporating it into telemedicine consults and provider training. Pediatric urology providers 
recommended including a chordee measurement tool. Table 1 contains representative quotes 
from the participants regarding the function and content of the DA.

Design and Prototyping session

The study team engaged in a collaborative session to synthesize data from the three 
workshops and establish key features and requirements of our DA prototype (Figure 2). 
Because the included stakeholders wanted the DA to be available “24/7”, parents wanted the 
tool to be sharable with other caregivers, included stakeholders desired multi-media 
components, and because the majority of stakeholder teams created prototype apps or 
websites, we chose to create a web-based DA. We created a site map consisting of five 
modules (Extended Summary Figure). Based on the site map, we created a web-based DA 
prototype called the Hypospadias Homepage (Figure 3). “Hypospadias Basics” includes the 
epidemiology of hypospadias in the United States and a hypospadias severity scale. “Surgery 
Basics” includes goals, illustrated steps, and pros/cons of surgery. “Frequently Asked 
Questions” covers general hypospadias information, perioperative expectations, and a review 
of postoperative care. We included photographs and illustrations in the prototype to evaluate 
parental preferences for visual representations of hypospadias during subsequent phases of 

Chan et al.
Page 6

prototype testing. ”Help me Decide” consists of a decisional conflict scale and a values 
clarification exercise. “Testimonials” includes video narratives by parents.

DA Module Development

It is recommended that DA’s include a “values clarification method” (VCM) to help patients 
consider how they value key aspects of a healthcare decision.[23] Their purpose is to “help 
patients clarify and communicate the personal value of options, in order to improve the 
match between what is personally most desirable and which option is actually selected.”[7] 
[15] The most common types of VCMs are considering the pros versus cons, utility 
assessment with or without decision analysis, prioritization and rating scales.[15] We 
developed a VCM for the Hypospadias Homepage to facilitate the identification of: a) 
options (i.e. surgery or no surgery), and b) attributes of the options which affect the parent’s 
preference (e.g. effectiveness of the surgery, recovery period, risk of complications, risk of 
long-term issues if not repaired). Multiple decision processing theories and the perioperative 
concerns identified by parents in our previous qualitative work informed the design of our 
VCM.[24–27] [10, 11] It consists of an abbreviated version of the decisional conflict scale 
(SURE) and a series of open-ended questions asking parents to identify options and consider 
various decision attributes and personal values relevant to the decision (Appendix A).[28]

Based on the recommendations of all stakeholder groups, we also developed a module of 
parent narratives (i.e. video testimonials) to depict a variety of experiences, both positive and 
negative, with decision-making about surgery and the day of surgery. [29] In order to 
minimize bias, we did not include any narratives about surgical outcomes to avoid 
influencing parental perceptions about complication rates.[29] We identified and recruited 
parents using the methodology described above in the Materials and Methods section. None 
of them had participated in earlier phases of the study. Videos were filmed by a professional 
video production company at our academic medical center or at the parent’s residence/
workplace and were edited for content and brevity.

Discussion

In this study, we engaged many of the key stakeholders in hypospadias care in the co-design 
of a user-friendly, interactive hypospadias DA prototype with “24/7” availability. The key 
functions were to: 1) provide accurate, customizable, educational content, 2) engage parents 
in a decision-making activity and 3) connect them to each other through parent testimonials, 
blogs and/or chat rooms. Although parents desired direct communication with one another, 
we decided against this given the need for constant site monitoring and potential medico-
legal concerns. We compromised by including parent testimonials to help parents feel 
connected to each other. Parents and providers had divergent recommendations regarding 
visual design of the DA protoype. Parents suggested basic illustrations/photographs of 
hypospadias whereas providers recommended more sophisticated three-dimensional models 
and chordee measurement tools.

Most DA developers regard the involvement of relevant stakeholders early on in the process 
as a crucial initial step.[30] Many have utilized focus groups as part of a “participatory 
design approach” to integrate patient/provider recommendations for design and content into 

Chan et al.
Page 7

the development of DAs.[31–33] In addition to exploring key stakeholders’ 
recommendations for a hypospadias DA, we included them as co-designers of DA 
prototypes in order to maximize the parent-centeredness of the DA. Workshop participants 
leveraged their expertise, incorporating their unique experiences into their design prototypes 
with the help of supportive design tools and guidance from design experts.[34] This hands-
on, creative approach to DA prototype development encourages the expression of ideas that 
are difficult to put into words.[35] To our knowledge, no prior studies have engaged key 
stakeholders as co-designers of a DA prototype in this manner.

To our knowledge, this is the first DA prototype developed for a pediatric urology condition 
using a qualitative, human-centered design approach to engage key stakeholders in the 
development process. Another strength of our study is we used a common theoretical 
framework (i.e. the ODSF) and we adhered to the quality criteria for DAs outlined by the 
IPDAS.[12, 13] In addition, we incorporated more recent evidence regarding several key 
elements of DAs such as the design of values clarification methods and patient testimonials.
[14–16]

One limitation of this study is that the small population sampled limits generalizability, thus 
our findings may not reflect the views of all parents of hypospadias patients or pediatric 
providers involved in hypospadias decision-making. It is possible that parents who chose to 
participate in the focus group or video testimonials contributed their own biases to the 
discussion. In addition, all of the pediatric urologists were from a single academic medical 
center which may reflect the biases of our group practice, e.g. likelihood of recommending 
surgical intervention and how bothersome complications are to us. Ideally, we also would 
have included older hypospadias patients, both repaired and unrepaired, as stakeholders in 
the development of the DA. Unfortunately, we encountered challenges in recruitment of this 
patient population due to their limited long-term follow-up in our practice. We plan to use 
social media to recruit them for a future phase of this study.

Despite the low sample size, our stakeholder group for this study included several fathers 
and racial minority participants unlike our prior study on hypospadias decision-making, 
which was more homogenous.[11] Another limitation is that some parents may have felt 
uncomfortable discussing sensitive issues in a group setting. Nevertheless, the study 
provides a rich description of a group of parents’ and providers’ recommendations for a 
hypospadias DA prototype. Another limitation of this study is the potential loss of data 
during analysis of workshop transcripts such as intonations of voice, body language and 
seating arrangements that can add meaning to the textual data.[36] This seems less likely, 
however, since most of the coders participated in the co-design workshops or took notes 
during the sessions.

Conclusions

Parents and providers desire a hypospadias DA that is user-friendly, interactive, 
customizable to their needs/concerns and available “24/7.” In future studies, we will conduct 
further testing of the DA prototype with usability experts, providers, and parents prior to 
launching a pilot test in the clinical setting.

Chan et al.
Page 8