Vol:.(1234567890)

https://doi.org/10.1007/s41347-023-00378-3

Co‑Production of a Cognitive Behavioral Therapy Digital Platform 
for Families of Individuals Impacted by Psychosis

Sunny Chieh Cheng1   · Sarah Kopelovich2   · Dong Si3 · Myra Divina1 · Ningjun Serene Gao4 · Mia Yunqi Wang5 · 
Jamie Jaesook Kim4 · Ziyi Li6 · Jennifer Blank2 · Rachel Brian2 · Douglas Turkington7

Received: 10 June 2023 / Revised: 13 November 2023 / Accepted: 11 December 2023 / Published online: 8 January 2024 
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024

Abstract
Education and skills training have consistently been recognized as an unmet need for caregivers of individuals with psychosis, 
as traditional models of clinician-delivered family interventions remain inaccessible to most caregivers across low-, middle-, 
and high-income countries. We endeavored to expand access to psychosis education and skills training by co-developing 
a digital training platform with experts and families. We engaged in collaborative co-design sessions with caregivers who 
had received training in Psychosis REACH—an evidence-based psychosocial family intervention for psychosis—to elicit 
design principles, develop a functional prototype, and engage in usability testing of an online interactive training program. 
Seven participants reported six design principles for a prototype. These included simplicity, accessibility, skill acquisition, 
usability, sense of community, and hope. Guided by these principles, participants’ preferred features were (1) online mod-
ules with didactic content, (2) a training “coach” conversational agent to provide instruction and feedback to users, and (3) 
a conversational agent simulation of an individual experiencing psychosis with whom users can practice skills. Participants 
completed the usability testing. The levels of ease of use ranged from 4.2 to 4.8 on a 5-point scale with 5 being easiest to 
use and the level of usefulness ranged from 4 to 4.75 on a 5-point scale, with 5 being most useful. This study is the first 
to develop a digital platform for family caregivers to support interactive skills training for psychosis caregiving at home. 
Iterative user-centered design resulted in a functional alpha prototype ripe for testing. Future directions include testing the 
design requirements on more diverse users and evaluating the effects of the online platform on the caregiving experience.

Keywords  Usability · Psychosis · Caregiver · User-centered design · Cognitive behavior therapy · Co-production · Digital 
platform · Mental health

Introduction

Eleven million Americans experience psychosis during their 
lifetime, and roughly 60 million have a loved one affected 
by psychosis (Palumbo et al., 2015). Family interventions 
for psychosis (FIp) are intended to enhance the knowledge 
and skills needed to support illness management in the com-
munity (e.g., McFarlane, 2016; Mueser & Gingerich, 2006). 
A substantial evidence base supports the administration of 
FIp to enhance functioning, quality of life, and treatment 
engagement among individuals with psychosis; reducing the 
risk and duration of hospital admissions (Bird et al., 2010; 
Onwumere et al., 2011; Pfammatter et al., 2006; Pilling 
et al., 2002) and minimizing detriments to economic, social, 
physical, and mental health among family caregivers (Hegde 
et al., 2019; Stanley et al., 2017). As a result, FIp is widely 
recognized as the recommended standard of care in both the 

Drs. Cheng and Kopelovich are co-first authors.

 *	 Sarah Kopelovich 
	

1	
School of Nursing and Healthcare Leadership, University 
of Washington, Tacoma, WA, USA

2	
Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, 
University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA, 
USA

3	
Division of Computing and Software Systems, University 
of Washington, Bothell, WA, USA

4	
Department of Human Centered Design & Engineering, 
University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA

5	
Department of Economics, University of Washington, 
Seattle, WA, USA

6	
Department of Statistics, University of Washington, Seattle, 
WA, USA

7	
Newcastle University, Newcastle Upon Tyne, UK

141

US and abroad (Keepers et al., 2020; NICE, 2014); yet, an 
audit of FIp services in the United States (US) suggests that 
fewer than 2% of family members supporting a loved one 
with a serious mental illness are receiving any form of FIp 
(ISMICC, 2017).
To remediate the pervasive inaccessibility of recom-
mended interventions like FIp, federal agencies in the US 
have advocated for technological strategies to enhance 
access to quality care (ISMICC, 2017; National Academies 
of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine, 2016). Techno-
logic advances in internet-delivered conversational agents 
and Artificial Intelligence (AI) have broadly influenced the 
delivery of evidence-based interventions for other health 
conditions (Vaidyam et al., 2019), and an array of technol-
ogy-based interventions are specifically geared toward the 
needs of unpaid caregivers (Czaja et al., 2016). Chief among 
those needs is on-demand access to accurate information 
about their loved one’s diagnosis and training in evidence-
based skills to improve communication and illness manage-
ment (Buck et al., 2021). Psychosis REACH (Recovery by 
Enabling Adult Carers at Home) is an empirically-supported 
bichronous family intervention that is based on cognitive 
behavioral therapy for psychosis, an evidence-based psy-
chological treatment for distressing and impairing psychotic 
symptoms that has amassed a substantial evidence-base 
and that is included in schizophrenia treatment guidelines 
(SAMHSA, 2021). Psychosis REACH leverages virtual 
platforms to provide asynchronous didactics and synchro-
nous skills training to self-identified caregivers in high-
yield cognitive and behavioral techniques (CBT) for cop-
ing, communication, and problem-solving (Kopelovich 
et al., 2021; Turkington et al., 2018). Families can access 
Psychosis REACH independent of a clinical service, thereby 
redressing the critical access gap observed both domesti-
cally and abroad. Despite the fact that Psychosis REACH has 
enhanced access to much-needed psychoeducation and skills 
coaching, caregivers have few opportunities to receive feed-
back on skill rehearsal, which is considered a key element of 
skill acquisition (Lindhiem et al., 2014) and generalization 
(Greene, 2003).
Conversational agents offer ubiquitous hybrid (human- 
and conversational agent-supported) coaching in the 
caregiving environment, building caregivers’ capacity 
to enact skills through state-dependent learning and 
enhancing the alliance between caregivers and their loved 
ones (Joerin et al., 2019; Lederman et al., 2019). A digital 
platform with conversational agents represents a low-cost 
and user-friendly means of increasing health literacy (Ben-
Zeev et al., 2021), supporting the delivery of home-based 
caregiving activities, enhancing communication, and 
improving caregiving outcomes (Kowatsch et al., 2021; 
Lindeman et al., 2020). A positive evaluation for integrat-
ing conversational agents into family interventions has been 

demonstrated for chronic disease (Kowatsch et al., 2021). In 
mental health care (Abd-Alraza et al., 2021), conversational 
agent-enabled interventions have targeted supporting mental 
wellbeing for non-help-seeking individuals (Martinengo 
et al., 2022), assisting behavioral health clients in managing 
their symptoms (Fulmer et al., 2018; So et al., 2020), and 
supporting the delivery of psychosocial interventions such as 
problem-solving therapies or communications skills training 
in older adults (Ali et al., 2021). There is a lack of digital 
platforms that deliver evidence-based family intervention to 
support family caregivers of individuals impacted by serious 
mental illnesses. To this end, we endeavored to engage end 
users in the co-production of an internet platform designed 
to reinforce the evidence-based Psychosis REACH didactic 
content and foster CBT-informed training among families 
navigating life with psychosis.

Methods

We identified design requirements based on both the 
established health technology design framework (Kowatsch 
et al., 2019) and user interviews before progressing to the 
participatory, iterative, user-centered design (UCD), and 
development process. During UCD, we employed individual 
interviews, group co-design sessions, prototype development  
(Sefelin et al., 2003) and preliminary usability testing (Cardello, 
2014; Nielsen, 2012) of a digitally-delivered CBT for a psy-
chosis (CBTp)-informed skills training platform for family 
and other caregivers of individuals impacted by psychosis. 
Compared to other approaches, such as the solution-first 
approach or function-centered design, UCD systematically 
identifies user pain points, needs, and goals. As a result, 
UCD enables co-production between stakeholders (e.g., 
digital project designers, engineers, treatment developers or 
content experts, and end users) to optimize the responsivity 
of the product to the end users’ needs, desires, and contexts 
(Lyon et al., 2019). Furthermore, involving the intended ben-
eficiaries of interventions in research and the co-production 
of health services can further enhance the applicability and 
appropriateness of the intervention (Buckley et al., 2007; 
Lwembe et al., 2016).

Participants

Our multidisciplinary research and development team 
worked with an advisory board consisting of family and 
caregivers (N = 7) of individuals with psychotic and mood 
disorders. We solicited input on proposal development, 
design principles, and priority content. We employed pur-
posive sampling to recruit family caregivers who had prior 
exposure to the Psychosis REACH training to serve as end 
users. Eligible participants included individuals over the age

142
	

of 18 who identified as the family or significant other of 
an individual diagnosed with a psychotic disorder or mood 
disorder with psychotic features, had previously completed 
Psychosis REACH training, and endorsed at least weekly 
contact in any format with a loved one who experiences psy-
chosis. The < BLIND FOR REVIEW > Institutional Review 
Board approved the study.

Qualitative Interviews

In line with best practices (Patton, 2002), the research team 
aggregated stakeholder input on relatable caregiving com-
munication challenges, personas, design specifications of 
the platform, and design requirements. The research team 
developed a list of semi-structured interview questions. Dur-
ing the individual interviews with the family caregivers, an 
experienced qualitative researcher used the semi-structured 
interview guide to elicit family caregivers’ needs for a digital 
platform that incorporates conversational agents. Interview 
questions focused on family caregivers’ needs and experi-
ences (i.e., Can you share with me a recent time when you 
interacted with your loved one while they were experiencing 
psychotic symptoms? What challenges did you experience 
with your loved one? Who or where do you go to when you 
want to know how to communicate with your loved one?) 
and their interest in integrating technology to support their 
caregiving (i.e., If we were to put the materials on Psycho-
sis REACH on a website to give you easier access, how 
would you want it to look/work?). Participants received 
e-gift cards after the interviews as incentives for their time 
and involvement. The interviews were audio recorded with 
permission and subsequently transcribed. Thematic analysis 
was adopted to analyze the transcripts (Miles & Huberman, 
1984).

Co‑Design Session

Participants were invited and consented to join the 90-min 
co-design sessions with the team of UCD experts. The pur-
pose of the co-design sessions was to collectively ideate 
design specifications for the digital platform that delivers 
CBTp and has conversational agents to practice the skills 
with the family caregivers. Participants were first introduced 
to technology-assisted interventions and provided back-
ground information on the proposed digital platform with 
conversational agents. Participants were asked to brainstorm 
platform specifications such as intervention modalities, 
design preferences, user flows, platform layout options, and 
chatbot conversation format. Based on these design specifi-
cations, the research team generated a prototype called psy-
chosis iREACH, a digital platform that focuses on reinforc-
ing Psychosis REACH didactic content and skill rehearsal.

Content Development

Researchers with expertise in intervention, distance learn-
ing, and family interventions for mental health conditions 
collaboratively developed a repository of simulated prompts 
and interactive scenarios between a caregiver and a loved 
one with psychosis. The Psychosis REACH treatment 
development team (second author [blinded] and last author 
[blinded]) proposed module content and authentic dialogs 
that conversational agents could use based on their cumu-
lative 55 years of experience working with individuals 
experiencing psychosis and their families. Scenarios were 
intended to be generalizable across symptom profiles, cul-
tures, and geographic regions. The research team reviewed 
and provided feedback on proposed features based on the 
prescribed parameters of the platform. Two 1-h virtual advi-
sory board meetings were conducted with the goal of solic-
iting input from the Family and Caregiver Advisory Board. 
At each meeting, the research team described the requisite 
components of each training module and the chatbot’s pur-
pose and function.

Usability Testing

The same participants who participated in the previous stages 
of the study were recruited to provide feedback on the proto-
type. During the 60-min usability testing session via Zoom, 
participants were shown the demonstration of the prototype. 
During the demonstration, participants were encouraged to 
think aloud (Jaspers et al., 2004) as they interacted with the 
prototype. After their interactions, participants were asked a 
series of open-ended questions about their experience navi-
gating the platform (i.e., the homepage, sign-in, and module 
learning), the interactivity of the conversational agents, and 
the overall information design. Participants completed the 
10-item System Usability Scale (SUS) to assess the perceived 
level of ease of use and usefulness of the platform. The SUS 
is a valid and reliable measure that has been widely adopted 
by studies focusing on the family caregiver population (Quinn 
et al., 2019). Items are rated on a 5-point Likert scale (1 rep-
resents strongly disagree and 5 represents strongly agree), 
and the total score was derived from the steps suggested by 
Smyk (2020). According to the developers of the scale, scores 
exceeding 68 out of 100 indicate above-average usability.

Results

Qualitative Interviews

Of the seven participants, 67% identified as female and 33% 
identified as male. Most (83%) identified as White, 16% as

143

Native American, and 16% as Asian/Asian American. Most 
(67%) were a parent of an individual experiencing psycho-
sis, 16% were a spouse, and 16% were a sibling. Regarding 
technological literacy, almost half the participants (N = 3) 
reported that they were unfamiliar with trending technology. 
Forty-three percent of participants reported device use per 
day ranging from 2 to 5 h, 43% reported 5 to 10 h, and 14% 
reported more than 10 h. Thematic analysis (inter-coder reli-
ability 89%) revealed participants’ caregiving experiences 
and their interests in incorporating technology to support 
themselves. Participants commonly reported their strug-
gles and emotional distress around caregiving. Frustration, 
exhaustion, and anxiety were common feelings due to their 
caregiving roles and their worries about the impacted indi-
viduals’ safety. Many reported feelings of helplessness, 
isolation, and confusion, commonly generated during times 
when they were unable to access resources. For example, a 
caregiver stated “I feel I am on my own and no one has the 
answer to my questions.” Participants endorsed a preference 
for an on-demand web-based tool with little-to-no prerequi-
site digital skills. One participant noted, “To have to learn 
new things all the time…for someone who has a child, with 
an adult child with psychosis, that’s stressful enough. [I’d] 
just rather have things be really easy, so no password and 
one way to do everything and a clear explanation of how 
to use the site in writing.” Participants also expressed the 
need for a community that knows how to navigate caregiv-
ing challenges so they can learn from others’ experience. 
“… we [are] all in so much pain about... our own family 
member, where we see... our own stories and the beauty of 
stopping that and listening to [another] person in their own 
pain. You know that has a transformational power that it 
takes you away from.” When asked about the main challenge 
they experienced with their loved ones, the dominant theme 
across participants was a perceived lack of competence in 
communicating with their loved one. For example, one par-
ticipant said, “I would love more answers to know how to 
approach the patient.” Overall, participants expressed the 
need to have a tool for effective communication with their 
loved ones who suffered from psychosis.
When asked about their interests in incorporating a digi-
tal platform with conversational agents, users first expressed 
positive sentiments regarding the Psychosis REACH train-
ing. The training has equipped the caregivers with useful 
techniques to communicate more effectively with their 
loved ones. “I took the training in May…It was amazing, 
super informative, very thorough, great tools…strategies 
like empathizing are great.” Participants suggested that 
there is a need to review, practice, and receive feedback on 
Psychosis REACH skills at their own pace. When asked 
about appropriate formats to communicate with the coach 

and the simulated patient, participants agreed using multi-
ple choice response options is more preferable than free text 
typing with responses. Overall, thematic analyses revealed 
the following three features of the desired digital platform: 
(1) an online platform in which users can access the Psy-
chosis REACH content whenever they need to know how to 
approach their loved ones, (2) a conversational agent (from 
now on, referred to as “coach”) that helps users navigate the 
platform and provides instructions and feedback to users 
through multiple choice response options, and (3) a con-
versational agent that simulates a loved one diagnosed with 
a psychotic disorder (from now on, referred as “client”) 
with whom users can practice each of the five Psychosis 
REACH skills.
Developed within the context of the health technology 
design framework (Kowatsch et al., 2019), participants’ 
feedback was distilled into six core design principles, which 
served as a guideline for the platform design team (Fig. 1). 
The six design principles are simplicity, usability, accessibil-
ity, skill acquisition, sense of community, and hope.

Co‑Design Session

The same seven participants who participated in the quali-
tative interviews were invited to the co-design sessions; all 
participants participated. Based on the findings from the 
qualitative interviews, the design sessions were organized 
into three parts: the design of the online platform, the coach 
conversational agent, and the client conversational agent. 
With regard to the design of the platform, participants rec-
ommended that learning modules be presented as optional 
features for learners to access on demand. Participants noted 
a preference for these modules to present narrative sum-
maries of key information (e.g., rationale, empirical basis, 
and core techniques) associated with each skill domain to 
enhance comprehension and support deeper learning for 
self-selecting learners. Participants’ feedback on design 
features also included preferences for the sign-up and login 
page, duplicating navigation to skill modules on both the 
side and bottom of the screen and boxing text into dialog 
boxes to enable easier tracking between the user, coach, and 
client conversational agents. For the sign-up page, partici-
pants expressed that 2-factor authentication seemed secure 
and trustworthy. They suggested that security statements 
should be added to explain why the website collects personal 
data (e.g., email and/or phone number, relationship to loved 
one with psychosis, and date of birth) and how data is stored. 
Features such as a magnifying glass function, larger font 
size, video and audio media, and print functions for each 
module were requested to enhance accessibility. Regard- 
ing the coach conversational agent, participants requested

144
	

easy access to the virtual coach, supported by a floating 
button that tracks along with user progress on a screen and 
also fixed to the top right corner of the screen. Participants 
also indicated that depicting the coach conversational agent 
as one of treatment developers gives the coach more cred-
ibility. Participants viewed a series of 3 mood board visual 
prototypes to assess their preferences on the conversation 
format layouts. Option A is the conversational agent in the 
middle with the show text option, option B is the conver-
sational agent in the middle with text always present, and 
option C is the conversational agent at the left side. One 
participant (14%) chose A; 5 participants (71%) chose B; 
1 participant (14%) chose C. Finally, although participants 
reported a preference for representation of diverse clinical 
presentations and relationships between the caregiver and 
loved ones with psychosis, stakeholders also reasoned that 
the initial prototype should focus on one common clinical 
symptom and one caregiving relationship. Because parents 
are the most frequent caregiver to access Psychosis REACH 
trainings (Kopelovich et al., 2022, 2023), the determination 
was made to prioritize the depiction of a parent interacting 
with an adult child experiencing persistent paranoid ideation.

Content Development

Modules were developed to correspond to each of the five 
categories of cognitive behavioral skills taught in Psychosis 
REACH, which are abbreviated using the acronym FIRST 
(Kopelovich et al., 2022). Each of the five modules includes 
a specific learning objective, a brief summary and rationale 
of the skill domain, and real-world examples of skill applica-
tions. Following the didactic content, users are instructed to 
self-navigate to the client conversational agent to practice 
each set of skills.

Usability Testing

The same seven participants who participated in the co-
design session were recruited for usability activities to 
verify the alignment of changes with initial feedback. 
Regarding the website platform, the overall feedback was 
that users had no barriers in navigating the website, which 
they noted was simple and straightforward: “I like that the 
sidebar with all [menu] choices continues onto this page so 
anytime I can go back to any menus on the sidebar menu. 

Fig. 1   Psychosis iREACH design principles and requirements

145

The website is very simple.” Changes were made to avoid 
cognitive overload with too much text-based visual stimuli: 
“Too much text makes it hard to concentrate.” To improve 
users’ experience, we increased the font size to 18 points, 
used visually appealing blocks to chunk content, added 
printer tabs, and augmented auditory and visual support 
(e.g., adding a magnifying glass function). Additionally, we 
added a progress indicator for users to know how much pro-
gress they have made in using the website to learn FIp and 
how many rounds of dialogs they have had with the client 
conversational agent. Participants expressed their apprecia-
tion of having a progress bar, stating “I like the percent-
age present. I would know the progress and it gives more 
information.” For both the coach and client conversational 
agents, participants expressed a preference for personalized 
avatars. For example, if the coach’s conversational agent 
depicts the experts involved in the Psychosis REACH train-
ing, it enhances familiarity and credibility. One participant 
mentioned, “I like the real image and makes it feel like you 
have someone actually there. It’s not silly and more person-
alized.” Another participant stated, “I prefer the image of 
someone from the team.” Interactivity is important for our 
participants (“I think the animated avatars are more engag-
ing than text only.”).
Usability interviews were designed to understand the lev-
els of ease of use and usefulness of the website. Reported 
levels of use of use ranged from 4.2 to 4.8 (1 being very 
difficult and 5 being very easy); levels of usefulness ranged 
from 4.0 to 4.7 (1 being very useless and 5 being very use-
ful). User feedback on the website difficulty levels included: 
“The design does not [look] like I am reading a book or tak-
ing a class. It is like conversations… everything is so good. 
I want to continue (browsing the website)” and “Everything 
is easy to read, especially when we are always in a hurry.” 
Scores on the SUS indicate that participants generally feel 
that the Psychosis iREACH user interface is easy to use and 
found that the coach and client conversational agents feature 
was highly intuitive. The SUS mean score 93.1 (SD = 7.78) 
indicates above-average usability.

Discussion

Education and skills training related to symptom identifi-
cation, monitoring, communication, and illness manage-
ment have been consistently recognized as a significant 
challenge for caregivers of individuals with psychosis 
(Cheng et al., 2020; Kopelovich et al., 2021). Psychosis 
REACH is intended to enhance access to caregiver train-
ing in these evidence-based skills for psychosis, yield-
ing promising effects on the wellbeing and efficacy of 
caregivers and potentially to the individual experiencing 
psychosis (Kopelovich et al., 2023; Rathod et al., 2023). 

While Psychosis REACH’s bichronous training approach 
can enhance the reach of the intervention (e.g., Kopelovich 
et al., Under Review), a more dynamic platform is needed 
to enhance opportunities for learners to rehearse the skills. 
The conceptual impetus for Psychosis iREACH was to lev-
erage conversational agents to create dynamic opportuni-
ties for Psychosis REACH trainees to reinforce didactic 
content and enhance skill acquisition. We adhered to best 
practices in digital platform development to create a Psy-
chosis iREACH functional prototype. While limited by a 
small scope and sample, our co-production approach can 
be extended to caregivers of individuals with other seri-
ous mental health conditions. For example, the real-time 
collaborative prototyping efforts using remote telecon-
ference sessions was effective, feasible, and acceptable 
among family caregivers of individuals with psychosis. 
The process resulted in a functional prototype that family 
caregivers found to be accessible, acceptable, and usable. 
These promising findings set the stage for further develop-
ment and testing.
Our research team anchored accessibility and usability 
in each stage of the design process. We engaged end users 
with various technical skills in their home or work environ-
ments to ensure that the product was navigable for diverse 
users and devices. According to our research, conversational 
agents can be embodied with animated visual representa-
tions of field experts so users feel more engaged. Several 
national guidelines have recommended that both CBT and 
FIp be made more widely available (National Institute for 
Clinical Excellence, 2002). Using digital platforms to deliver 
CBT for psychosis to family caregivers increases accessibil-
ity. A systematic review (Kambeitz-Ilankovic et al., 2022) 
also indicates comparable effectiveness of face-to-face and 
digital CBT approaches. In our study, participants reported 
the interests and usability of the digital platform, specifi-
cally, the conversational agents, to practice and receive real-
time feedback. Literature demonstrates that appropriately 
designed conversational agents utilize natural language 
processing (NLP) techniques to support learning (Chhibber 
& Law, 2019). The benefits of using conversational agents 
to assist learning include fostering an environment with 
ease and comfort to both fulfill the need for interpersonal 
relationships in learning and stimulate essential learning 
behaviors through just-in-time information exchange and 
communication (Figen & Ozlem, 2012). Our preliminary 
work has led to the development of an appropriate prototype. 
The natural next steps are to use the platform to collect more 
language data for optimizing NLP techniques and family 
caregivers’ learning experiences.
In the usability stage, participants rated both the platform 
and the conversational agents feature as highly effective, 
efficient, and satisfactory. Users reported that the design is 
simple and easy because of the consistency of the design and

146
	

clear descriptions of each function and stated they would 
recommend it to others. Several preferred features from 
the usability interviews included privacy statements on the 
sign-up page, tooltips in each menu option, and the skip 
options for returned users, which can be extended to other 
technology-assisted family intervention platforms.

Limitations and Implications

UCD research is often limited to small samples (Greer 
et al., 2019). Our sample, while small, was enriched by 
direct stakeholder involvement in the discovery and initial 
design process. That said, digital training tools can and 
likely will be deployed internationally and should there-
fore represent the needs and desires of the target audience 
in diverse geographic regions. Future research and devel-
opment should therefore focus on bolstering the number 
and diversity of stakeholders involved in the co-production 
process and enhancing the representation of various clini-
cal presentations and caregiving relationships.
This study is aimed at designing and testing Psycho-
sis iREACH, a digital platform consisting of web-based 
modules and functional conversational agents to enhance 
knowledge and competency in cognitive behavioral tech-
niques for families caring for a loved one with psychosis. 
The study benefited from the inclusion of participants 
who had lived experience as caregivers of individuals with 
psychotic disorders, had completed the Psychosis REACH 
core training, and who reported a range of comfort lev-
els with technology. Future platform development can be 
enhanced by aggregating suggestions from a larger and 
more diverse sample of caregivers to enhance interactivity 
and expedient access to the platform.

Acknowledgements  The authors wish to thank the University of Wash-
ington Family & Caregiver Advisory Board for their guidance on the 
user-centered design and recruitment process; and our caregiver end 
users for their feedback on the content and wireframes.

Author Contribution  All authors commented on previous versions of 
the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

Funding  This work was funded by the University of Washington 
Garvey Institute for Brain Health Solutions innovation grant. 

Data Availability  The data that support the findings of this study are 
available from the corresponding author, upon reasonable request.

Declarations 

Ethics Approval  All research activities reported in this manuscript were 
approved by the University of Washington Institutional Review Board 
(STUDY00013937). The proposal was granted an exempt determina-
tion. All data were de-identified. All authors adhered to recommended 
best practices for the conduct, reporting, editing, and publication of 
scholarly work in medical journals of the International Committee of 
Medical Journal Editors and Springer Ethics Policies. 

Consent for Publication  The authors have all consented to publish.