agriculture

Article
Safety-Critical Manuals for Agricultural Tractor
Drivers: A Method to Improve Their Usability

Maurizio Cutini 1,*
ID , Giada Forte 2, Marco Maietta 2, Maurizio Mazzenga 2,
Simon Mastrangelo 2,3 and Carlo Bisaglia 1
ID

1
Consiglio per la ricerca in agricoltura e l’analisi dell’economia agraria, Research Centre for Engineering and

2
Ergoproject Srl, Via Antonio Pacinotti 73/B, Roma 00146, Italy; g.forte@ergoproject.it (G.F.);
m.maietta@ergoproject.it (M.M.); m.mazzenga@ergoproject.it (M.M.); s.mastrangelo@ergoproject.it (S.M.)
3
PAN-PAN Edizioni Srl, in Via Luciano 15, Milano 20156, Italy
*
Correspondence: maurizio.cutini@crea.gov.it; Tel.: +39-0363-49603

Received: 4 July 2017; Accepted: 31 July 2017; Published: 4 August 2017

Abstract: This work sets out the planning phases adopted for the ﬁrst time to put together a manual
on injury and accident prevention in the use of farm tractors. The goal is to convey information
more effectively than at present, while taking the end users’ opinions into consideration. The manual
was devised, created, and tested based on a human-centred design (HCD) process, which identiﬁed
the operators’ requirements using a participatory ergonomics (PE) strategy. The main topics of the
manual were outlined by engaging the users in a qualitative research activity (i.e., focus groups
and workshops with ﬁnal users), and the contents were prioritized and labelled by way of a noun
prioritization activity. The users were involved right up to the choice of graphics and print layout in
order to orient the publication to the farming context. The research activity highlighted a divergence
between the operators’ requirements and the topics currently dealt with in the sector publications.
The project resulted in the publication of the “Safe Tractor” manual, which features some innovations.
The experience highlighted the need to adopt HCD processes to create innovative editorial products,
which can help speed up the dissemination of safety culture in the primary sector.

Keywords: focus group; editorial design; health and safety; usability

1. Introduction

Agricultural work is one of the most hazardous occupations as it ranks among the top jobs in
work injury statistics. The fatality rate of such injuries is six times higher than the rate of all industries
combined. In addition, concern about the growing number of leisure-related farm injuries is arising
as well.
Figures concerning the burden of these injuries in the EU countries (EU15) show an average
mortality rate of 13 deaths per 100,000 farm workers; this is conﬁrmed also in the United States, where
an average rate of 22 deaths per 100,000 workers was recorded. In both regions, peaks of more than 30.0
deaths per 100,000 workers were recorded as well [1,2]. Statistics referring to Italy reported tractors as
the main cause both of injuries and deadly accidents; as a matter of fact, 56.5% of the total number of
accidents in agriculture and forestry has been related to operating tractor tasks. Within this framework,
and considering only the deadly accidents in agriculture and forestry operations, concern arises as
51% of these happened while workers were operating tractors (75% located on ﬁeld and 25% while
driving on roads). As far as accident dynamics are concerned, machine rollover represents the 77% of
the accidents, while those involving the cardan shaft account for 0.7%, but 66% of cases result in the
death of the operator [3].

Agriculture 2017, 7, 67; doi:10.3390/agriculture7080067
www.mdpi.com/journal/agriculture

2 of 20

Children often live, play, or even help on farms, and they are exposed to the dangers of tractors,
machinery, and livestock [4]. Among the actions underway to lower the number and seriousness
of accidents, effective training methods are increasingly being sought for agricultural machinery
operators. Indeed, the “experience” factor alone does not seem to be signiﬁcant, seeing as, in Italian
statistics, fatalities mainly concern “senior” users; 40% of accidents are with operators aged over
50 [5]. As a result, institutions are intervening with information and worker training initiatives,
both owing to new national regulatory obligations [6] and as an awareness-raising and divulgation
activity. Furthermore, the design activities should also be more end user-oriented through what is now
called a human-centred approach. This means that all designable components of a system have to be
ﬁtted to the characteristics of the intended users rather than selecting or adapting humans to ﬁt the
system [7]. This work sets out the planning phases adopted for the ﬁrst time to put together a manual
on injury and accident prevention in the use of farm tractors. The Human-Centred Design (HCD)
process has also been formalized in the ISO-standard 13407-1999 human-centred design processes for
Interactive Systems [8], currently revised by ISO 9241-210, 2010 [9]. These standards state the following
key principles:

1.
the active involvement of users and clear understanding of user and task requirements;
2.
an appropriate allocation of function between user and system;
3.
iteration of design solutions;
4.
multi-disciplinary design teams.

HCD is a broad term to describe design processes in which end users inﬂuence how a design takes
shape. It is both a broad philosophy and variety of methods [10]. It came to the fore through Norman
and Draper [11], who focused on users’ needs, carrying out an activity/task analysis, performing early
testing and evaluation, and designing iteratively. According to Norman [12], the role of the designer
is to facilitate the task for the user and to make sure that they are able to make use of the product as
intended, with a minimum effort to learn how to use it. Norman notes that often the manuals that
accompany products are not user-centred; consequently some design principles are needed to guide
the design.
HCD requires the full exploration of the user’s needs and the intended uses of the product.
The need to involve actual users, often in the environment in which they would use the product
being designed, is a natural evolution in the ﬁeld of user-centred design [13]. Their involvement
leads to more effective, efﬁcient, and safer products and contributes to the acceptance and success of
products [14]. The main methods used in user-centred design are as follows [15]:

•
ﬁeld studies (including contextual inquiry);
•
user requirements analysis;
•
iterative design;
•
usability evaluation;
•
task analysis;
•
focus groups;
•
formal heuristic evaluation;
•
user interviews;
•
prototype without user testing;
•
surveys;
•
informal expert review;
•
card sorting;
•
participatory design.

Before any usability design can begin, it is necessary to understand the context of use for
the product, i.e., the goals of the user community, the main user, the task, and the environmental

3 of 20

characteristics of the situation in which it will be operated [16]. The work set out here focuses on
designing a manual on the health, safety, use and maintenance of farm tractors. When drawing up
these publications, generally the contents they need to include are taken into account but not how
they are read and used by the end reader. This research used a method that is “user-oriented” in all
its phases of realization [17]. Every phase of the manual’s deﬁnition envisaged the farm workers’
active and direct participation, in particular concerning the choice of contents and their depiction in
graphic form.

2. Materials and Methods

The ﬁrst phase of the project set out to analyse the context in question. As a result, existing manuals
were acquired to identify which topics needed to be dealt with and to assess their current presentation,
organization, and reception. What emerged from the current publications was used as the basis for
the workshops with the farm workers (WS1). They were all Italian and from the Bergamo area of the
Lombardy region. During the workshops, the farm workers discussed and outlined their knowledge
requirements, which were then put forward and tested in subsequent focus groups [18,19] involving a
larger number of users. Once the context as well as the workers’ real knowledge requirements had
been deﬁned, the next step was to devise the layout of the new publication. The iterative design phase
began with a noun prioritization approach. Noun prioritization is the process of assigning priorities to
things or tasks [20]. Prototypes were tested through expert observation and user workshops (WS2),
until the ﬁnal publication design was reached.

2.1. Issued Manual Evaluation: Deﬁnition of the Context in Question

The activity began by analysing a sample of equivalent publications to the planned one [21].
An analysis was made of nineteen publications by public institutions, the main focus of which was the
safety of farm equipment (see list in Appendix A).
The aims were to catalogue the editorial features and to single out the best/worst practices in
terms of clarity, immediacy in getting the message across, impossibility of misinterpretation, and
completeness. Possible interesting topics and gaps in the communication process were identiﬁed in
order to reach a ﬁrst hypothesis on how to develop the new publication and to test it by involving
ﬁnal users, who were able to recognize the most and least mentioned topics and therefore to identify
the ones not mentioned.

2.2. Preliminary Screening: Individual Interviews with Experienced Users

The ﬁrst activities were individual interviews with three expert workers (41 to 52 years old, 20 to
40 years of experience). They were asked questions on their habitual use of safety manuals and user
and maintenance manuals, their knowledge requirements, the information that they think a sector
worker should know, and what they expect from a new publication on health and safety in the sector.
By comparing the results of this activity with what emerged from the previous benchmarking
on other publications, it was possible to deﬁne a ﬁrst structure (i.e., selection of topics, style of the
illustrations) of the new publication.

2.3. Workshop 1: Further Investigations to Outline which Topics to Include in the New Publication and on
Health and Safety Manual User Experiences

A workshop was organized with a larger group of operators (ﬁve experienced and three less
experienced users, average age of 41, standard deviation of 6.37). The goal of the workshop was
to obtain conﬁrmation of what had emerged in the interviews. The experienced operators had
28.5 years of experience, while the less experienced operators counted 14.6 years. As a result, a further
investigation could be made of their health and safety manual user experiences in order to more
precisely deﬁne the topics to include in the new publication.

4 of 20

The results were compared with the initial hypothesis made after analysing the manuals, leading
to the outline of a ﬁrst layout (i.e., division into chapters, selection of topics) for the new publication.

2.4. Focus Group: Deﬁnition of the New Publication

Contrary to group interviews, which collect data from several people at the same time, focus
groups explicitly use group interaction as the core of the method. This means that instead of the
researcher asking to each person a question in turn, participants are encouraged to discuss and
exchange comments and questions on experiences and points of view [19]. Focus groups are helpful
“when insights, perceptions and explanations are more important than actual numbers” [22].
The aims of the focus group were:

•
to further investigate how the users interact with the manuals;
•
to devise the layout of the new publication.

It was possible to recruit twenty-two experienced farmers:

•
landowners, agricultural contractors, farm labourers, and seasonal workers;
•
aged between 20 and 60 (average age 36, SD = 12.46);
•
all men.

The users were divided into three focus groups, each lasting one and a half hours (one with
eight participants, two with two). A set of over 15 users is usually considered sufﬁcient to perform a
categorization activity such as noun prioritization [23].
They were attended by a moderator, who conducted the activities while promoting the
participation of all and asking some open questions, and an observer who took notes and made
additional questions in the ﬁnal phase of the discussion. As agreed with the users, all of the sessions
were video recorded.
Once the context as well as the workers’ real knowledge requirements had been deﬁned, the layout
of the new publication was devised and then checked using noun prioritization. This last is an effective
method for representing users’ implicit mental models, which reveals their expectations on how the
contents should be categorized. Once the mental models and implicit categorization are known,
the information can be organized so that it is easier to ﬁnd and use. This technique consists of showing
the users cards with the name or description of a particular content. The users are then asked to
divide the cards into groups and to put the topics into set categories. The participants were invited to
categorize the topics and put them in order from the most to the least important. The categories of topics
presented in the “Safe Tractor” publication were selected by researchers following the results from
issued manual evaluation and input collected from users involved in the pre-focus group participatory
activities (i.e., workshops and interviews). There were three set categories: (i) information, (ii) training,
and (iii) action.
Sixteen topics (Table 1) had to be put into categories (six in each of the information and training
categories and four in the action category), which had been selected from the results of the analysis of
the topics dealt with in the existing publications and in WS1 (topics considered more/less interesting
by the participants).

5 of 20

Table 1. The categories and the relevant topics proposed to the participants of the focus group.

Category
Topic
Description

Information
driving in the ﬁeld
risks of injuries and accidents that can take place
while driving in the ﬁeld

on-road driving
risks of injuries and accidents that can take place
while driving on roads

regulations
presentation of the health and safety regulations
concerning agricultural sector workers

environmental risks
the impact of work operations on the biological
and/or atmospheric conditions
risks linked to use of the
farm vehicle
dangers connected to use during farming and
maintenance operations

statistics
e.g., number of workers in the sector, number of
accidents/injuries

Training
work environment
basic notions on environmental and
organizational aspects affecting work activities

checklist
a ‘paper and pencil’ list that workers can use to
check that the work is done in safety

maintenance
information on the ordinary maintenance
activities to perform on the machine every day

work postures
indications on the postures to assume to prevent
muscle/bone problems linked to the farm work

ﬁrst approach to the vehicle
indications on how to work safely designed for
users new to the sector
safety signs
Action
driving in the ﬁeld
on-road driving
injuries from use of the
vehicle
information on the most likely injuries linked to
the use of farm vehicles
ﬁrst aid
basic ﬁrst aid procedures

2.5. Workshop 2: Discussion of the Draft with Experienced Users

The iterative design phase began after the focus group and noun prioritization activities.
The authors of the manual were involved in drawing up the contents of the new publication, with the
request to follow the indications below in order to create a text built around real users’ requirements:
“Always remember who your readers are: not just your boss or whoever has to review your texts,
but the end users” [24]. The prototype was tested with the users in workshops (WS2) using the
“walk-through/talk-through” method [25,26]. The users had the tasks of reading the contents, marking
any passages that were difﬁcult to understand and/or not very clear, and deciding the best solution for
the graphical layout and for the order in which the topics were presented. During WS2, the publication
was read out loud, followed by a free discussion. During this second session, the discussion was
oriented in order to verify and further investigate subjective dimensions [27], such as:

•
attractiveness: assessing whether the handbook is interesting enough to attract and keep the
users’ interest, with particular attention to the aspects/elements that they prefer and/or have
most caught their interest;
•
comprehension: assessing whether the transmitted message is clear and how this is understood
by users;
•
acceptance: ensuring that the handbook does not contain offensive or unpleasant elements and
that it actually reﬂects users’ convictions and beliefs;
•
personal involvement: checking if users perceive that the instrument was designed precisely for
their needs;
•
persuasion:
assessing
whether
the
handbook
convinces
users
to
implement
the
proposed behaviour.

6 of 20

3. Results

3.1. Issued Manual Evaluation

A vast theoretical overview of the topic of “farm vehicle and equipment safety” but little
information/practical training (e.g., how to get into and out of a tractor safely even though this
is one of the most widespread causes of injuries) occured in 57.9% of the analysed publications. Table 2
shows the frequency with which the topics came up.

Table 2. Topics seen in the publications and their frequency.

Topic
Frequency (%)

Work environments (theory)
89.5
Safety signs
78.9
Farm vehicle safety (theory)
73.7
Statistics on the frequency of accidents
57.9
Checklist
31.6
Driving the farm vehicle on the road
26.3
Maintenance operations
15.8
First approach to the farm vehicle
15.8
First aid
10.5

Almost 85% of the analysed publications were divided into a range of six to eight chapters, further
divided into paragraphs and subparagraphs. They were set out in the style of a compilation, with
quotations from the regulations in force and technical descriptions of the risks to an operator when
using a tractor. The images accompanying the texts were technical drawings taken from the regulations
or drawn following the same type of model. 10% of the publications examined give a practical and
concise presentation of the main dangers connected to the use of tractors as well as the solutions to be
adopted in an emergency; the texts are accompanied by examples in the form of non-technical images.
Lastly, the remaining 5% contain notes on the regulations and give information on day-to-day work
activities; each topic is presented according to information/training sheets with example illustrations
accompanying the text, subsections, and summary tables. Through this analysis, it was possible to
identify the institutions’ training/information priorities, which were then compared with the user
requirements previously collected.

3.2. Preliminary Screening

The users interviewed individually (n = 3) underlined the need for publications on safety that
give practical and concrete indications on “what to do”, “what not to do”, and “what to know” to
avoid or prevent accidents. They highlighted that farm sector workers have a great need for training
since they consider the existing publications unsuitable and incomplete.
The operators interviewed expressed information/training needs in contrast with what was
found in the analysis of the existent publications. From the interviews, it also emerged that user and
maintenance manuals are given little use both because there is not always a space designed for them
and because the texts are particularly long and not very clear when those consulting them would
instead like to ﬁnd quick solutions to problems on the spot. Even when a tractor is used for the ﬁrst
time, the tendency is to ask more experienced colleagues.

3.3. Workshop 1

The workshop with a larger group of operators (ﬁve experienced and three less experienced,
average age of 41, SD of 6.37) resulted in the classiﬁcation of the topics that the users thought most
useful (obtained from the average of the topics considered most useful by the ﬁve experienced users

7 of 20

and the average of those considered most useful by the three less experienced users). These are
presented separately depending on the amount of experience of the operators (Table 3).

Table 3. Topics in order of usefulness for the interviewed users, separated according to experience.

Classiﬁcation
Experienced Users
Less Experienced Users

1
Checklist
First approach to the farm vehicle
2
On-road driving
Work environments (practical information)
3
Maintenance operations
Checklist
4
First aid
On-road driving
5
Farm vehicle safety (practical information)
Maintenance operations
6
-
First aid

The comparison (Figure 1) between the topics quoted by the operators as useful and those treated
as such in the publications highlights the divergence (r = −0.69) between what the users would like to
read and what they ﬁnd in the manuals.

 

0

0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18

Quotations by operators (n.)

Citation in publications (n.)

Driving on the road

Control check list

Maintenance

First approach to the
tractor
First aid

Working postures

Occupational diseases

Safety of machinery-
Theory
Legislation

Accident statistics

Safety signs

Working places
(theory)

Figure 1. The x-axis shows the topics dealt with in the publications, the y-axis shows the topics quoted
by the operators.

3.4. Focus Groups

3.4.1. User and Maintenance Manuals

The users only questioned user manuals to ﬁnd out what error codes mean or the maximum
admissible load weight. The vehicle owners only consult the manual when they are dealing with
a new model, while they state that during the tractor’s life span they ask either the dealer where
they bought it or colleagues with the same model. The users complained about the fact that the
information in the publications is not very comprehensible because they are written in a complex or
superﬁcial manner. Another problem is that these texts are not very accurate translations into Italian
of instructions written in other languages. Examples of users’ answers were: It only gets opened when
it’s absolutely necessary; It’s written for clever clogs; The information’s there, but we can’t put it into
practice; At times the only solution they give is to go and consult an authorized dealer. The participants
pinpointed the length of the texts as the main factor discouraging them from reading and claimed that,
in previous years, the dealers had suggested to the manufacturers that they divide the manuals into
several leaﬂets precisely to make them easier to read.

8 of 20

3.4.2. Safety Manuals

All the operators admitted that they only read safety publications when they had to; for example,
during a course held on the farm. They said they had leafed through them while waiting in the ofﬁces
of some institution or other or because they came with the sector journals. They deemed them all to
be very similar to one another, outdated and not really responding to their actual work conditions.
Examples of operators’ comments resulted: I’m not going to read them until I get sent on a course;
When you go to the Italian farmers’ union to sit in a queue, you leaf through them because that’s all
there is in the waiting room; It didn’t say anything new. It was a waste of time. They did not express
the need for clearer publications because they appeared skeptical and almost annoyed by the aims of
these publications; they talked about them as containing lists of “obligations”, which involved costs
of varying proportions in order to meet them. “They’re a cost, not a gain.” The data categorized and
summed up shows that the participants are sensitive to health/safety problems, but in practice they
have difﬁculty in applying suitable measures in their everyday working conditions.
Nevertheless, it emerged that they wanted to be informed on these topics so long as those doing
the information and training activities (public institutions, manufacturers, lawmakers) accounted for
their real working and personal needs (e.g., clearer instructions, basic and useful information).

3.4.3. Noun Prioritization

The same people took part in the noun prioritization as took part in the focus groups. Of the
22 people present in the focus group, 19 took part in this second trial (average age 38, SD was 12.39).
The preferences marked by the users were shown as the total of the degree of preference attributed to
the topic (from 1, agree with most, to 5, agree with least) divided by the number of participants. For
every category, the average of the user preferences given to each topic was compared with the average
presence of the same topics in the 19 texts analysed during the issued manual evaluation activity.
The results (Figures 2–4) show an inverse polarization on almost all the topics proposed; the topics
deemed most interesting by the participants are those dealt with least in the publications analysed.

 

0.84

0.95
0.89

0.84

0.64

0.88

0.96

On‐road
driving
Driving in the
field
Regulations
Environmental
risks
Use of farm
machine risks
Statistics

Frequency/Normalized score 

Topic
Frequency of the presence in publications
Users scores

Figure 2. Cont.

9 of 20

 

0.95
0.89

0.96

0.00

0.20

0.40

0.60

0.80

1.00

On-road
driving
Driving in the
field
Regulations
Environmental
risks
Use of farm
machine risks
Statistics

Frequency of the topic 

Topic

Presence in publications
User preference

Figure 2. Frequencies of the topics dealt with in the sample of the 19 analysed publications (blue) and
the normalized average scores expressed by the 19 operators (red) in the Information category.

 

Work
environment
Checklist
Maintenance First approach Work postures
Signs

Frequency/Normalized score 

Topic

Frequency of the presence in publications
Users scores

Figure 3. Cont.

10 of 20

 

0.00

0.20

0.40

0.60

0.80

1.00

Work
environment
Checklist
Maintenance
First
approach
Work
postures
Signs

Frequency of the topic 

Topic

Presence in publications
User preference

Figure 3. Frequencies of the topics dealt with in the sample of the 19 analysed publications (blue) and
the normalized average scores expressed by the 19 operators (red) in the Training category.

 

Farm vehicle
injuries
Driving in the
field
On‐road driving
First aid

Frequency/Normalized score 

Topic
Frequency of the presence in publications
Users scores

Figure 4. Cont.

11 of 20

 

0.00

0.20

0.40

0.60

0.80

1.00

Farm vehicle
injuries
Driving in the
field
On-road driving
First aid

Frequency of the topic 

Topic

Presence in publications
User preference

Figure 4. Frequencies of the topics dealt with in the sample of the 19 analysed publications (blue) and
the normalized average scores expressed by the 19 operators (red) in the Action category.

At the end of the noun prioritization activity, the participants were asked to comment in groups
on the topics they considered most signiﬁcant or they found more difﬁcult to place.
Regulations, belonging to the Information category were ranked among the bottom positions by
the absolute majority of the participants. The users maintain that, in the publications, there is usually
just a list of regulations; therefore they are considered of little interest. A topic that caused perplexity
was the Checklist in the Training category; the users attributed little importance to the topic, not out of
a lack of interest but because they thought that a tool of this kind (a list on paper to tick off with a pen)
could be considered not very usable for the workers. Statistics, in the Information category, was the
main topic of ﬁnal discussion since half of the participants ranked it among the top positions, while the
other half put it among the bottom. The users expressed their opinions by basing themselves on their
previous experiences with sector manuals. The workers with most experience justiﬁed their choice
by maintaining that using statistics on injuries and accidents that really happened could be a good
way of raising awareness and convincing people of the need for safety when reading a publication;
the users with less experience instead claimed that statistics are just seen as lists of numbers and
ignored. The conclusion drawn was that users would declare greater interest in some topics if, in their
experience, they had found them dealt with in a more explicit, concise, and, above all, less abstract
manner (e.g., as far as statistics are concerned, they would prefer to ﬁnd a smaller number of ﬁgures
in the publications but ones linked to the most frequent accidents and injuries, rather than a mass
of generic data). Another interesting piece of data that emerged from the discussion is that, when
prompted to express personal expectations about the publications, the users admitted that they did not
feel the need for a new publication, but that they would feel motivated to read it if the message was
mainly put across through images and a few texts. In addition, they agreed in considering the division
into areas (Information, Training, Action) as complete. They also asked for the topics to be dealt with in
the new publication while taking their real working conditions into consideration. Furthermore, they
explicitly requested that the excessive technicalities found in the previous publications be avoided.

12 of 20

3.5. Workshop 2: Iterative Design

After gathering the information, work began to make the manual prototype deﬁning some
elements such as the position of the illustrations on the page, the layout of the text in boxes, the thumb
index at the side, and the print medium.
The ﬁrst prototype of the manual (Figure 5) was presented to a group of experienced users,
who were asked to assess the clarity of the contents and the coherence of the chosen graphics.
From the preliminary investigation, it emerged that the areas the publication had been divided
into (i.e., Information, Training, and Action) reﬂected the classiﬁcation and institutional lexicon that
had been identiﬁed as a worst practice during the manual evaluation.

Figure 5. Prototype of manual page setting: example on the driver’s position.

Hence, in order to ensure that the contents are conveyed effectively, the general organization
of the text was reviewed to make it task-oriented. As a consequence, it was decided to separate the
formal “regulations” from the “real” ways of using a vehicle according to the workﬂow deﬁned with
the users.
Therefore, the publication was divided into the chapters:

1.
Vehicle at rest (what you need to know before you start to drive):

•
Before you start work;
•
Safety devices;
•
Attaching equipment;
•
Maintenance activities;
•
Work shifts and stress.

2.
Work in the ﬁeld:

•
Danger of overturning;
•
Use of equipment;
•
Presence of people around the machine.

13 of 20

3.
On-road transport:

•
Conduct on the road;
•
How to behave with car drivers;
•
Load quantities;
•
Safety signs.

4.
Annexes:

•
What to do in the event of accidents;
•
Maintenance checklist.

The group of experienced users then reviewed the texts according to the new layout for
completeness, deeming it a good idea to also include a chapter on vocational illnesses, which had not
been included in previous versions.
This additional chapter contains indications on:

•
danger from chemical agents;
•
danger from physical agents;
•
biological risk.

Following the indications, the authors decided on further graphical elements, in particular the
use of boxes and a review of the style of the illustrations (Figure 6).

 

Figure 6. Intermediate draft of the section on the driving position.

To arrive at the ﬁnal version of the publication, another four prototypes were made, which were
assessed iteratively with direct user involvement. Participants were asked to read the prototype of the
publication aloud. This allowed researchers to understand how workers wanted to use the manual for
making meanings that are relevant to them, encouraging discussion, making connections with their
lives, informing their view of themselves and others, asking themselves questions, and using the text
to create personal storytelling [28].

14 of 20

Moreover, when read out loud, the participants found further issues, which they had not identiﬁed
previously or pointed out in the feedback provided after reading the manual to themselves such as the
presence of decorative elements and illustrations in partial contrast to the procedures described in the
texts (e.g., the illustration of some personal protective equipment not set out in the text), complicated
sentences (e.g., the presence of two negatives or long sentences with lots of clauses), and not very clear
descriptions of activities (e.g., for attaching a winch and/or the procedure for making a U-turn on a
slope). After this workshop, the authors came up with the ﬁnal draft (Figure 7).

 

Figure 7. Final draft on the driving position.

3.6. The Final Manual

The ﬁnal manual was drawn up by CREA-IT (Italian Agricultural Research Council) and ENAMA
(Italian Institute for Agricultural Mechanization) experts, assessed and reviewed by experienced users,
and, where necessary, simpliﬁed and updated to ﬁt the needs expressed by the users. As far as the
chosen graphics are concerned, the four colours of the different sections are included on the cover
(Figure 8) to make the four areas that the manual is divided into easy to identify. Furthermore, the areas
can be recognized inside the publication thanks to a vertical thumb index in the same colour as the
area and page number.

 

Figure 8. The cover with the four colours of the different sections included.

15 of 20

At the very beginning of the manual, some information on the latest data on accidents is visualized
in graphic form (Figure 9). This helps to convey the information, make it easy to memorize and read,
and to share the dimension of the problem.

Figure 9. Example of graphic information on the latest data on accidents.

Every topic in the manual includes a short sentence (Figure 10) or ﬁgure (Figures 11 and 12) that
summarizes real cases on fatalities to attract attention and get users to actively read it.

 

Figure 10. Example of a short sentence introducing every topic in the manual reports.

16 of 20

Figure 11. Example of a ﬁgure adopted to attract attention.

Figure 12. Example of a ﬁgure summarizing real cases of fatalities.

In order to only convey the information that the users consider useful for their particular work,
every topic is set out over a maximum of two pages, which include short introductory texts and bullet
points containing the main information to know or use to work in safety.
Some topics have boxes with further information. These have a dual function:

17 of 20

•
the boxes labelled “Did you know that” contain additional information on frequent procedures
and/or situations (Figure 10);
•
the boxes labelled “Be careful” (in red, the colour used to underline situations of possible danger)
contain further bullet points with actions to do and precautions to bear in mind before performing
procedures (Figure 7).

The texts alternate with explanatory and practical illustrations (Figure 13) to use as concrete
visual examples of what is relayed in the manual. Some pages contain colour spots to underline the
behaviour to apply in the described operations.

Figure 13. Example of practical illustrations.

4. Discussion

The “Safe Tractor” manual can be considered the ﬁrst example of a publication in the farming
sector created from its users’ requirements. Through a participatory HCD approach, the users were
involved in all the phases to create the manual.
A generational hierarchy was displayed in the interaction among the participants; the older users
or those with more years of work experience were the ones who expressed their opinions with more
conviction and more often, while the younger users intervened by conﬁrming the opinions of their
older colleagues or rejecting them, but only in part. The group leaders nevertheless played a positive
role as they encouraged the others to participate actively in the discussion by responding promptly to
the stimuli given by the moderator and proposing possibilities for change and improvement.
The ﬁnal manual prototype has a new feature, that is, the print medium. Indeed, bearing in mind
the conditions in which a tractor is normally used (high levels of damp, dust and at times dirt), which
can damage the paper of a normal manual, and considering how the user consults it (in uncomfortable
positions, in a hurry, sometimes wearing gloves), which can lead to whole or parts of pages being
torn, it was decided to print the whole manual on a highly resistant artiﬁcial medium. The chosen
material, which can be handled like ordinary paper, is biaxially oriented polypropylene ﬁlm, or BOPP
(Kartaplastic®, Tecnofoil srl, Azzano Decimo, Pordenone, Italy). This material is more resistant to

18 of 20

ripping and more waterproof than paper but has a similar appearance and likewise can be printed on
and recycled.
Right from the start of the research project, the users’ support was deemed fundamental in
selecting the topics to include in the publication and, more in general, in assessing their efﬁcacy.
The result is a manual that includes information on what to know before getting into the driver’s
seat in “Vehicle at Rest”. “Work in the Field” explains how to safely perform day-to-day activities;
“On-road Transport” suggests how to avoid accidents with other vehicles’ and “Occupational Illnesses”
gives advice on how to prevent health problems.
The validation and assessment process envisaged by the HCD approach has not ended and
may continue after the publication of the manual to iteratively improve it with every new edition.
In this view, it is hoped that it will be possible to further the research by working on quantitative
metrics as well by expanding the topics dealt with (e.g., ﬁrst aid) and by involving other types of
users (e.g., women, foreign workers). The authors should discuss the results and how they can be
interpreted in light of previous studies and of the working hypotheses.

Acknowledgments: This study was funded by the INTRAC project, “Integration of ergonomic and safety aspects
in agricultural tractors” funded by the Italian Ministry of Agricultural, Alimentary, and Forestry Policies, (MiPAAF;
D.M. n. 12488/7303/11 of 09/06/2011).

the experiments; Maurizio Cutini, Simon Mastrangelo and Giada Forte performed the experiments; Simon
Mastrangelo, Giada Forte, Marco Maietta, and Maurizio Mazzenga analyzed the data; Marco Maietta and
Maurizio Mazzenga followed the graphic design and Maurizio Cutini and Giada Forte wrote the paper.

Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest. The founding sponsors had no role in the design
of the study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or in the
decision to publish the results.