Caregiver and Health Care Provider Perspectives on Cloud-
Based Shared Care Plans for Children With Medical Complexity

Arti D. Desai, MD, MSPHa,b, Elizabeth A. Jacob-Files, MA, MPHb, Julia Wignall, MAb, Grace 
Wangc, Wanda Pratt, PhDd, Rita Mangione-Smith, MD, MPHa,b, Maria T. Britto, MD, MPHe

aDepartment of Pediatrics, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington

bSeattle, Children’s Research, Institute, Seattle, Washington

cUndergraduate Research Program, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington

dDepartment of Biomedical and Health Informatics, The Information School

eCincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio

Abstract

OBJECTIVES: Shared care plans play an essential role in coordinating care across health care 
providers and settings for children with medical complexity (CMC). However, existing care plans 
often lack shared ownership, are out-of-date, and lack universal accessibility. In this study, we 
aimed to establish requirements for shared care plans to meet the information needs of caregivers 
and providers and to mitigate current information barriers when caring for CMC.

METHODS: We followed a user-centered design methodology and conducted in-depth 
semistructured interviews with caregivers and providers of CMC who receive care at a tertiary care 
children’s hospital. We applied inductive, thematic analysis to identify salient themes. Analysis 
occurred concurrently with data collection; therefore, the interview guide was iteratively revised as 
new questions and themes emerged.

RESULTS: Interviews were conducted with 17 caregivers and 22 providers. On the basis of 
participant perspectives, we identified 4 requirements for shared care plans that would help meet 
information needs and mitigate current information barriers when caring for CMC. These 
requirements included the following: (1) supporting the accessibility of care plans from multiple 
locations (eg, cloud-based) and from multiple devices, with alert and search features; (2) ensuring 
the organization is tailored to the specific user; (3) including collaborative functionality such as 
real-time, multiuser content management and secure messaging; and (4) storing care plans on a 
secure platform with caregiver-controlled permission settings.

Address correspondence to Arti D. Desai, MD, MSPH, Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington, 2001 Eighth Ave, Suite 
400, M/S CW8-5, PO Box 5371, Seattle, WA 98145-5005. arti.desai@seattlechildrens.org. 
FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE: The authors have indicated they have no financial relationships relevant to this article to disclose.

POTENTIAL CONFLICT OF INTEREST: The authors have indicated they have no potential conflicts of interest to disclose.
Dr Desai conceptualized and designed the study, collected data, participated in data analysis, and drafted the initial manuscript;Ms 
Jacob-Files and Ms Wignall collected data and participated in data analysis; Ms Wang participated in data analysis; Drs Pratt, 
Mangione-Smith, and Britto participated in the design of the study; and all authors reviewed and revised the manuscript, approved the 
final manuscript as submitted, and agree to be accountable for all aspects of the work

HHS Public Access
Author manuscript

Published in final edited form as:
Hosp Pediatr. 2018 July ; 8(7): 394–403. doi:10.1542/hpeds.2017-0242.

CONCLUSIONS: Although further studies are needed to understand the optimal design and 
implementation strategies, shared care plans that meet these specified requirements could mitigate 
perceived information barriers and improve care for CMC.

Care coordination is a critical function of high-quality health systems to meet the health 
service and information needs of patients and families.1–3 This function is particularly 
important for children with medical complexity (CMC), who on average receive care from 
13 outpatient health care providers representing 6 distinct subspecialties.4 A central 
component of care coordination is a multidisciplinary shared care plan.5–7 A care plan is a 
single, comprehensive tool containing the child’s pertinent medical history, medication list, 
appointments, goals of care, and action items that is developed in partnership with families 
and providers.8 These care plans have the potential to strengthen family-provider 
relationships, enhance communication, and improve child health outcomes.8 Furthermore, as 
components of multifaceted interventions, care plans have been associated with high-quality 
care experiences and improved patient-reported outcomes in pediatric and adult populations.
9

Care plans are typically in paper format and are created by using standardized templates, 
taking the form of loose sheets of paper, notebooks, binders, or documents scanned into the 
electronic medical record.8,10–12 Researchers in qualitative studies explored the use of care 
plans by CMC families, and providers highlighted several limitations in their design and 
implementation that impede routine use.10,11,13 These limitations include a lack of shared 
ownership, difficulty modifying them in real time, and a lack of universal accessibility from 
various devices. Cloud-based care plans (ie, care plans that are stored online and are 
available to users on demand via the Internet) may provide an efficient platform to support 
their adaptability and accessibility in real time.14–18 However, little is known in terms of 
how families and providers perceive information sharing in the cloud and how they would 
define a cloud-based platform. Furthermore, there is a paucity of evidence that demonstrates 
how families and providers would initiate, review, update, and share these care plans across 
settings to facilitate care coordination.17–21

To provide such evidence, we used user-centered design as an innovative approach, both to 
understand the optimal design and implementation strategies for shared care plans and to 
ensure that they are consistent with the needs, constraints, and previous experiences of 
relevant stakeholders.19,22–26 Through a user-centered design process, stakeholders are 
actively engaged in iterative cycles of developing new technologies by doing the following: 
(1) identifying their needs and establishing requirements for the technology, (2) developing 
designs, (3) building interactive versions of the designs, and (4) evaluating designs.27 In this 
study, we aimed to conduct the first step of the user-centered design process by 
understanding the needs of caregivers (parents or legal guardians) and health care providers 
who care for CMC and to establish requirements for shared care plans that would mitigate 
current barriers to meeting these information needs.

Desai et al.
Page 2

METHODS

Study Design and Population

Consistent with user-centered design methodology, we used pragmatic inquiry to meet the 
study objectives. Pragmatic inquiry involves eliciting perspectives of diverse stakeholders on 
the basis of real-world experiences to guide future interventions and action.28 Such an 
approach is commonly used as the first step in the user-centered design process to identify 
the needs and requirements of relevant stakeholders.

We recruited English-speaking caregivers and providers of CMC 0 to 18 years of age who 
were hospitalized at a tertiary care children’s hospital between March 2016 and November 
2016. We identified CMC using a flag in the child’s medical record that is based on 
predefined criteria developed by the institution. Trained research staff approached eligible 
caregivers during the child’s hospitalization using a standardized recruitment protocol. We 
recruited providers (eg, emergency department [ED] providers, primary care providers 
[PCPs]) caring for CMC enrolled in the study using a standard e-mail template. We 
intentionally did not interview individuals with expertise in clinical informatics or 
information security at this stage because our aim in this study was to foster an open palate 
of ideas to meet caregiver and provider needs, rather than understand the feasibility of these 
ideas within current health information systems.

We used purposive sampling, a qualitative strategy to recruit eligible participants on the 
basis of their demographic characteristics to maximize participant diversity and the range of 
perspectives. As data analysis progressed, we also used theoretical sampling to recruit 
different types of providers (eg, subspecialists, nursing staff) as new questions or areas of 
exploration emerged from the study findings.29 We recruited and enrolled caregivers and 
providers until the research team deemed that a diverse array of perspectives was obtained, 
and well-defined themes emerged from the analysis.

Data Collection

In-depth, semistructured interviews led by 1 of 3 research team members (A.D.D., E.A.J-F., 
and J.W.) were conducted either in the child’s hospital room, child’s home, a private hospital 
meeting room, provider’s office, or by telephone for participants who were not local at the 
time of the interview. Interviews lasted ~1 hour, were audio recorded, and transcribed. We 
used open-ended questions and probes to elicit caregiver and provider experiences with 
current health information processes and their perspectives on existing care plans and cloud-
based care plans (Supplemental Information). Participants were also asked to draw designs 
of their recommendations for these care plans. We revised interview guides weekly as new 
themes and areas of inquiry emerged from the data analysis. Participants completed a 
demographic survey after the interview and were provided a $100 gift card.

All study procedures were approved by the Seattle Children’s Hospital Institutional Review 
Board.

Desai et al.
Page 3

Data Analysis

We used applied thematic analysis, a process that is used to identify the main ideas from 
participant responses, combine similar ideas into themes, and organize these themes into 
actionable strategies that may be useful for solving practical problems.30 To identify main 
ideas from interview transcripts, 3 authors (A.D.D., E.A.J-F., and J.W.) first read each 
transcript in its entirety to gain insights into broad concepts. Next, at least 1 of these authors 
reread each transcript, highlighted excerpts, and applied codes to each idea in the excerpt. 
Each transcript was then reviewed by at least 1 of the other authors, and additional codes 
were applied to each excerpt if needed. During weekly meetings throughout the data 
collection period, these 3 authors initially reviewed codes, resolved coding questions, and 
developed a codebook. As interviews, analysis, and codebook development progressed, 
weekly meetings were focused on combining codes into themes and organizing themes into 
categories. Data analysis was facilitated by using Dedoose version 7.0.23 qualitative 
software.31

RESULTS

Demographics

The study sample consisted of 17 caregivers and 22 providers. In Table 1, we outline 
demographic characteristics of the participants. Demographic characteristics of children are 
presented in Supplemental Table 5.

Overview of Study Findings

We organized the themes we identified into 3 main categories: (1) information needs when 
caring for CMC, (2) barriers to meeting these information needs in the current system, and 
(3) requirements for care plans to meet the information needs of all stakeholders and to 
mitigate barriers. Regarding information needs, caregivers and providers noted that 
information should be centralized, timely, consistent, and helpful when caring for CMC 
(Table 2). Participants also highlighted several barriers that currently exist to meeting these 
needs (Table 2). On the basis of these perceived needs and barriers, we identified 4 
requirements for care plans that could help to meet needs and mitigate barriers: accessible, 
user-centered, collaborative, and secure. Each requirement is presented in more detail below, 
with illustrative quotes used to highlight similarities and differences in perceptions between 
caregivers and providers in Table 3.

Requirement 1: Accessible

Caregiver number 6 said: “If there’s a way to tie it all in with the computer system, where a 
parent could say, ‘He’s got a care plan. He’s got a special pre-op protocol that needs to be 
followed.’ They could go, ‘Look. You’ve got a red flag here.’ Quick. Boom. It pops up”

A key requirement for care plans is ensuring quick accessibility wherever and whenever 
users (ie, caregivers or providers) need it. For where they need it, participants were open to 
accessing a care plan in the cloud because this would provide a single version of the care 
plan that was available in a centralized location regardless of where the child was receiving 
care (ie, a “universal porta” They suggested that a cloud-based care plan should be affiliated 

Desai et al.
Page 4

with a hospital system (as opposed to a personal cloud-based health record) to enhance 
trustworthiness of information within the care plan. Hospital providers (inpatient or ED) 
strongly recommended that any care plan should be linked through the hospital electronic 
health record (EHR) to find information in a timely manner; however, the document does not 
need to “live” within the EHR. Participants also request that care plans be electronically 
accessible on multiple devices (eg, computer, smartphone). This would mitigate barriers of 
paper copies “getting lost in the shuffle.” For example, caregivers could share the care plan 
through an app on their smartphone to avoid the frustration of repetitively sharing their 
child’s health history. In addition, caregivers noted that care plans must have download and 
print capabilities in case an Internet connection was unavailable or for users without 
smartphones.

For when they need it, providers recommended that care plans be available before any health 
care encounter, so they would have time to familiarize themselves with the child’s unique 
care needs to efficiently guide the encounter. This feature would alleviate the burden on 
caregivers to be the “on-call historian.” Participants suggested that electronic alert features 
could help meet this goal. For example, outpatient follow-up providers could receive an alert 
when a discharge summary is available to prepare for the follow-up visit. Participants also 
noted users should have customizable alert settings to avoid “alert fatigue.”

Participants emphasized that information they would like to share or find “in the moment” 
must be easily retrievable within the care plan. This requirement would alleviate the burden 
on caregivers to remember all of their child’s health information and prevent providers from 
having to “dig through” multiple folders or documents. Participants requested a robust 
search function to help meet this goal. This would give users the “10 000 ft view” (eg, 
problem list) and allow them to quickly find details regarding a particular event, action plan, 
or medication change without having to open multiple programs, tabs, screens, or notes.

Requirement 2: User-centered

In the very front, executive summary, boom. That’s right here, and all this other 
stuff is behind the scenes. If somebody needs that, which they do, it’s just not me, 
they can have all that stuff. But what I need, when its emergent, is right here in 
front of me…the three things I got to worry about…this kid is different from a 
normal kid because of this, this, and this. –ED provider 3

Participants noted that care plans should contain content relevant to their particular role, and 
the content should be organized in a manner that addresses the user’s specific needs. This 
requirement would enable users to quickly retrieve the information they need to efficiently 
care for the child. The formatting adaptability of an electronic care plan would meet this 
requirement, in which the interface would differ on the basis of the user’s role, although the 
back-end data infrastructure would remain the same. In Fig 1, we present 2 examples of 
content a caregiver and provider would prefer to have in a care plan and how they would 
organize it. The content in Fig 1 was representative of the main areas discussed by the 
majority of participants. Participants also discussed how they would prioritize different types 
of content given time constraints and how they would use layers via hyperlinks or tabs to 
access lower priority content.

Desai et al.
Page 5

Requirement 3: Collaborative

If there was truly a shared, live, active care plan, and all of the docs involved in his 
care could contribute to a running care plan, that would be amazing. But it needs to 
be easy for everyone to use because it takes time to do this kind of updating, time to 
document what conversations happened and have it be accurate so that it’s useful. –
Primary care provider 6

We identified collaboration among care team members as a key requirement to generate and 
maintain information within a care plan. Collaboration was perceived to promote 
trustworthiness of the care plan because multiple care team members could provide content 
related to their area of expertise and review the content for accuracy. Participants 
emphasized that care plans stored in the cloud would make a collaborative model feasible 
because multiple care team members could share the responsibility of routinely updating the 
care plan in real time. Role clarity among care team members and effective communication 
were identified as 2 key features of a collaborative model for care plans.

To meet the need of having consistent information across care team members and settings, 
we identified 3 key roles: a team leader, contributors, and the health information technology 
(HIT) system (Table 4). For “team leader,” respondents expressed different opinions about 
which care team member(s) should fulfill this role. However, there was a general consensus 
that the team leader(s) should have expertise in complex care, understand the 10 000 ft view, 
and have frequent interactions with the child. The team leader(s) should be clearly identified 
at all times, and selecting the team leader should be a shared decision between caregivers 
and providers based on the individual or team that best meets these characteristics. For the 
role of contributors, caregivers and providers were unified in their perspective of which care 
team members should fulfill this role because these would be individuals who “own” 
specific aspects of the child’s care (eg, subspecialists, care coordinators, caregivers, etc). 
Participants also highlighted that the HIT system serves an important role in maintaining an 
updated and accurate care plan through seamless data transfer functionality (eg, auto-
population) and user reminders to review or update information.

A collaborative model for care plans also requires seamless communication between care 
team members. Therefore, participants recommended that any care plan should contain a 
secure messaging system to enable care team members to ask questions, clarify the rationale 
behind decisions, or resolve conflicting information within the care plan. This could serve as 
a “mini virtual care conference” in real time, which caregivers highlighted would help team 
members “get on the same page” about their child’s evolving care plan. This would also 
decrease the burden on caregivers to constantly relay information between providers and 
allow interprovider conversations to occur at convenient times. For example, PCPs could 
receive a message from the inpatient team about a discharged patient, rather than a receiving 
a call in between scheduled patient visits. However, some participants noted that a 
messaging system should not replace discussions for urgent matters or for complex issues 
that need to occur by telephone. Finally, a conversation log would provide a historical record 
if similar questions or clarifications surfaced in the future.

Desai et al.
Page 6

Requirement 4: Secure

They obviously want security, but ultimately what they want is good care for their 
child, and if one had to be sacrificed, I think they would sacrifice security versus 
the care and care coordination. –Subspecialist, provider 14

The last requirement we identified for care plans was storing them on a secure electronic 
platform with strict permission controls. Participants discussed the balance between 
maximizing security and ease of access, with most respondents preferring easier access to 
information rather than a time-intensive login process. Some trusted that any platform 
developed by the health care system would have sufficient security (eg, Health Insurance 
Portability and Accountability Act [HIPAA] compliance), assuming the development of 
electronic care plans would follow similar security protocols as current EHRs. Participants 
prioritized emergency care information accessibility over security because this information 
should be readily available to emergency providers (eg, first responders, school nurses, ED 
providers). Finally, participants felt having a tracking system of when and where users are 
accessing care plans would be important to enhance accountability.

Participants felt that caregivers should control permission settings in terms of who can view 
and modify the care plan. Access could be granted to teams or institutions in which all 
providers within that team and/or institution would have access to the care plan. However, 
this should include an exception feature if caregivers want to exclude specific providers. 
Caregivers also noted that permission controls should be specific to different sections of the 
care plan based on the user’s relationship with the child. Additionally, different permission 
settings could be set for the user’s ability to edit, comment, view, download, or share 
information.

DISCUSSION

In this study, we describe how electronic care plans that are stored in the cloud may meet the 
information needs of caregivers and providers who care for CMC and mitigate perceived 
information barriers that exist in our current health information systems. Using a user-
centered design approach, we identified 4 care plan requirements (accessible, user-centered, 
collaborative, and secure) that can be met with a cloud-based solution. We synthesized 
caregiver and provider recommendations into concrete actionable design features and 
implementation strategies that may be tested in future phases of the user-centered design 
process.

With the findings in this study, we introduce the idea of a cloud-based solution to mitigate 
barriers relating to lack of universal accessibility and information inconsistency across 
multiple users and settings. These barriers have been noted in studies in which researchers 
have examined the information needs of CMC, which suggest that a centralized, electronic 
care plan may be beneficial.10,11,13,32 Given that most people are now connected to the 
Internet via mobile phones, cloud-based care plans would enable users to access, share, and 
update care plans instantaneously as needed.33 In a few studies, researchers have explored 
the idea of Web-based care plans for specific pediatric populations and within specific care 
settings.18,19,21 We add to this existing body of work by explicitly detailing requirements for 

Desai et al.
Page 7

cloud-based care plans, such as having access via mobile devices, personal computers, and 
through links in the EHR. Given functional limitations of existing EHRs, cloud-based care 
plans may need to live outside of the EHR. It is suggested in our findings that health care 
providers would be willing to access an external platform if the benefits of accessing it (eg, 
content in a user-tailored format, efficient sharing of information across care team members) 
outweigh the time required to access it (ie, simplified login process). We also add to the 
existing body of work by identifying key roles for maintenance of a collaborative care plan.

With this study, we generated ideas regarding how cloud-based, electronic care plans would 
ideally be designed and implemented on the basis of the information needs of caregivers and 
providers. However, we recognize that many constraints and challenges will need to be 
overcome when translating their ideas into practice, which can be explored through future 
phases of the user-centered design process. For example, usability testing will help to 
identify whether team leaders are willing to take on the responsibility of overseeing the care 
plan and which sections of the care plan contributors are realistically willing to update. 
Involvement of a clinical informaticist in the design process will help to clarify which 
information can be auto-populated from other sources, and security experts can help to guide 
the optimal balance between accessibility and privacy. User-centered design methods allow 
for iterative cycles of development and testing. Within these cycles, stakeholder needs, 
requirements, and constraints are continually revisited; designs are revised on the basis of 
usability testing; and implementation strategies are modified until these care plans are 
proven to be effective tools for coordinating care and improving patient-and family-centered 
outcomes.

This study has some limitations. First, we interviewed only 1 individual within many of the 
provider categories, thus limiting our ability to develop an in-depth understanding of 
particular needs and requirements of different provider groups. However, such a strategy 
satisfied our goal to explore common themes across a diverse set of providers. In future 
phases of the user-centered design process, it will be beneficial to gain in-depth insights 
from individual provider groups and ensure all stakeholders involved in caring for CMC are 
well represented (eg, surgical subspecialists). Second, the caregivers we interviewed were all 
English speaking, predominantly white, and reported high comfort levels with technology. 
Future studies should explore the perspectives of caregivers with diverse racial and/or ethnic 
backgrounds, limited English proficiency, and low self-reported technology capabilities to 
understand their unique information needs and requirements for care plans. Third, we did 
not explore the perspectives of patients with medical complexity directly; therefore, 
researchers in future studies should explore these patients’ roles with respect to accessing 
and updating content in their care plans. Finally, we did not conduct observations of how 
information is currently shared or retrieved and how care plans are currently used. 
Observations will be essential in future phases of the user-centered design process to 
discover additional needs and requirements for shared care plans, given existing work-
arounds that caregivers and providers use.

Desai et al.
Page 8

CONCLUSIONS

Cloud-based, electronic care plans have the potential to mitigate many of the barriers that 
exist in our current health information systems. These care plans should be accessible 
wherever and whenever the information is needed, user-centered in terms of content and 
formatting, collaborative, and secure with strict permission controls. Future research is 
needed to test various design and implementation strategies to meet these stated 
requirements among diverse groups of stakeholders in real-world settings. Care plans that 
meet these requirements have the potential to promote efficiency, enhance communication, 
facilitate coordinated care, and improve health outcomes for CMC.