A Randomized Trial Comparing Classical Participatory Design to 
VandAID, an Interactive Crowdsourcing Platform

K.R. Dufendach,
Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center

S. Koch,
Karolinska Institutet

K.M. Unertl, and
Vanderbilt University Medical Center

C.U. Lehmann
Vanderbilt University Medical Center

Abstract

Background—Early involvement of stakeholders in the design of medical software is 
particularly important due to the need to incorporate complex knowledge and actions associated 
with clinical work. Standard user-centered design methods include focus groups and participatory 
design sessions with individual stakeholders, which generally limit user involvement to a small 
number of individuals due to the significant time investments from designers and end users.

Objectives—The goal of this project was to reduce the effort for end users to participate in co-
design of a software user interface by developing an interactive web-based crowdsourcing 
platform.

Methods—In a randomized trial, we compared a new web-based crowdsourcing platform to 
standard participatory design sessions. We developed an interactive, modular platform that allows 
responsive remote customization and design feedback on a visual user interface based on user 
preferences. The responsive canvas is a dynamic HTML template that responds in real time to user 
preference selections. Upon completion, the design team can view the user’s interface creations 
through an administrator portal and download the structured selections through a REDCap 
interface.

Results—We have created a software platform that allows users to customize a user interface and 
see the results of that customization in real time, receiving immediate feedback on the impact of 
their design choices. Neonatal clinicians used the new platform to successfully design and 

Cincinnati, OH 45229-3026, kevin.dufendach@cchmc.org, Phone: 513.636.7018, Mobile: 616.481.5089, Fax: 513.636.2056. 
Human Subject Protection
This study was approved by the investigational review board of Vanderbilt University Medical Center (study ID 160124) and followed 
procedures in compliance with the ethical standards of the responsible committee on human experimentation and with the World 
Medical Association Declaration of Helsinki on Ethical Principles for Medical Research Involving Human Subjects.

HHS Public Access
Author manuscript

Published in final edited form as:
Methods Inf Med. 2017 October 26; 56(5): 344–349. doi:10.3414/ME16-01-0098.

customize a neonatal handoff tool. They received no specific instruction and yet were able to use 
the software easily and reported high usability.

Conclusions—VandAID, a new web-based crowdsourcing platform, can involve multiple users 
in user-centered design simultaneously and provides means of obtaining design feedback remotely. 
The software can provide design feedback at any stage in the design process, but it will be of 
greatest utility for specifying user requirements and evaluating iterative designs with multiple 
options.

Keywords

computers; informatics; human factors and engineering; human-computer interface

Introduction

One of the goals of the 2009 Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical 
Health (HITECH) Act was to improve the safety of medical care through the investment in 
electronic health record systems. However, safety results vary significantly between specific 
systems and locations.[1] E-iatrogenesis — the unintended negative consequences of 
implementing health information technology — had been described as early as 2007.[2] If 
not implemented carefully, unintended consequences of automation can contribute tomedical 
errors.[3] By applying human factors principles into the design of medical software alerts, 
Russ et al. demonstrated improved usability and decreased prescribing errors in a simulated 
crossover trial.[4]

Despite advances in existing technology, clinician dissatisfaction with Electronic Health 
Records (EHR) increased from 24% in 2010 to 39% in 2012.[5] A significant proportion of 
end user dissatisfaction in healthcare systems is attributable to poorly designed interfaces 
unresponsive to user workflows and needs. Change management knowledge mandates that 
end users must be included in the design process and that “workflow and information needs 
of end users must be studied and analyzed, and the effect of the new intervention must be 
modeled on workflow, new work demands, interruption of other tasks, and local culture and 
conditions.”[6] Development of health information technology software requires 
establishment of common ground between design and the clinical work that needs to be 
performed.[7] Medical software design requires input from real users, who “alone have the 
relevant knowledge and understanding of the actions, and the consequences, of their work.”
[7]

User-centered software design seeks to involve end users throughout the design process to 
create a product that better matches the user’s expectations and experience. Developing 
software based on the user’s needs and requirements (for example, by including all data 
elements required by a user to complete a task on the screen), allows the software to better 
match the end user’s optimal workflow as opposed to forcing users to change their behavior 
to accommodate the product’s design (like having to interrupt the task and search for the 
required information elsewhere only to come back to complete the task).[8]

Dufendach et al.
Page 2

Current EHR certification requirements from the Office of the National Coordinator for 
Health Information Technology require EHR vendors to attest to implementing user-
centered design practices in the creation of their software products.[9] However, a study 
examining the user-centered design processes of eleven EHR vendors from February to 
August 2013 found a wide range of user-centered design practices ranging from full in-depth 
contextual analysis to simply providing methods of receiving requests and feedback from 
users.[10] Despite variance from robust to basic user-centered design strategies, all EHR 
software designers indicated that they felt user-centered design to be important and wished 
they had more resources to pursue it further. Yet, a recent examination of usability practices 
of 50 top electronic health record vendors found that fewer than half used the recommended 
15 participants in usability testing, and only 8 of those used at least 15 individuals with a 
clinical background.[11]

Basic user-centered design employs interviews and surveys, but these techniques can prove 
inadequate, as most users neither know their own requirements nor can they articulate them 
in ways computable to the design team.[7; 12] Involving users in cooperative design or 
guided user-driven innovation allows end users to become a source of innovation in the 
design process, but such methods have limitations due to the time and expertise demanded 
on both designers and end users, alike. Due to these demands, end user involvement is often 
limited to just a small number of stakeholders, which may not encapsulate the complexity in 
healthcare information technology systems, which often involve multiple stakeholders in 
varying contexts of use.[13]

Objectives

The goal of this project was to reduce the effort for end users to participate in co-design of a 
software user interface by developing an interactive web-based crowdsourcing platform.

Methods

We developed VandAID (Vanderbilt Active Interface Design), an interactive web-based 
platform that allows responsive remote customization and feedback of a visual user interface 
(Figure 1). Users can express their preferences in the software’s dynamic canvas, where the 
user interface is built and modified by the user. This canvas responds to settings and 
preferences from a toolbox available to users.

The platform is written as a single page application using hypertext markup language 
(HTML) and JavaScript with the AngularJS 1.5.x framework.[14] AngularJS facilitates data 
binding between HTML elements and settings stored in the JavaScript data model.

Canvas

With the creation of any user interface, a design team must decide which data elements to 
display and how to present them in regards to color, font, location on the screen, and other 
design choices. With VandAID, the dynamic canvas allows the design team to test different 
display options by letting the users select the ones that best match their expectations and 

Dufendach et al.
Page 3

workflow. The canvas responds dynamically to the selections and preferences made by 
users, giving them direct feedback on the results of their decisions.

The dynamic canvas itself is an HTML document that leverages the power and 
customizability of HTML 5 and JavaScript. Any graphics, formatting, and even scripts that 
can be included in a web page can be built directly into the dynamic canvas. This makes this 
platform ideal for designing custom HTML-based software, such as might be done in 
creating a SMART (Substitutable Medical Apps, Reusable Technologies) on FHIR (Fast 
Healthcare Interoperability Resource) application that can be embedded into an EHR.[15–
17]

Preferences Pane

The preferences pane provides a toolbox from which the user builds the application by first 
selecting which elements should appear on the canvas and then setting specific element 
option fields, such as whether out of range values should be bold or how numerical data 
should be displayed (Figure 2). The option fields are based on standard survey questions 
such as multiple choice, checkbox, yes-no, text, and other options. The toolbox supports 
advanced survey options like branching logic, which allows irrelevant options to be hidden 
until needed.

The canvas responds to the user’s selections and preferences by accessing the values of the 
preference fields through interfacing with a JavaScript field manager. Although any 
JavaScript can be used to access the field values, this platform is optimized to use AngularJS 
directives that allow direct manipulation of the HTML document object model (DOM) based 
on the values of fields.

Integration with REDCap

By representing each design option as a standard survey field, the VandAID platform is able 
to interface directly with the powerful REDCap survey and database software.[18] Using the 
secure REDCap API, the platform can import data collection instrument fields directly into 
the software for use in the preferences pane and then save each user’s selections as a unique 
submission in the project. REDCap can also be used to create automated email invitations to 
users. This can allow anonymous feedback submission on the interface being designed as 
well as end user voting on preferred interface settings. The REDCap integration also 
provides designers with a secure, centralized location to store user submissions and to export 
the raw data for statistical analyses.

Evaluation Interface—In addition to performing statistical analyses on the raw data, 
administrators from the design team can also use the evaluation interface to view each 
individual submission. This view is built directly into the VandAID platform itself and 
allows designers to jump between the various submissions to see the design product from 
each end user.

Comparison of Classical Participatory Design with the VandAID Platform—We 
compared the new VandAID platform to classical participatory design (PD) through a 

Dufendach et al.
Page 4

parallel randomized controlled trial of neonatal intensive care clinicians. Our initial test case 
for this platform seeks to establish the list and formatting necessary to create an effective 
neonatal patient list for use in a handoff between neonatal clinicians.

Eligible neonatal clinicians for the study included all neonatal attendings, fellows, and nurse 
practitioners at Vanderbilt University Medical Center, excepting the two individuals who 
participated in creation of the VandAID software platform itself. We invited all eligible 
clinicians to provide feedback on a neonatal handoff tool. Of those who expressed interest, 
two from each professional group were randomly selected, using R software, to participate 
in one-on-one PD sessions.[19] Invitations and reminders were sent using REDCap.

One-on-one PD sessions were conducted directly by the first author. Participants were given 
the opportunity to design a neonatal handoff tool using pens, paper, sticky notes, scissors, 
and other materials. They were also given a prompt of pre-enumerated potential items, 
which were the same items available to the VandAID group. Each session was video 
recorded and then transcribed for further evaluation. All creations were collected by the 
design team at the conclusion of the session.

All remaining clinicians were sent email invitations with an individualized link to provide 
design feedback on a neonatal handoff tool using the VandAID software. The VandAID 
version allowed users to weigh the benefits of adding more information with the space 
required to present that information. VandAID additionally allowed users to customize the 
presentation of the data, such as by indicating whether out of range labs should appear in 
bold and if new labs should appear in italics.

Following each PD or VandAID session, users provided feedback on the usability of the 
specific user-centered design method by completing a standardized system usability scale 
survey.[20; 21]

Results

We successfully created a software platform that allows users to customize a user interface 
and see the results of that customization in real time, receiving immediate feedback on the 
impact of their choices. We invited all 67 eligible neonatal clinicians to participate in the 
randomized trial. Of these, 42 expressed interest and were randomized. All 6 randomized to 
PD completed the sessions, and 29 used the VandAID platform to design and customize a 
neonatal handoff tool (Figure 3).

Several similarities existed between the items selected with VandAID and the PD sessions 
(Figure 4). All individuals requested a to-do list. The patient name was forced to be included 
with the VandAID software, although users could choose how it should appear. Nearly all 
requested the patient’s location, age and weight information, ventilation settings, and a 
medication list. No individual requested detailed vital signs. Of note, only 63% of 
individuals selected the medical record number to appear, which could be considered an 
important safety concern.

Dufendach et al.
Page 5

When contrasting the PD sessions with the VandAID designs, we observed differences 
between the two groups in the items included. Only one of the PD users included the care 
team name, and only one included a plan by system, both of which were included in over 
half of the VandAID software designs in which it could be selected as an option. PD 
participants also generally did not comment on item formatting, such as bold or italicized 
data, although one individual did volunteer that they would like to have resuscitation status 
bold if not “full code.” Most PD participants also required prompting from the facilitator 
specify how laboratory values should appear, whether in a table or in a stick figure diagram. 
Many VandAID participants left additional free text comments with additional ideas and 
options not presented in the specific example, some of which had also been enumerated in 
PD sessions.

Time spent creating a handoff design was significantly shorter for VandAID users with a 
mean of 9.6 minutes per user (median 9, 95% confidence interval 7.4–11.8 minutes) 
compared with the PD sessions, which lasted a mean of 26.3 minutes (median 27.5, 95% 
confidence interval 20.3–32.3 minutes). Results of the system usability scale survey for 
VandAID users gave a mean of 84.3 (95% CI 80.2–88.4), which places it in the 96th 
percentile for usability with this standardized survey. For comparison, the PD sessions 
achieved a mean 75.4 (75th percentile), but also had a very large confidence interval (95% CI 
52.3–98.5).[20; 21] Other than a short prompt at the top of the canvas pointing them to the 
left-sided toolbox and the save and submit button, users received no instruction on using the 
tool itself, and at no time did any of the clinicians contact a research team member to request 
additional instruction on using the tool.

Source Code

The source code for this initial use case project is available at https://github.com/
KevinDufendach/vandaid-nicuhandoff.

Conclusions

This study compared two user-centered design methods to help design a neonatal handoff 
tool, classical one-on-one PD sessions and VandAID, a new web-based crowdsourcing 
platform. Both methods provided important information, and they proved complementary to 
each other. VandAID prompted users with examples of possible data elements, which may 
have allowed users to better weigh the value of displaying certain elements. Compared to the 
PD session, the use of the VandAID tool was significantly faster and less onerous to 
providers and researchers while yielding similar results.

Part of the success of the initial use of VandAID may be attributable to the fact that the lead 
designer of the software (KRD) is a neonatologist and thus a domain subject expert, leading 
to user-driven innovation. Identification of items for the toolbox and design of the example 
items was enhanced by having the expertise of an informatics-trained user. Lacking such a 
dual perspective would likely have required earlier PD sessions or other user-centered 
techniques.

Dufendach et al.
Page 6

Our new design platform provides a means of crowdsourcing electronic health record design 
from multiple users remotely and asynchronously. The versatility of the interactive canvas 
means that interface designers can use this process at multiple steps throughout the design 
cycle as the product moves from rough sketches to high fidelity prototypes and ultimately to 
a fully functional release candidate. An initial canvas may have little more than plain text or 
hand drawings, while a design in its later stages may be a fully functional SMART on FHIR 
application that draws data from a live EHR. Using REDCap functionalities, this tool could 
be used to incorporate input from much larger groups, including external sites.

Involving stakeholders at the start of the design process has been shown to improve end user 
satisfaction and efficiency by matching the final product to the user’s workflow. This new 
design platform adds another low-cost tool that can complement other user-centered design 
methods and facilitate involvement of multiple users throughout the design process.