for Evaluating the Usability of Genomic User
Interfaces

Alberto Garc´ıa S.1(B)
, Carlos I˜niguez-Jarr´ın2
, Oscar Pastor Lopez1
,
Daniel Gonzalez-Ibea3, Estela P´erez-Rom´an3, Carles Borred`a3, Javier Terol3,
Victoria Ibanez3, and Manuel Tal´on3

1 PROS Research Center, VRAIN Research Institute, Universitat Polit`ecnica de Val`encia,
Cam´ı de Vera, s/n, 46022 Val`encia, Spain

2 Escuela Polit´ecnica Nacional, Quito, Ecuador

3 Centro de Gen´omica, Instituto Valenciano de Investigaciones Agrarias (IVIA), Moncada,
Valencia, Spain

Abstract. Several tools have been developed to extract knowledge from the vast
amount of data in genomics. The success of the knowledge extraction process
depends to arge extent on how easy to learn and use are the tools for bioin-
formaticians. User interface design is neglected frequently in the genomic tool
development process. As a result, user interfaces contain usability problems that
make knowledge extraction a complex task. User-Centered Design (UCD) is a
design approach that can be applied to improve the usability of interfaces. A fun-
damental principle of UCD is to design the UI based on users’ knowledge, their
needs, objectives, and tasks to ensure that the resulting user interface meets the
real user needs. We apply the UCD approach to design, evaluate and improve
CitrusGenome, a tool that enables bioinformaticians to extract knowledge from
genomic data. Following the UCD process, we ﬁrst conduct user research to
deﬁne user needs by applying UCD techniques such as interviews and task anal-
ysis. Then, we design a user interface that meets those user needs by using
GenomIUm. GenomIUm is a systematic method that guides the design process of
user interfaces in the genomic domain. We have performed two UCD iterations
and, after each iteration, the user interfaces were validated by bioinformaticians.
Some usability problems were found in each iteration. Therefore, we reﬁned the
user interface by solving the usability problems and incorporating such solutions
into the ﬁnal design. Finally, bioinformaticians using the reﬁned user interface
reported a reduction in the complexity of extracting knowledge from genomic
data. We conclude that UCD techniques, together with GenomIUm, can be a use-
ful strategy to design user interfaces that are easier to learn and use in the genomic
domain.

Keywords: Genomics · User-centred design · User interface · GenomIUm

c
⃝Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
R. Ali et al. (Eds.): ENASE 2021, CCIS 1556, pp. 213–240, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-96648-5_10

214

1
Introduction

Amongst one of the biggest challenges of the century is to get a deep understanding of
genomics [22]. A so complex domain, which contains hundreds of dynamic variables,
requires immense efforts to study it. The amount of genomic data that is publicly avail-
able has increased considerably over the last decades [8]. This is mainly explained by
the reduction in the costs of sequencing genome data [15] and the increase in the speed
of sequencing thanks to Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) technologies [9]. How-
ever, being able to generate such an amount of data has originated a series of issues that
require special attention. The result of these issues is that extracting knowledge in the
genomic domain is complex, tedious, slow, and prone to error.
User-centered design (UCD) can be a convenient solution to improve knowledge
extraction in the genomic domain. UCD is a product design approach that grounds its
design process in information about who will use the product. It is widely recognized
that bioinformatics resources suffer from serious usability problems [14]. Applying
UCD can signiﬁcantly improve the usability of bioinformatics tools, making knowledge
extraction more efﬁcient and effective. Although successfully applied in other domains,
UCD has been little used in the genomic domain because of its speciﬁc particularities.
Applying UCD in this domain is complex and requires overcoming several additional
challenges.
This work extends our previous work, where we applied UCD techniques to develop
a bioinformatics tool that improves domain knowledge extraction processes [21]. The
tool has been developed in a real-world use case along with the collaboration of the
Instituto Valenciano de Investigaciones Agrarias (IVIA) [29,30], an agri-food research
institute whose work focuses on improving productivity and sustainability of the citrus
agricultural activity. We focused on identifying their key tasks and how to improve
them by deﬁning the most convenient User Interfaces (UIs) in terms of usability. The
tool has been developed using GenomIUm [10], a UCD-based framework that provides
i) a method to design and implement big data UIs, and ii) a catalog of User Interface
design patterns to support the process. Sections 3 and 4 detail our previous work.
The new contributions of this work are the following: i) to validate the ﬁrst ver-
sion of the UI of CitrusGenome by performing a usability evaluation with users, which
allowed us to identify a set of usability problems; and ii) to generate the second ver-
sion of the UI of CitrusGenome by solving the usability problems identiﬁed in the ﬁrst
version.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows: Sect. 2 discusses the state of the art
regarding the use of UCD in the genomic domain. Section 3 studies the use case to
be improved by identifying the problems to address (i.e., the lack of automation and
how to visualize the data). Section 4 presents how these problems are addressed by
applying GenomIUm to generate the needed bioinformatics tool. Section 5 validates our
proposed solution, identiﬁes a set of usability problems, and generates a new version of
the UI in order to solve them. Lastly, Sect. 6 discusses conclusions and proposes future
work.

215

2
State of the Art

The ultimate goal of UI design is to produce usable UIs that are both easy to use and
easy to learn. These UIs should allow users to perform their tasks and achieve their
goals efﬁciently [19]. However, in complex domains such as bioinformatics, this goal is
poorly addressed, and there is a growing concern that current approaches are inadequate
for this kind of domain [5]. Javahery et al. highlight that the complexity of the UIs of
bioinformatics resources is higher when they are compared to the interfaces of websites
that people use daily [14]. In line with that, Carpenter et al. suggest that usability should
be a more highly valued goal to increase the adoption of bioinformatics tools [4].
Understanding how users work becomes vital to provide usable UIs in such a com-
plex domain. Understanding what tasks they perform and what workﬂows they follow
allows UI designers to better adapt the tools to the speciﬁc needs of domain experts.
Svanæs et al. state that genomics tool UIs should take into account not only the user’s
needs but also its particular context as a manner of providing more usable solutions
[25]. Stevens et al. conducted a set of surveys of bioinformatics tasks resulting in a task
classiﬁcation to assess the quality of query systems [23]. Tran et al. performed a cross-
sectional study of bioinformatics tasks that were documented and proposed as poten-
tially desirable system features in bioinformatics tools [27]. Rutherford et al. examined
how large DNA sequences are studied and navigated by users to improve the usability of
DNA-sequencing navigating tools [20]. All these works provided a better understanding
of the unmet needs of genomic domain users.
There has been an explosion in the number of available bioinformatics tools in the
last decades. A good example is OMICtools, which provides a catalog of more than
20.000 web-accessible bioinformatics tools [7]. A common point among those tools is
that their developers tend not to focus on their interfaces or usability aspects [18]. The
designed UIs do not consider the user’s perspective and requirements as the starting
point of the design process [1]. Consequently, most of the users of these tools ﬁnd it
hard to access the information and too frequently struggle to ﬁnd valuable information
for their research. They accept tools with poor usability because they use them freely,
though these tools do not always provide what they need [18]. A usability testing of
bioinformatics tools conducted by Bolchini et al. [3] reported that usability issues that
affect the efﬁciency and effectiveness of bioinformatics work. Several reasons seem to
be the underlying cause of not focusing on bioinformatics tool UIs and their usability
aspects [5,16,18]:

– Bioinformatics has historically relied on command-line tools and using UCD
requires a “cultural shift”.
– Bioinformatics data that have to be presented are complex and highly intercon-
nected. Additional technical and scalability constraints have to be considered.
Besides, it is a constantly evolving subject whose rules usually have plenty of excep-
tions.
– Using UCD techniques generates an initial delay in the design process and measur-
ing the impact of applying these techniques is too difﬁcult. UCD techniques improve
scientiﬁc discovery processes, but “discovery” is an intangible metric and therefore
difﬁcult to measure.

216

– The prior knowledge that is needed to adequately carry out UCD techniques in this
domain (human-computer interaction, bioinformatics and computing) creates a gap
between domain users and developers.
– The usability validation, crucial to provide successful solutions [12], needs to be
carried out by skilled UI designers, which is not always possible.

These reasons make the design process of user-friendly UI difﬁcult. Apart from that,
authors tend to give more importance to the novelty of the developed tool lessening
down usability and UI aspects. In other words, it is the novelty of the tool its most
valued aspect rather than its associated UCD work[18]. In summary, usability and UI
aspects have been frequently ignored historically.
However, more recent bioinformatics projects are considering UCD when design-
ing and developing their UIs. A scenario-based visualization tool to support epidemio-
logical research called ADVISES was developed using UCD methods [24]. They used
prototyping and storyboarding techniques to analyze user tasks and their domain mental
model. The EB-eye search service was redesigned following UCD principles [28]. Sev-
eral user interviews were conducted to gather the initial information and requirements
before developing the search service. After developing it, one-to-one usability testing
sessions were performed to collect user feedback. The Enzyme Portal was developed
after performing a series of user workshops and interviews to identify user needs [16].
Afterward, they tested multiple prototypes until ﬁnding an optimal design in terms of
navigation and functionality.
In conclusion, having the user as the primary source of information of the UI design
and development processes results in multiple beneﬁts [18]. The users will be more
likely to use a tool if they guide the design process. Having greater access to the data
will increase users’ scientiﬁc discoveries. Overall, UCD supports the development of
high-quality bioinformatics resources that ease users’ work and better adapt to their
speciﬁc needs.

3
Problem Statement

The reported use case consists of applying UCD techniques to develop a bioinformat-
ics tool to aid in performing a speciﬁc analysis process regarding genomic citrus plant
(variety) improvement. This analysis consists of establishing genotype-phenotype rela-
tionships, in other words, the observable traits in the varieties (phenotype) caused by
the genetic code (genotype). For instance, which variations in the genetic code make
a variety drought resistant? Consequently, it is crucial to prioritize (i.e., identify and
select) which variations have an impact on the phenotype under study correctly. We
focus on the prioritization of genetic variations that might have a notorious impact on
plant phenotypes. This analysis is a problematic and inefﬁcient process that involves
several manual tasks. These tasks are complex, slow to perform, and prone to human
failures. The tasks can be grouped into:

Task 1: Select Variety Groups. There are tens of sequenced citrus varieties, and it
is arduous to work with multiple of them because of the large amount of data that is
contained on each of them. In order to work with the varieties, bioinformaticians have

217

to select and group them based on speciﬁc phenotypes. Two groups are created, one
group contains varieties that highly express a phenotype of interest, and the other group
contains varieties that do not express it. For instance, a phenotype of interest is the
sweetness of the fruits that a set of sequenced varieties produce.

Task 2: Compare Groups. There are a plethora of variables to consider when ﬁlter-
ing the data. Domain experts have to reduce the existing amount of genomic data by
applying several conditions as a previous step before comparing the groups of varieties.
For instance, by establishing a quality data threshold or by selecting a speciﬁc genomic
region. Also, they need a report of the applied ﬁlters to manage them. Considering the
ﬁlter conditions, the groups of varieties have to be compared in order to extract their dif-
ferences at a genotype level (i.e., genetic variations). Although applying a single ﬁlter or
performing simple set operations (e.g., data intersection or subtraction) are challenging
but feasible tasks, chaining multiple ﬁlters or performing more complex operations are
not possible. The complexity and the cost of the data ﬁltering task increase dramatically
as the number of varieties involved increases.

Task 3: Visualize. The amount of data obtained after performing Task 2 can become
unmanageable, and the bioinformaticians require to ﬂuidly examine them to identify
potential genetic variations of interest. By “examine” we mean to i) show how the data
are distributed based on speciﬁc criteria and ii) interact with the data by showing or
hiding data columns and performing data.
The generated knowledge is highly valuable because it allows modifying citrus vari-
eties to potentially increase or decrease the expression levels of phenotypes of interest.
However, because of the complexity of the process reported above, extracting knowl-
edge is complex and requires considerable effort. The UI design process focused on
automating the process and decreasing its complexity so that bioinformaticians can
extract knowledge more easily. To accomplish this goal, the three tasks identiﬁed above
become the starting point to apply our UCD-oriented solution.

4
Proposed Solution

Our proposed solution consists of developing a bioinformatics tool, whose UIs have
been designed following a UCD approach. UCD puts the user in the center of the design
process to ensure that the resulting UI meets their real needs and interactions. From a
general perspective, UCD can be summarized into two main activities: user research and
solution production. In the ﬁrst activity, we have researched our domain expert users by
applying UCD techniques such as user observation and task analysis. Observing them
while performing the prioritization of genetic variations process is a crucial activity to
identify problems related to the data manipulation, detail the high-level tasks identiﬁed
in the problem statement, and determine which UIs should be designed. In the second
activity, we have designed the UIs by using the UI design patterns that better address
the data manipulation-related problems identiﬁed in the previous activity.

4.1
User Research

Domain users have been characterized through several interviews and observing how
they work. Identifying and analyzing the tasks involved in the prioritization of genetic

218

variations allowed us to understand both the user mental model (i.e. how they think
the variation prioritization process works) and the domain under study. The gathered
information has been consolidated in a task model of the envisioned system deﬁned by
using Concur Task Trees (CTT) notation [17] as shown in Fig. 1. CTT notation allows
to represent the tasks with a chronological and hierarchical structure. Figure 1.1 is the
main CTT whilst the “Deﬁne ﬁlters” and “Examine variation distribution” tasks are
detailed in Figs. 1.2 and 1.3 respectively for reasons of space. The task model contains
the three high-level tasks deﬁned in Sect. 3 (i.e. select variety groups, compare groups
and visualize) decomposed in lower-level tasks.
The ﬁrst task, select variety groups task, consists of deﬁning the two groups of
varieties to be compared. Each citrus variety has a set of genetic variations from which
some of them are unique and some are shared with other varieties. The system shows
the list of available sequenced citrus varieties. Then, the user selects the varieties of
interest and adds them to the groups.
The second task, compare groups task, consists of two lower-level tasks: deﬁne
ﬁlters and perform comparison. In the ﬁrst one, the conditions to ﬁlter the genetic vari-
ations are deﬁned (Fig. 1.2). Up to eight ﬁlters can be deﬁned from which six are manda-
tory:

1. Variation type (mandatory, unique): Two types of genetic variations can be com-
pared, namely, Single Nucleotide Polymorphism (SNP) and insertion/deletion
(indel). On the one hand, SNPs are changes in the genetic code that only affect
one nitrogenous base (A, C, G or T). For example, a variation that changes a C for
a T at a given position. On the other hand, indels are genetic variations where the
length of the genetic code is altered, either by addition, deletion or both.
2. Set ﬂexibility criteria (mandatory, unique): This ﬁlter refers to how restrictive is to
accept a variation based on its frequency of appearance among the varieties of a
group. By default, only genetic variations that appear in every variety of a group are
accepted. However, in some cases this might be too restrictive. The “ﬂexibility” has
to do with the ability to ﬁlter genetic variations that exist in a subset of the varieties of
a group. Such subset is deﬁned by indicating a minimum and maximum threshold of
varieties to be considered. There are multiple reasons to do that: working with large
groups of varieties, genetic variations wrongly identiﬁed in the sequencing process,
varieties exhibiting a common phenotype caused by different genetic variations, etc.
3. Quality (mandatory, unique): Because of technological limitations in the sequencing
process, genetic variations are complemented with a set of quality indicators that
show how reliable they are. This ﬁlter allows specifying the quality threshold to
accept genetic variations.
4. Annotation impact (mandatory, multiple): Genetic variations are annotated with
software to predict their effect and impact at a genomic level [6]. This ﬁlter allows
specifying the impact and effect under which a variation is accepted. Genetic vari-
ations are classiﬁed by how signiﬁcant they are. A variation will be much more
relevant if it is predicted to alter a protein’s functionality in a disruptive way (high
impact).
5. Genome regions (mandatory): Genetic variations can be located in speciﬁc types
of regions (intergenic regions, genes, exons, introns, etc.) with unique functionality.

219

Fig. 1. Task analysis. Source: [21].

This ﬁlter allows specifying the genomic regions where genetic variations have to
be located to be accepted.
6. Allelic balance (optional, multiple): The analyzed citrus plants are diploid (i.e. their
cells has paired chromosomes1) so they have two copies of the DNA sequence. When

1 https://www.genome.gov/genetics-glossary/Diploid.

220

a variation is identiﬁed, it can appear in one of these copies or in both. The allele is
the sequence, in one of the copies, in the speciﬁc position where the variation has
been identiﬁed. The allelic balance is deﬁned as the ratio of appearance of possible
alleles of a variation in the copies of the DNA sequence of a citrus plant. This ratio
can range from zero to one. This ﬁlter allows specifying multiple lower and upper
limit pair values of allelic balance. Only those genetic variations with an allele bal-
ance value inside one of the deﬁned ranges will be accepted.
7. Genome positions (optional, multiple): Genetic variations are located in speciﬁc
positions of the DNA sequence. This ﬁlter allows specifying the genomic positions
where genetic variations have to be located to be accepted.
8. Proteins (optional, multiple): Some genetic variations affect protein aspects, such as
protein’s structure or how they work. This ﬁlter allows ﬁltering genetic variations
based on how they affect a speciﬁc protein aspect.

In the second one, perform comparison, the two groups of varieties are compared
considering the applied ﬁlters. This comparison consists of four operations that the sys-
tem performs internally: Firstly, those genetic variations that do not pass the deﬁned
ﬁlters are removed. Secondly, the genetic variations of the ﬁrst group of varieties are
intersected. Thirdly, the genetic variations of the second group of varieties are inter-
sected. Fourthly, the symmetric difference of the genetic variations of the two groups is
obtained.
The third task, visualize task, consists of examining the data. It involves to i) exam-
ine how genetic variations are distributed over multiple criteria, also called passive anal-
ysis and ii) interact directly with the data (active analysis). Passive analysis allows users
to get a general vision of the data at a glance. To do that, six different visualizations are
used:

– By Chromosome package: a visual representation of the genetic variations with their
physical location at a chromosome level.
– By variety: number of genetic variations for each variety in the deﬁned groups.
– By Gene Ontology: number of genetic variations for each gene ontology type.
– By enzyme type: number of genetic variations for each enzyme type according to
the type of reaction they catalyze.
– By scaffold: number of genetic variations for each scaffold.
– By annotated impact: number of genetic variations for each annotated impact.

Active analysis allows users to interact with the data in a more complex way. Multi-
ple actions can be performed, combined and chained, including: ﬁltering, grouping and
aggregating data, showing and hiding data attributes and performing pivoting opera-
tions. Interaction with data can be performed by ﬁltering, grouping and aggregating
operations that can be combined and chained.
The characterization of these tasks becomes a foundation that guides the design
decisions to generate the UIs that will improve and facilitate the genetic analysis
process.

4.2
User Interface Design

So far, we have identiﬁed the tasks involved in genomic analysis. Now, our attention
focuses on translating those tasks into a tangible UI design. To do that, we focus on

221

developing a key artifact of the design activity: the conceptual design (CD) of the UI,
which captures the structure and ﬂow of the UI. To deﬁne the CD, we have applied a
method called GenomIUm that has been developed in previous work [10] (see Fig. 2). It
is based on Pattern Oriented Design (POD) approach [13] and aims to assist designers
in creating the CD of genomics UIs.

Fig. 2. GenomIUm phases. Source: [21].

GenomIUm takes advantage of the two main characteristics of POD by providing i)
a systematic design process and ii) a catalog of interconnected patterns that support the
systematic process.
The systematic design process consists of four steps:

1. Architectural Design: This step consists on deﬁning the UIs that will make up the
system and their navigation ﬂow. This step is supported by information architec-
ture patterns, which describe system-wide solutions that organize the content to be
displayed by deﬁning high-level presentation units and how they are linked.
2. Structural Design: This steps focuses on establishing the internal structure of each of
the UIs deﬁned in the previous step. This step is supported by page patterns, which
describe the internal structure (i.e. sectors) of presentation units.
3. Content Design: This step consists of selecting the speciﬁc content elements that
conform the internal structure of each UI deﬁned in the previous step. This step is
supported by navigation and content patterns, which describe the content elements
that compose sectors. Each pattern allows users to perform a speciﬁc identiﬁed task.
4. Reﬁnement: Each design pattern provides a general UI design solution. This step
consists of adapting such a general design solution by indicating the visual details
of the selected patterns in the previous step according to the speciﬁc particularities
of the data that is involved in the genomic analysis.

The process is iterative in nature and designers can repeat the steps several times until
the CD meets the user needs.
The catalog is structured in several pattern categories, one for each step of the design
process and it covers general design problems (i.e. navigation or interface distribution)
as well as speciﬁc design problems (i.e. visualizing the complete set of chromosomes of
a species). Designers can exploit the pattern relationships to create complete or partial
UI designs.
The process and its pattern catalog cover the design of the UIs of a complete
genomic application. In the following paragraphs, we describe the CD resulting from
applying GenomiUm in a joint work with bioinformaticians. Figure 3 shows the
designed UI after performing the GenomIUm method.

222

Fig. 3. UI design through the GenomIUm method. Source: [21].

223

In Step 1, Architectural design, three UIs have been deﬁned based on the tasks
analysis (Fig. 1): Variety Selection UI for the “Select variety groups” task, Filter UI for
the “Apply Filters” task and Visualization UI for the “Visualize” task. Bioinformaticians
performed several UCD activities to guide the deﬁnition of the UIs. As an example,
Fig. 4 shows them performing a card sorting session. The deﬁned UIs are connected
through the “Sequential” pattern (the UI with the “H” letter indicates the initial UI).
This pattern is used when a complex task can be divided into more simple tasks that
are performed in a sequential order. It guides bioinformaticians through the three UIs
to carry out the “prioritize genetic variations” process.

Fig. 4. Geneticists and designers working together in a Card Sorting Session. Source: [21].

In Step 2, Structural design, the sectors of the UIs have been designed using the
“Conceptual Framework” pattern. This pattern suggests that the UIs should share the
same layout. The deﬁned layout consists of three sectors: a heading, a body and a footer.
In step 3, Content design, the design patterns that compose each UI have been
selected. Most of them pertain to the “Genomic Patterns” category, which addresses
how to show and interact with genomic-related content. Table 1 describes the selected
patterns for each UI.
In Step 4, Reﬁnement, the selected patterns have been adapted to the speciﬁc partic-
ularities of the data to be displayed as well as the identiﬁed task that they solve. Step
4 in Fig. 3 shows the reﬁned Visualization UI. Only the reﬁnement of the Visualization
UI will be addressed due to space limitations. The resulting Visualization UI gives the
reader a clear idea of how the reﬁnement process works.
The corresponding CD of the three UIs have been iteratively validated by bioinfor-
maticians who provided valuable feedback to improve the UI designs. The reﬁned CDs

224

Table 1. UI patterns used in the Conceptual Design of the UIs. Source: [21].

Variety selection UI

Filter UI

Visualization UI

Present in the three UIs

have been implemented with standard web technologies. More speciﬁcally, we designed
the UI using the Angular framework2, and utilized a set of open source libraries to

2 https://angular.io/.

225

implement the UI paterns (i.e., angular2-charts.js3, ideogram.js4, and agGrid5). These
libraries offer angular-speciﬁc implementations that allows to include them in the
project easily. Table 2 indicates the framework or library that implement each of the
selected UI patterns.

Table 2. Frameworks and libraries used to implements the UI patterns used in the Conceptual
Design of the UIs. Source: [21].

Variety selection UI

Filter UI

Visualization UI

Present in the three UIs

Figure 5 illustrates the ﬁnal implementation of the Visualization UI. Each pattern
has been labelled according to the CD of the step four in Fig. 3.

5
Validation

To validate the CitrusGenome tool, we focused on evaluating how easy is for the users
to ﬁnd the information for performing the genomic analysis.
To do that, we deﬁned a typical genomic analysis problem whose goal is to identify
a set of genetic variations with the potential to cause premature fruit abscission (PFA).
PFA occurs when citrus trees have more fruits than they can maintain, causing some
of these fruits to be degraded. PFA is a biological process of interest in the agricultural
ﬁeld because high PFA results in small amounts of high-quality fruits while low PFA
results in large amounts of lower-quality fruits [2]. Therefore, achieving an optimal
level of PFA is crucial.
From the genomic analysis problem, we then deﬁned three questions to be tested.
They become the Research Questions (RQs) of the validation study.

3 https://github.com/emn178/angular2-chartjs.
4 https://github.com/eweitz/ideogram.
5 https://github.com/ag-grid/ag-grid.

226

Fig. 5. Implementation of Visualisation UI. Source: [21].

227

RQ 1—Will the participants be able to select the data that is involved in the genomic
analysis?
RQ 2—Will the participants be able to set the ﬁlters required to reﬁne the data?
RQ 3—Will the participants be able to identify variants that are potentially respon-
sible for PFA?

5.1
Method

The participants involved in the validation were ﬁve bioinformaticians from the IVIA
research institute. Two of them are part of the IVIA staff as senior researchers, and
they had no previous experience using the tool. Another two of them are Ph.D students
that work as analysts, one of them had little previous experience using the tool while
the other one did not have any experience at all. The last participant is a Ph.D student
analyst with considerably previous experience using the tool (see Table 3).

Table 3. Information of the participants that validated UI of the tool.

The validation consisted of 28 tasks (See the tasks in Appendix A) to test the RQs
written above, and it was performed in a virtual way by using the Zoom video con-
ference platform because of the restrictions derived from COVID-19 pandemia. Each
virtual session involved one participant with the user role, and one of us with the eval-
uator role. The evaluator guided the user by explaining the task to be done and asking
him/her for speaking aloud about the actions or decisions made during the test.
The sessions were recorded and stored in a shared repository in order to review
and analyze the comments made by participants. We divided the review and analyze
process into two stages. In the ﬁrst stage, we met with the participants individually to
review the correspondent recorded session and get their feedback. In the second stage,
we performed a focus group to discuss how easy or difﬁcult was for them to use the
CitrusGenome tool.

5.2
Results

In this section, we describe how the participants performed the tasks related to each
RQ. Then, based on the difﬁculties that the participants had to complete the tasks, we
identiﬁed a set of usability problems.

228

Set of tasks related to RQ1: Will the participants be able to select the data that
is involved in the genomic analysis?
All the participants completed the tasks related to RQ1, and, in general, they
reported a favorable opinion about the data selection. They pointed out that the drag-
and-drop mechanism was intuitive and more sophisticated compared to other tools they
use. However, participants 4 and 5 had some difﬁculties ﬁnding two varieties. The rea-
son for this is that the varieties are shown in the UI of CitrusGenome using their com-
mon name and internal code, but participants 4 and 5 are used to work with the scientiﬁc
name of the variety. Besides, participant 1 mentioned that displaying the cultivar6 of the
varieties would enhance the process by adding relevant information.
Thus, the varieties information that is shown in the UI should include the scien-
tiﬁc name and the cultivar. Participants 1 and 2 described potential cases where such
information is necessary: i) some researchers do not know the internal code of all of
the citrus varieties; and ii) the same variety can be sequenced multiple times, so the
common name is not always enough to identify the variety of interest (here, the cultivar
can help to select the correct one).
From the discussions of this set of tasks, we have deﬁned the following usability
problem:

– Usability Problem 1: The participant wants to know additional information (the
cultivar and the scientiﬁc name) of the citrus varieties when creating the groups in
the ﬁrst step of the analysis.

Set of tasks related to RQ2: Will the participants be able to set the ﬁlters
required to reﬁne the data?
All the participants completed the tasks related to RQ2, but those participants with
previous experience using the tool (i.e., participants 3 and 4) completed the tasks faster
than the rest of the participants. All the participants agreed that the way in which the
ﬁlters are designed is intuitive, and they had no problem setting them.
Participants emphasized the ease with which they set the ﬁlters. In the opinion of
participants 4 and 5, the biological concept of ﬂexibility (Sect. 4.1 describes this concept
and the task to conﬁgure it) is complex to understand, but they indicated that the UI
helped understanding this concept.
In general, all the participants pointed out that the ﬁlters give researchers the ability
to do analyses with a high degree of modularity and ﬂexibility. However, senior partici-
pants (i.e., participants 1 and 2) mentioned searching in promoter regions as a desirable
feature because they are gaining attention in recent academic works. This feature was
not of interest when we carried out the “research user” stage of the UCD process, and
the subsequent ﬁrst version of the prototype did not include such a feature. However,
this interest has changed. This is an example of the continuous evolution of the domain,
which requires updating genomics tools continuously.
From the discussion of this set of tasks, we have deﬁned the following usability
problems:

– Usability Problem 2: The participant wants to search in promoter regions of the
DNA, but the option is not available.

6 A cultivar is deﬁned as a group of selected plants that share common characteristics.

229

– Usability Problem 3: The participant wants to search in the promoter region of a
speciﬁc gene, but the option is not available.

Set of tasks related to RQ3: Will the participants be able to identify variants
that are potentially responsible for PFA?
The tasks related to RQ3 are more complex and time-consuming when compared
to the tasks of RQ1 and RQ2. The reason is that these tasks require the user to analyze
the data resulting from the comparison exercise. With regards to this, all of the par-
ticipants mentioned that the charts displayed eased their work. While the participants
with some experience using the tool (i.e., participants 3 and 4) mentioned that the grid
(see number 21 of Fig. 5) provided them with a very useful and ﬂexible tool, the rest
of the participants (i.e., participants 1, 2, and 5) indicated that some of the features of
the grid were difﬁcult to use at ﬁrst. All of the participants were able to complete the
tasks except participant 5. This was because there is not an explicit representation of
the varieties that compose each group, and participant 5 did not know to which vari-
eties correspond the codes displayed in the grid. As a result, this participant could not
complete the following tasks: Tasks 14 to 18 and Task 26 to 28. Besides, participant 4
struggled to complete the tasks that participant 5 could not complete. In this case, the
reason was that recalling to which group of the analysis (i.e., group A and group B)
each variety belongs leads to a signiﬁcant mental workload to this participant. Thus, the
participants agreed that this situation should be somehow remedied.
From this set of tasks, we have deﬁned the following usability problems:

– Usability Problem 4: The participant wants to see at a glance which varieties com-
pose each group of the analysis.
– Usability Problem 5: The participant struggles differentiating between varieties of
group A and varieties of group B in the following columns of the grid: Genotype,
Genotype Quality, Total Depth, Allelic Depth, and Allelic Balance.

In addition to these results, the users provided us with four comments that were not
directly related to the research questions but considered relevant:

Comment 1—The participants missed a home page from which to navigate to perform
the analysis. Having a home page has become a de facto standard, and they think that
CitrusGenome should have one. From this comment, we have deﬁned the following
usability problem:
– Usability Problem 6: The tool lacks a home page.
Comment 2—After having conﬁgured the ﬁlters of the analysis, the participants more
experienced in the genomics ﬁeld (i.e., participants 1, 2, and 3) realized that a rele-
vant feature was missing. Having information on the quality of the sequencing pro-
cess for citrus varieties before setting up the analysis ﬁlters can be very helpful.
They stated that this information should be displayed grouped by variety and geno-
type. Also, this information could help to conﬁgure certain ﬁlters, such as the allele
balance one, with more conﬁdence. From this comment, we have deﬁned the fol-
lowing usability problem:
– Usability Problem 7: Before starting the analysis, the participant wants to know
the values of the mean value of the GQ and DP attributes of the variants of the
citrus varieties based on the value of the GT attribute.

230

Comment 3—Novel participants (i.e., 1, 2, 4, and 5) expressed that a getting started
page with a detailed description of the steps of the analysis would ease the ﬁrst use
of the tool. From this comment, we have deﬁned the following usability problem:
– Usability Problem 8: Novel participants may struggle when using the tool for
the ﬁrst time.
Comment 4—Participants aim to be able to study the results at anytime. They also
want to be able to switch between the visualization of different analyses to compare
the results. However, they can only visualize the result of an analysis when it is
completed. From this comment, we have deﬁned the following usability problem:
– Usability Problem 9: The participants want to be able to visualize analyses at
anytime, but it can only be seen once.

5.3
Discussion and Design Solutions

Considering the results from the validation with the user, our team (i.e., the evaluators)
met to evaluate the results and identify the severity level of each usability problem. The
severity level allows us to prioritize our effort in designing and implementing a potential
solution to this problem.
To deﬁne the severity level, we used the severity rating scale of ﬁve degrees pro-
posed by Nielsen [11]: 0 (it is not a usability problem), 1 (it is a cosmetic problem
and can be solved in overtime of the project), 2: Minor usability problem (its resolu-
tion should be given in low priority), 3: Major usability problem (the problem needs to
be solved and is given high priority), and 4: Usability catastrophe (the problem must
be solved before the project is launched). Table 4 shows the list of usability problems
together with their severity levels.
Of the nine usability problems that we have identiﬁed, problem 9 was scored with
severity level 4, which means that this problem represents a usability threat and should
be solved with the highest priority. Five problems (2, 3, 4, 5, 8) were considered major
usability problems and were scored with severity level 3. This level is the second highest
one, and it means that they should be solved with high priority. Problems 1 and 7 were
considered minor usability problems, so they were scored with severity level 2. The
priority level of these problems is low. Finally, problem 6, which is related to the lack
of the home page, was considered a cosmetic problem and got the lowest priority.
The order in which the problems were solved followed the priority level assigned,
from the highest to the lowest. We have deﬁned and implemented a solution that solve
each usability problem. Table 4 shows a match between the usability problems reported
above and the corresponding design solution (“Design solution” column).
Design solution 1: update the card that contains variety information in the ﬁrst
step of the analysis.
In the previous version of the CitrusGenome UI, each variety was represented using
the common name and the internal code attributes (see Fig. 6). However, this represen-
tation proved to be insufﬁcient to meet the requirements of the participants, and we
have updated it. In the current version of the UI, we have added two new attributes (see
Fig. 7). The ﬁrst attribute is the scientiﬁc name of the variety, which is shown below the
common name in a smaller font size. The second attribute is the cultivar of the variety.
Design solution 2: Allow users to search in promoter regions of the DNA

231

Table 4. Improvements that have been considered as usability problems to be addressed in the
second iteration of the DCU.

Fig. 6. Previous version of the card containing variety information, causing usability problem 1.

232

Fig. 7. New version of the card containing variety information to solve usability problem 1.

Fig. 8. Previous version of the menu lacking promoter regions, causing usability problem 2.

The genome regions ﬁlter is conﬁgured using a drop-down menu. There were eight
options in the drop-down menu of the previous version of the CitrusGenome UI (see
Fig. 8). In the current version of the UI, we have included another option, namely, pro-
moter, so that the user can search for variations in these regions (see Fig. 9).

Fig. 9. New version of the menu including promoter regions, solving usability problem 2.

Design solution 3: Allow users to search in the promoter region of a speciﬁc gene

Fig. 10. Previous version of the menu lacking the promoter region of a speciﬁc gene, causing
usability problem 3.

233

The genome positions ﬁlter allows users to search for variations in speciﬁc positions
of the DNA such as a gene or its introns, and it is conﬁgured using a drop-down menu,
to select the type of region (e.g., gene, intron, exon, etc.), and a free text search service
to identify the speciﬁc element. There were eight options in the drop-down menu of
the previous version of the CitrusGenome UI (see Fig. 10). In the current version of the
UI, we have included another option, namely, promoter, so that the user can search for
variations in the promoter of a speciﬁc gene (see Fig. 11).

Fig. 11. New version of the menu including the promoter region of a speciﬁc gene, solving usabil-
ity problem 3.

Design solution 4: implement chart components to display the required infor-
mation
In the previous version of the UI, there was no easy way to see which varieties
compose each group. In the current version of the UI, we have implemented two cards,
one per group, in order to display which varieties compose each group (see Fig. 12). We
used chip components7 to represent each variety.

Fig. 12. New charts including the varieties of group A and group B in the analysis, solving usabil-
ity problem 4.

Design solution 5: group the values of these columns into two new columns

Fig. 13. Previous version of the data grid, causing usability problem 5.

7 https://material.io/components/chips.

234

In the previous version of the UI, the grid displayed the following variety-speciﬁc
information of variants: genotype, genome quality, total depth, allelic depth, and allelic
balance. As Fig. 13 shows, each attribute is divided into multiple columns, one per vari-
ety, and it is not possible to identify which varieties pertain to each group of the anal-
ysis. This usability problem is related to the “Recognition rather than recall” Nielsen’s
Heuristic8, which states that user should not have to remember information from one
part of the interface to another, but recognize it. To solve this usability problem, we
grouped these columns to make group composition explicit (see Fig. 14), allowing the
user to easily recognize the group at which each variety belongs.

Fig. 14. New version of the data grid, solving usability problem 5.

Design solution 6: Create a home page
In the previous version of the UI, there was no home page. In the current version of
the UI, we have implemented a home page (see Fig. 15).
Design solution 7: Create a page displaying the required information
In the previous version of the UI, users could not know the mean value of the GQ
and DP attributes of the variants. These values have great importance because they can
alter the result of the analyses. Therefore, we implemented a page to display the mean
value of the GQ and DP attributes of the variants based on the GT attribute and the
variety (see Fig. 16).
Design solution 8: Create a getting started page

Fig. 15. Screenshot of the home page created to solve usability problem 6.

8 https://www.nngroup.com/articles/ten-usability-heuristics/.

235

Fig. 16. Screenshot of the page displaying the information needed to solve usability problem 7.

In the previous version of the UI, novel users indicated that a getting started page
could increase the adoption of the tool and ease its usage. In the current version of the
UI, we have created a getting started page (see Fig. 17) that describes each step of the
analysis in detail.

Fig. 17. Screenshot of the getting started page created to solve usability problem 8.

Design solution 9: Allow users to visualize analyses at anytime
The main problem that we have identiﬁed is that the result of the analysis can not
be visualized if the user leaves the page. Participants indicated to us that it was crucial
to be able to access the result of the analyses at any time. They reported several reasons
to justify the importance of this usability problem: i) users may need to re-evaluate the
result of past analyses; ii) a common use case is to perform a set of analyses and jump
from one to another to compare the results; and iii) both technical and human failures
can cause the user to leave the page unintentionally.
In the current version of the UI, we have implemented two new pages. In the third
step of the analysis, the user receives a code to identify the analysis result instead of
visualizing it directly (see Fig. 18). The second page contains a text input where the user
writes the unique identiﬁer the analysis whose result is to be visualized (see Fig. 19). If
the identiﬁer corresponds to an analysis, the result is then visualized, and the user can
work with it.

Fig. 18. The message displaying the unique identiﬁer of the analysis, solving usability problem 9.

236

Fig. 19. The page to introduce the identiﬁer of the analysis to visualize it, solving usability
problem 9.

6
Conclusions

UIs are crucial to manage data and extract knowledge from it. Its design and devel-
opment require proper attention as good designed UIs can have a huge impact in per-
forming these tasks. Unfortunately, genomic applications are unintuitive, complex and
overly verbose because their UIs are poorly designed. Consequently, learning to use
them is difﬁcult and tedious, which reduces knowledge extraction from genomic data.
This paper emphasizes the use of UCD as an appropriate approach to design
genomic UIs. We report the following: i) a ﬁrst iteration of UCD, where we designed
and implemented genomic UIs in a real-world use case, and ii) a second iteration of
UCD, where we reﬁned the genomic UIs by identifying and solving a set of usability
problems. The method that we have used in these UCD-based iterations is GenomIUm.
The GenomIUm method is both conceptual model-based and pattern-oriented. This
method incorporates both general patterns (i.e., design patterns whose deﬁnition is not
limited to a speciﬁc context) and domain-speciﬁc patterns (i.e., design patterns whose
deﬁnition is speciﬁc to the genomic context).
As we have mentioned above, our works consisted of two UCD iteration. The ﬁrst
iteration focused on analyzing the tasks involved in genomic analysis, conceptualizing
the UI by selecting and adapting design patterns, and generating a ﬁrst version of the
UI as a functional prototype to be evaluated by users (i.e., bioinformaticians). The sec-
ond iteration focused on identifying usability problems as a result of the user evaluation
of the ﬁrst version. We then proposed a set of design solutions to solve the identiﬁed
usability problems. Finally, we reﬁned the UI design by incorporating such design solu-
tions, which are more adjusted to the real needs of the users.
Complementing UCD techniques with the support of a pattern-based method (i.e.,
GenomIUm) to design UIs provided us with a systematic way to generate easy-to-use
UIs in the genomics ﬁeld. While UCD techniques allow us to research the users, and
to specify the actual user tasks, the pattern-based method guides the design and imple-
mentation of the UI based on the user tasks. Besides, composing UIs with widely used
design patterns makes them familiar and, consequently, easier for bioinformaticians to
use.
Bioinformaticians reported being satisﬁed with the designed UI in the ﬁrst interac-
tion because the CitrusGenome platform improved how users performed their knowl-
edge extraction and data management processes. The reasons for this improvement can
be summarized into four statements:

237

1. Automation of the analysis process.
2. Intuitive, easy, and guided process
3. Effortless management of large amounts of data.
4. No need for high computer skills to perform the analysis process.

However, the design solutions that were proposed and implemented to reﬁne the ﬁrst
version of the UI enhanced the ability of users to ﬁnd the information and, consequently,
provided bioinformaticians with a better user experience.
Future work includes the following: as the UCD methodology states, conducting
continuous design-evaluation iterations in order to reﬁne the UIs of CitrusGenome to
the current and future needs of its users; to incorporate new patterns in the GenomIUm
catalog in order to cover a wider range of interactions in the genomics domain; and to
extend the tool to other agri-food domains the IVIA is currently working with, such as
the rice genome.

Acknowledgements. The authors would like to thank the members of the PROS Research Cen-
ter Genome group for fruitful discussions regarding the application of Conceptual Modeling in
the medical ﬁeld. This work has been developed with the ﬁnancial support of the Spanish State
Research Agency and the Generalitat Valenciana under the projects TIN2016-80811-P, PROME-
TEO/2018/176, and INNEST/2021/57 and co-ﬁnanced with ERDF. Work at IVIA is funding by
the Ministerio de Ciencia, Innovaci´on y Universidades (Spain) trough grant RTI2018-097790-R-
100 and by the Instituto Valenciano de Investigaciones Agrarias (Spain), through grants 51915
and 52002.

A
Appendix A: Tasks

We have divided the problem in three steps: 1) select the working data, 2) set the ﬁlter
conditions, and 3) analyze the data. These steps correspond to the three UIs that we
have designed and implemented.

Select the Working Data: this step consists of creating the two groups under study, the
varieties of the ﬁrst group (group A) have high levels of PFA, and the varieties of the
second group (group B) have low levels of PFA. The ﬁrst step is divided into two tasks:

– Task 1: Create group A with 17 varieties of citrus with high levels of PFA.
– Task 2: Create group B with 12 varieties of citrus with low levels of PFA.

Set the Filter Conditions: this step consists of setting the different criteria used to
perform the analysis. Only those variants that fulﬁll the criteria will be visualized. The
second step is divided into 8 tasks:

– Task 3: Accept Single Nucleotide Polymorphism (SNP) variations.
– Task 4: Accept variations that appear in every variety of group A and at most in four
varieties of group B.
– Task 5: Accept variations that appear in every variety of group B and at most in four
varieties of group A.
– Task 6: Accept variations with every GQ and DP values.
– Task 7: Accept variations annotated with high, moderate, or low impacts.

238

– Task 8: Accept variations with an allele balance value between 0.45 and 1 in all the
varieties.
– Task 9: Accept variations that are located inside gene sequences.
– Task 10: Accept variations located between the 28,000,000 and 36,400,000 positions
of chromosome 2.

Analyze the Data: this step consists of visualizing the accepted variations and get
insight from these data. The third step is divided into X tasks. Each task consists of
answering a knowledge question using the data available:

– Task 11: How many variations have been accepted?
– Task 12: What group has more variations?
– Task 13: What variety has more variations?
– Task 14: Which varieties compose group A and group B?
– Task 15: How many variations with a 0/1 genotype have been accepted in group A?
– Task 16: How many variations with a 0/1 genotype have been accepted in group B?
– Task 17: How many variations with a 1/1 genotype have been accepted in group A?
– Task 18: How many variations with a 1/1 genotype have been accepted in group B?
– Task 19: How many high impact annotations have been identiﬁed?
– Task 20: How many cellular component annotations have been identiﬁed?
– Task 21: What is the most common group of enzymes affected by the accepted
variations?
– Task 22: What are the 3 genes with the most variations?
– Task 23: What are the 3 genes with the most high impact annotations?
– Task 24: What is the enzyme type with the most variations?
– Task 25: What is the pathway type with the most variations?
– Task 26: What are the biological processes affected by variations annotated with a
high impact, with a 0/1 genotype in group A, and 1/1 genotype in group B?
– Task 27: How many variations have low Genotype Quality values in group A?
– Task 28: How many variations have low Genotype Quality values in group B?