EDM Forum
EDM Forum Community

eGEMs (Generating Evidence & Methods to
improve patient outcomes)
Publish

3-13-2015
Integrating Patient-Reported Outcomes into Spine
Surgical Care through Visual Dashboards: Lessons
Learned from Human-Centered Design

Andrea L. Hartzler

Shomir Chaudhuri

Brett C. Fey

David R. Flum

See next pages for additional authors

Follow this and additional works at: http://repository.edm-forum.org/egems

Part of the Civic and Community Engagement Commons, Graphic Communications Commons,
Health Information Technology Commons, and the Other Computer Engineering Commons

This Informatics Empirical Research is brought to you for free and open access by the the Publish at EDM Forum Community. It has been peer-
reviewed and accepted for publication in eGEMs (Generating Evidence & Methods to improve patient outcomes).

The Electronic Data Methods (EDM) Forum is supported by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ), Grant 1U18HS022789-01.
eGEMs publications do not reflect the official views of AHRQ or the United States Department of Health and Human Services.

Recommended Citation

Hartzler, Andrea L.; Chaudhuri, Shomir; Fey, Brett C.; Flum, David R.; and Lavallee, Danielle (2015) "Integrating Patient-Reported
Outcomes into Spine Surgical Care through Visual Dashboards: Lessons Learned from Human-Centered Design," eGEMs (Generating
Evidence & Methods to improve patient outcomes): Vol. 3: Iss. 2, Article 2.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.13063/2327-9214.1133
Available at: http://repository.edm-forum.org/egems/vol3/iss2/2

Integrating Patient-Reported Outcomes into Spine Surgical Care through
Visual Dashboards: Lessons Learned from Human-Centered Design

Abstract
Introduction: The collection of patient-reported outcomes (PROs) draws attention to issues of importance
to patients—physical function and quality of life. The integration of PRO data into clinical decisions and
discussions with patients requires thoughtful design of user-friendly interfaces that consider user experience
and present data in personalized ways to enhance patient care. Whereas most prior work on PROs focuses on
capturing data from patients, little research details how to design effective user interfaces that facilitate use of
this data in clinical practice. We share lessons learned from engaging health care professionals to inform design
of visual dashboards, an emerging type of health information technology (HIT).

Methods: We employed human-centered design (HCD) methods to create visual displays of PROs to
support patient care and quality improvement. HCD aims to optimize the design of interactive systems
through iterative input from representative users who are likely to use the system in the future. Through three
major steps, we engaged health care professionals in targeted, iterative design activities to inform the
development of a PRO Dashboard that visually displays patient-reported pain and disability outcomes
following spine surgery.

Findings: Design activities to engage health care administrators, providers, and staff guided our work from
design concept to specifications for dashboard implementation. Stakeholder feedback from these health care
professionals shaped user interface design features, including predefined overviews that illustrate at-a-glance
trends and quarterly snapshots, granular data filters that enable users to dive into detailed PRO analytics, and
user-defined views to share and reuse. Feedback also revealed important considerations for quality indicators
and privacy-preserving sharing and use of PROs.

Conclusion: Our work illustrates a range of engagement methods guided by human-centered principles and
design recommendations for optimizing PRO Dashboards for patient care and quality improvement.
Engaging health care professionals as stakeholders is a critical step toward the design of user-friendly HIT that
is accepted, usable, and has the potential to enhance quality of care and patient outcomes.