to be associated in elderly women with HPV viral
infection, chronic irritation, infection and radiation
elsewhere for treating other diseases2. Almost 99%
of vaginal cancers are squamous cell carcinoma.
Vaginal intraepithelial lesion(VAIN) is the forerunner
of vaginal cancer like CIN but there is no established
routine/universal screening techniques to detect it
early as for CIN.

Pessaries of various types have been using as an
alternative option of pelvic organ descent for long.
Newer silicone made synthetic forms of pessaries are

used and its long term use found to be associated
with development of vaginal carcinoma3.

As diagnosis and treatment of vaginal cancer is very
complicated- it needs proper evaluation and it is a
dilemma to treat elderly patients. Most important
contributing factors are-majority of elderly stay alone
with no family members support specially in poorer
section of the community (Can’t attend health care
facilities either alone or because of financial constrain)
and more over advanced age and  related co-morbidities
make them vulnerable to no attendance or maintain
compliance to any given treatment or medications. The
morbidities and mortalities are also higher4 among them.

Case presentations

Case No 1
A 76 –year- woman, Para7, presented with protruding
mass through vagina with small amount of bleeding

1.
Professor, FOM, Widad University College, Kuantan, Pahang, Malaysia
2.
Professor & Head (Ex), Dhaka Medical College & Hospital, Dhaka.
3.
Consultant Obstetrician & Gynaecologist, Impulse General Hospital, Dhaka
4.
Consultant Obstetrician Gynaecologist, Brisbane, Australia
Address of Correspondence: Dr Hamida Begum, MBBS, DGO, FCPS(Gynae), Professor, FOM, Widad University
College, Kuantan, Pahang, Malaysia

Vaginal Cancer: Association with long term use of
Pessary in Pelvic Organ Prolapse

H BEGUM1, M RASHID2, H SHAMIMA3, F ZOHRA4,

Abstract
Vaginal cancer, rarest form of gynaecological cancer (0.6%) has been found to be associated
with long term use of vaginal ring pessary, which have long been used in alternative management
of pelvic organ prolapse (POP) other than surgery. A through survey was done in remote areas
of Cox’s bazar, refugee camp where out of 52 cases of pelvic organ prolapse, 7 cases found
to use vaginal ring pessary for long and out of 7, vaginal cancer developed in 4 cases. All of
them were aged women above 60 and had defaulted follow up presented with vaginal bleeding,
varying discharge and pain of varying intensity. One patient had only local lesion was treated
by surgical removal followed by radiotherapy. The 2nd one, 68 years, received neo-adjuvant
therapy and died before planned surgery. The 3rd one, aged 79, did not come for follow up after
diagnosis of vaginal cancer done and advised for definitive surgical treatment, family refused

come for F/U but since she is widow for 25 years,
depended on children, because of their busy schedule
could not bring her for F/U until when she came with
chronic urinary retention with vaginal discharge.
Examination revealed - foul smelling, a bit friable mass
about 4x3 cm on right wall of vagina and impacted
ring pessary on right anterior wall of vagina causing
urinary retention. Biopsy showed well differentiated
squamous cell carcinoma of vagina.

After discussing with oncologist neo-adjuvant therapy
started (Taxol and Carboplatin) prior to definitive
surgery. After 3 cycle of therapy-tumour size reduced
significantly, after completing the total 6 cycles of
regimen when she was prepared for definite surgery
of vaginal hysterectomy and pelvic floor repair, she
passed away because of Covid infection.

Case 2
A 68- year- lady, street vendor, diagnosed case of
chronic renal impairment was brought to local hospital
because of chronic incarceration of long standing
pelvic organ prolapse. She was a known case of
prolapse with H/O ring pessary inserted about 15 years
before. Since then she never attended any health care
facility for F/U though she was strictly instructed as
she said she felt better and relieved of symptoms of
prolapse after pessary insertion. She was brought to
OPD by neighbours because of vaginal bleeding and
puffiness of whole body with scanty urine output. On
examination after removal of pessary, a friable mass
of about 5x4 was seen in left fornix- biopsy of which
revealed poorly differentiated vaginal carcinoma.
Moreover, she was also diagnosed with end stage
kidney failure. Before further investigations and
evaluation she passed away within one week.

Case 3
She is 69 years old lady, para 9, all home delivery,
attended out- patient department of nearby clinic with
history of descent of pelvic organs for 28 years since
after her 8th delivery, initially 2nd degree followed by
complete procidentia. She was menopausal for 18

years, Pap’s smear done twice with negative results
but she has co-morbidities with long standing
hypertension and type 2 diabetes with irregular
medications but with no previous history of any
surgery. She was non-smoker, non- alcoholic with body
weight 61 kg. She was a separated lady for last 23
years and was staying with her sons. During booking
she also had features of cardiac and renal impairment,
so after discussion she was offered vaginal ring pessary
with advice for follow up. After initial 3 visits she
defaulted.

After 3 years when she came with a bit smelling
vaginal discharge and bleeding which on examination
revealed a neglected pessary and a small mass on
superadded ulcer of about 3x2cm, biopsy of which
revealed well differentiated squamous cell carcinoma
of vagina with no evidences of metastasis as revealed
by CT and cystoscopy. After counselling and
considering all risks, surgery proceeded –Vaginal
hysterectomy with bilateral salphingo-oophorectomy,
pelvic floor repair with sacrospinous fixation.
Histopathology showed the same findings with clear
vaginal margins, paravaginal tissues, ovaries, uterus
and other structures negative for malignancy. She was
referred to radiation oncologist where she received
both external & internal Radiotherapy.

Fig.-1: Histopathology: Well Differentiated Squamous
cell carcinoma of Vagina

Case 4
She was 71 years Lady, found in local bus terminal
lying with H/O of Ring Pessary insertion some 23

deeply impacted pessary. Pessary removed and
biopsy from ulcer shows well differentiated vaginal
cancer. Pap’s smear never done before. After initial
management while she was being prepared for
definitive surgery, she absconded.

Discussions
Women usually develop pelvic organ prolapse when
supporting structures gets weak as a result of repeated
and neglected or unattended childbirth. The descent
process though starts just after this type of incident
but to manifest symptoms took some years, may be
15-20 years5. Most of them are by that time aged with
almost no family support and some of them preferred
insertion of pessaries as an alternative option for
surgery6. Vaginal ring pessary is one of the commonest
managements in these groups of women because of
simple procedure and available everywhere with no need
of admission and anaesthesia as well5. Superficial
vaginal erosion (8.9%), vaginal discharge and infection
occurs in most of these women using these pessaries6.
Some women found to develop fistula, after using shelf
pessaries and incidence of vaginal or cervical cancers
rate increases to be of significance7.

Informed consent, careful strict follow up at regular
interval of 3-6 months for cleaning and to look after
the exact position of pessary is of paramount
importance to detect early ulcer or discharge if any8.
A non- healing ulcer as a result of chronic irritation on
vaginal walls lead to development of cancers9. This
event is triggered by advanced age, coexisting medical
morbidities, unhygienic life style, superadded HPV
infection flare up the chronic inflammatory process,
metaplasia and ultimately dysplasia and cancer8,10.

Gynaecologists should always aware of this potential
complication while using pessary as alternate
treatment of prolapse and during F/U vagina should
be thoroughly examined for any ulcer/erosion and
infection which should be vigorously treated and biopsy
is mandatory for tissue disorder diagnosis. Those who
are non- compliant should offer definitive surgical
management of prolapse.

Conclusion:
Women with pelvic organ prolapse, pessary should
be used only those who are strict on compliance to

come for regular follow up to detect early stage of any
vaginal ulcer which might proceed to cancer. And all
women must be informed about this rare but dangerous
complication before insertion of pessary. And whenever
any suspicious ulcer it is mandatory to take biopsy
for proper histopathological report.