324  |  	
wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/jan
J Adv Nurs. 2020;76:324–327.
© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

 

Received: 21 May 2019  |  Revised: 2 September 2019  |  Accepted: 17 September 2019

DOI: 10.1111/jan.14219  

O R I G I N A L  R E S E A R C H :  P I L O T  S T U D Y

Partnering with new mothers to develop a smart phone app 
to prevent maternal mortality after hospital discharge: A pilot 
study

M. Cynthia Logsdon PhD, WHNP‐BC, FAAN, Professor1
 |   Adrian Lauf PhD, Assistant 

Professor2 |   Reetta Stikes MSN, RNC‐NIC, CLC, Quality Improvement Coordinator3 |   

Ashely Revels BSN, Undergraduate Research Scholar1 |   Rachel Vickers‐Smith PhD, MPH, 

Assistant Professor1

The peer review history for this article is available at https://publons.com/publon/10.1111/jan.14219 

1School of Nursing, University of Louisville, 
Louisville, KY, USA

2Computer Engineering and Computer 
Science, University of Louisville, Louisville, 
KY, USA

3Center for Women & Infants, University of 
Louisville Hospital, Louisville, KY, USA

Correspondence
M. Cynthia Logsdon, School of Nursing, 
University of Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky, 
USA.

Funding information
Funding for this pilot study was provided 
by the University of Louisville National 
Science Foundation I‐CORPs program for 
entrepreneurial training and the Nursing 
& Interdisciplinary Research Committee, 
University of Louisville Hospital.

Abstract

Background: In the United States, approximately 700 women die annually from preg‐

nancy‐related complications in the first year after birth; a significant number of the 

deaths occur after hospital discharge. Although postpartum monitoring is important, 

the standard practice is for one healthcare evaluation at 6 weeks post‐birth. Most 

women are not aware of signs of postpartum complications.

Aim: The aim of the pilot study was to develop a prototype of a mobile app aimed at 

increasing a new mother's ability to monitor her own health after childbirth.

Design: The design used mixed methods and procedures from human‐centred design 

in an iterative process.

Methods: Data were collected by the researchers from January ‐ May 2019 in a hos‐

pital that serves primarily low income and underserved women in the southern US. 

Three groups of women provided data related to health education preferences or 

their reaction to a mock‐up or prototype mobile app. Several women completed the 

Mobile App Rating Scale (MARS; N = 22).

Results: Themes from interviews indicated that women (N = 5) preferred electronic 

health education and that they used apps to monitor their pregnancies. Other new 

mothers (n‐5) described their overall reaction to the proposed features of the app 

which was incorporated into the design of the app that was tested by the third group 

of new mothers (N = 22) who were positive about interactions with the app. The 

MARS scores for the app were positive.

Conclusions: New mothers indicated that they would be willing to use an app to 

monitor their own postpartum health.

Impact: Data from the pilot study informed the development of a prototype mobile 

app that can now be used in a clinical trial with new mothers to monitor their own 

health and report concerns to healthcare providers.

|  325

1 | INTRODUCTION

Approximately 700 women die annually in the USA from preg‐

nancy‐related complications in the first year after birth (Centers for 

Disease Control & Prevention, 2019). A significant number of the 

deaths occur after hospital discharge (48–72 hr after birth): 18.6% 

occur 1–6  days postpartum, 21.4% occur 7–42  days postpartum, 

and 11.7% occur 43–365 days postpartum (Peterson et al., 2019). 

The most common causes of deaths after hospital discharge are 

hypertensive disorders of pregnancy (0–6 days postpartum), cere‐

brovascular accidents (1–42 days postpartum), and cardiomyopathy 

(43–365 days postpartum; Peterson et al., 2019).

Although postpartum monitoring is important (American College 

of Obstetricians & Gynecologists, 2018), the standard practice is 

for one healthcare evaluation at 6 weeks after birth. Most women 

are not aware of signs of postpartum complications (Logsdon et al., 

2018) and patient factors (lack of knowledge of warning signs and 

nonadherence to medical regimens) are contributors to maternal 

mortality (Peterson et al., 2019). Over 60% of maternal mortality is 

preventable (Peterson et al., 2019).

Mobile applications (apps) have been used successfully to share 

evidence‐based health information and change health behaviour. 

Use of user‐informed mobile apps to provide actionable health 

information to new mothers has not been tested and has the po‐

tential to prevent maternal mortality. Aim: Develop a prototype 

of a user‐informed mobile app aimed at increasing new mother's 

ability to monitor her own health after childbirth. RQ1.1: What are 

new mothers’ preferences for receiving health information after 

discharge? RQ1.2: Do new mothers find a mobile app for education 

about their own health to be acceptable? Information from this 

pilot study will inform further testing of the user‐informed mobile 

app in a clinical trial.

1.1 | Design

The design used mixed methods and procedures from human‐cen‐

tred design in an iterative process. Traditional health intervention 

models have brought the user/patient into the process after the 

intervention is fully designed. In contrast, the user experience is at 

the centre of human‐centred design, increasing the likelihood that 

the end product will be acceptable to and useful for, the intended 

user.

2 | METHODS

Women were eligible to participate in the pilot study if they 

had delivered a live child in the past week, were 18 years of age 

or older and spoke English. The hospital serves primarily low 

income and underserved patients in the southern USA. From 

January to May 2019, the researchers invited a convenient sam‐

ple of new mothers to participate and obtained informed con‐

sent. The study was approved by the institutional review board 

of the university and the site. The interviews took place in the 

new mother's hospital room and she received baby products 

worth $15.

The first group of new mothers (N = 5) was asked open‐ended 

questions about how they prefer to receive health information. 

The next group of new mothers (N  =  5) provided feedback on 

paper mock‐ups of a smart phone app. Next, a prototype of an 

app was created for new mothers to use (N = 22). They were asked 

to interact with a series of different app screens while receiving 

minimal direction. Each tester was asked to describe her thoughts 

using a think‐aloud technique. New mothers then completed the 

Mobile App Rating Scale (MARS; range of scores 1 [low] ‐ 5 [high]; 

Stoyanov et al., 2015), including predictions of how the app 

K E Y W O R D S

maternal mortality, nurse, patient education, user‐centred design

TA B LE 1 Mobile App Rating Scale (MARS) and subscale scores 
(N = 22)

Total objective quality
4.4 (0.31)
4.4 (4.2, 4.7)

Behaviour change
4.9 (0.43)
5.0 (5.0, 5.0)

Note: Scores range from 1 (low) to 5 (high).
Abbreviations: SD, standard deviation; IQR, interquartile range.

326  |    

would change their health seeking behaviour. Interviews were 

audiotaped and transcribed verbatim. Transcripts were reviewed 

by researchers for overarching themes with particular emphasis 

on suggested changes.

3 | RESULTS

Themes from the first qualitative interviews indicated that women 

preferred electronic health education and that they used mobile 

apps to monitor their pregnancies. The second group of new moth‐

ers described their overall reaction to the proposed features of the 

app, emphasizing candid opinions about what they liked and missing 

features. This feedback was incorporated into the design of the pro‐

totype that was tested by the third group of new mothers who were 

positive about interactions with the prototype app. (See Table S1 for 

themes and examples of participant comments).

The MARS quality score for the mobile app was 4.4 (SD 0.31) 

and all four subscales had mean scores greater than 4 (Table 1). The 

subjective quality mean score was 3.9 (SD 0.72). The individual sub‐

jective item with the lowest mean score was, ‘Would you pay for this 

app?’ with a mean of 2.8 (SD 1.74). The average overall star rating 

of the app was 3.8 stars (SD 0.87). All app‐specific items had mean 

ratings of 4.8 or higher (range 4.8–4.9).

4 | CONCLUSIONS

New mothers indicated that they would be willing to use a mobile 

app to monitor their own health after childbirth. Such an evidence‐

based app is currently unavailable. Analysis of qualitative data 

provided features of an app that women preferred and would use. 

Feedback on an initial prototype of the smart phone app was posi‐

tive and provided guidance for further testing in a clinical trial.

5 | IMPACT

In a collaborative process, data from the study informed the initial 

development of a user‐informed, prototype mobile app that can be 

used in a clinical trial with women after childbirth to enable them to 

monitor their own health and to report concerns and health devia‐

tions to healthcare providers.

No conflict of interest was declared by the authors in relation to the 

study itself. Note that M. Cynthia Logsdon is a JAN editor but, in line 

with usual practice, this paper was subjected to double blind peer 

review and was edited by another editor.

ORCID

M. Cynthia Logsdon 
 https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6176-4237