Brief Communication

User-centered design of discharge warnings tool for
colorectal surgery patients

Aanand D Naik,1,2,3 Molly J Horstman,1,2,3 Linda T Li,4,5 Michael K Paasche-Orlow,6

Bryan Campbell,1 Whitney L Mills,1,2 Levi I Herman,1,7 Daniel A Anaya,4,8 Barbara W
Trautner,1,2,4 and David H Berger1,4

1Center for Innovations in Quality, Effectiveness, and Safety (IQuESt); Michael E. DeBakey VA Medical Center, Houston, TX, USA,
2Department of Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA, 3VA Quality Scholars Coordinating Center, Michael E.
DeBakey VA Medical Center, 4Michael E. DeBakey Department of Surgery, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA,
5Department of General Surgery, Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, NY, USA, 6Department of
Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA, 7Jesse H. Jones Graduate School of Business, Rice Univer-
sity, Houston, TX, USA and 8Department of Gastrointestinal Oncology, Section of Hepatobiliary Tumors and Health Outcomes and
Behavior, H. Lee Mofﬁtt Cancer Center and Research Institute, Tampa, FL, USA

Received 7 December 2016; Revised 31 January 2017; Accepted 18 February 2017

ABSTRACT

Objectives: Readmission following colorectal surgery, typically due to surgery-related complications, is common.
Patient-centered discharge warnings may guide recognition of early complication signs after colorectal surgery.
Materials and Methods: User-centered design of a discharge warnings tool consisted of iterative health literacy
review and a heuristic evaluation with human factors and clinical experts as well as patient end users to estab-
lish content validity and usability.
Results: Literacy evaluation of the prototype suggested >12th-grade reading level. Subsequent revisions
reduced reading level to 8th grade or below. Contents were formatted during heuristic evaluation into 3 action-
oriented zones (green, yellow, and red) with relevant warning lexicons. Usability testing demonstrated compre-
hension of this 3-level lexicon and recognition of appropriate patient actions to take for each level.
Discussion: We developed a discharge warnings tool for colorectal surgery using staged user-centered design.
The lexicon of surgical discharge warnings could structure communication among patients, caregivers, and cli-
nicians to improve post-discharge care.

Key words: readmissions, colorectal surgery, usability testing, health literacy, discharge instructions

INTRODUCTION

Hospitals face increased financial responsibility for 30-day readmis-
sions. Published interventions focus largely on reducing readmis-
sions for medical patients.1,2 The discharge needs of surgical
patients are often distinct, requiring specific engagement. The ma-
jority of surgical patients are readmitted for common complications
related to the surgical procedure itself.3–7 This predictability offers

the opportunity to provide postoperative patients with targeted dis-
charge warnings aimed at recognizing common post-discharge com-
plications.8,9

Among surgical procedures, colorectal surgery has one of the
highest unplanned 30-day readmission rates.4,6 Common causes of
readmission include ileus or bowel obstruction, surgical site infec-
tion, and dehydration.4,6 Prompt attention to warning signs for

Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the American Medical Informatics Association 2017.
This work is written by US Government employees and is in the public domain in the United States.
975

Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, 24(5), 2017, 975–980

doi: 10.1093/jamia/ocx018
Advance Access Publication Date: 16 March 2017

Brief Communication

these common complications is critical for health care systems to
have the opportunity to intervene early to avoid readmission.9

Patients play a critical role by identifying and communicating early
problems. As recommended by the Institute of Medicine, patients
need discharge instructions with tailored information that empowers
them to participate in their post-discharge care.8,10

We previously developed discharge instructions to address the
specific needs of colorectal surgery patients following discharge.6,9

In the prototype, the discharge instructions included a set of specific,
actionable warnings, consisting of a lexicon for complications fol-
lowing colorectal surgery that activates patients to communicate
with their health care providers. This discharge warnings lexicon
was developed through a systematic review of the literature6 and a
Delphi expert consensus panel with a national sample of colorectal
surgeons.9

The current study presents our effort to transform physician-
centered discharge warnings into an understandable, usable warn-
ings lexicon for patients using health literacy and usability heuristics
standards and cognitive interviews with patients during the postop-
erative period. Finally, we provide a discussion of how these dis-
charge warnings can be effectively integrated within a clinical team
structure that includes patients and their caregivers.

METHODS

A multiphase, user-centered design process was used to design and
test the discharge warnings prototype.11 A design thinking ap-
proach11 was used to synthesize ! ideate ! prototype and then iter-
atively revise the warning signs and symptoms tool for colorectal
surgery patients. The synthesis process included a previously con-
ducted meta-analysis of conditions associated with readmission fol-
lowing colorectal surgery.6 Data synthesis moved to concept
ideation using a Delphi expert panel of surgical experts, who devel-
oped an initial prototype with a physician-centric lexicon for dis-
charge warnings.9 The current study begins from this initial
prototype and moves through testing and prototype revisions.

Procedures
Phase 1: Health literacy review
We conducted a literacy evaluation of the discharge warnings proto-
type,9 led by a health literacy expert (MPO), using the Flesch-
Kincaid Readability Test, the revised Dale-Chall method, and the
Lexile Framework to make substantial revisions to our patient-
facing content.12 The goal of the literacy evaluation was to reduce
the required reading level to that of an 8th-grade education or below
in order to be consistent with the average reading level of the local
patient population we were interested in observing.13

Phase 2: Heuristics evaluation with experts and end users
To ensure that the discharge warnings lexicon was presented suc-
cinctly and uniformly, we conducted a series of heuristic evalua-
tions. First, a human factors psychologist (BC) conducted an initial
heuristics review using a subset of nationally recognized usability
heuristics published by the National Institutes of Health and avail-
able at: http://www.usability.gov.14 The goal of the heuristics evalu-
ations was to ensure that the discharge warnings conformed to
known human limitations and research-based guidelines for page
layout; headings, titles, and labels; text and color appearance; lists;
content organization; and usability.14 Second, 2 additional investi-
gators, a clinician (AN) and a non-clinician (LH), reviewed the

preliminary list of findings and identified additional concerns.
The human factors expert then compiled these findings into an
adapted prototype for usability testing by patient end users.
Patients were recruited for cognitive interviews to determine us-
ability during their first postoperative clinic appointment following
colorectal surgery at the surgical oncology clinic of the Michael E.
DeBakey VA Medical Center. The first postoperative clinic appoint-
ment was typically within 2 weeks of hospital discharge. Patients
who underwent elective colon or rectal surgery and had a scheduled
appointment were eligible to participate. Eligible patients were iden-
tified and approached by members of the surgical care team during
their clinic appointment. Patients interested in participating gave in-
formed consent at the appointment and were provided with a color
copy of the colorectal discharge warnings and everyday care instruc-
tions. A 30-min telephone interview was scheduled with each patient
for the following week. Patients were asked to read over and review
the warning signs and symptoms at home during the intervening
time between their postoperative clinic visit and the scheduled inter-
view. Interviews continued until thematic saturation was achieved
regarding usability guidelines, defined as no new themes being un-
covered in 2 subsequent interviews.
All interviews were audio recorded and transcribed verbatim. Inter-
views were conducted by research staff who had no role in the care of
the patients. Interviews followed a semistructured interview guide (see
Table 1 for questions). Six multidisciplinary research personnel (sur-
gery, gerontology, hospital medicine, human factors psychology, and
organizational psychology) then performed a thematic analysis of inter-
view transcripts using a card-sorting procedure to identify content that
patients found most salient.15,16 A single-linkage cluster analysis of the
card-sorting data was performed using the Jaccard index as a metric of
distance. Patient response themes were derived from the “clusters” of
patient responses (using a 0.33 distance threshold).

RESULTS

Phase 1
Results of the iterative design process and literacy evaluation revealed
that the initial discharge warnings, using language adopted directly
from the expert panel, required a literacy level consistent with >12th-
grade education (Figure 1). Subsequent revisions to the content of the
discharge warnings, in consultation with our health literacy expert, re-
duced the required reading level to 8th grade (Figure 2).

Phase 2
A comprehensive heuristics evaluation revealed several inconsis-
tencies regarding the presentation and readability of the informa-
tion provided by the discharge warnings. As shown in Figure 2,
the discharge warnings had low-contrast colorized text, an in-
consistent grouping scheme, inconsistent use of bold text,
unclear calls to action, and a mix of passive and active voice. The
human factors expert integrated the consensus findings of the
heuristics evaluation into a revised version of the discharge warn-
ings lexicon page using a simpler language base and a more con-
sistent design (Figure 3).

Patient interviews
Thematic saturation for usability was achieved after 7 post-colorectal
surgery patients completed cognitive interviews. All the participants
were male, ranging in age from 49 to 73 years. One completed only
primary school, 2 had high school diplomas, and the rest had at least

976

some college. The patient interviews and thematic analysis indicated
that these patients understood the information provided and ap-
proved of the manner in which warning signs and symptoms were
presented (Table 1). Patients demonstrated comprehension of the 3-
level heuristic for warnings (ie, the green, yellow, and red zones) and
recognized appropriate patient actions. Patients further suggested
edits to the design, readability, and formatting of certain pages.

Discharge warnings
Patients first noticed the colors, discharge warnings, and heading.
Patients understood that the green zone indicated that “everything is

going well,” the yellow zone indicated “things you need to look
out for,” and the red zone indicated that the patient needed to
see a doctor right away. Patients rated the clarity of information
on this page from 1 (lower) to 5 (higher), for an average of 4.7
(standard deviation ¼ 0.5).

Everyday care instructions
The thematic analysis of responses to our open-ended questions
about the everyday care instructions revealed that patients first no-
ticed the instructions and heading. Patients understood that the in-
formation indicated that they needed to “get moving” and to “keep

Table 1. Thematic analysis of phase 2 qualitative responses

Page
Question
Response Theme(s)

Warning Signs
When looking at this page, what is the ﬁrst thing that stands out to you?
Colors and formatting
Nothing
Warning signs
Heading
Warning Signs
What is the green zone telling you?
“Everything is going well”
Bowel movements
Warning Signs
What is the yellow zone telling you?
“Things you need to look out for”
“Something could be wrong”
“Something’s wrong with you”
Warning signs
Keep vigilant
Warning Signs
What is the red zone telling you?
“Go see a doctor”
Needs action
Everyday Care
When looking at this page, what is the ﬁrst thing that stands out to you?
Instructions
Heading
Nothing
Information
Everyday Care
In your own words, can you describe the information on this page?
Get moving
What to do/not do
“You have to keep up with it”
Both Pages
Do you have any other suggestions for how we could improve the usefulness
of these instructions?
Ostomy care
Additional instructions
Font size
Nothing

Note: Phrases in quotation marks are representative quotes from that theme.

Figure 1. Initial version of the warning signs page developed for discharge in-
structions incorporating the 12 warning signs identiﬁed by the Delphi panel.

Figure 2. Second major iteration of the warning signs tool developed for the
discharge instructions.

977

up with it.” Patients rated the clarity of the information on this page
from 1 (lower) to 5 (higher), for an average of 5.0.

DISCUSSION

We describe a user-centered “design thinking” process culminating
in a set of discharge warnings that are usable and understandable

for patients who have recently undergone colorectal surgery.17,18

The current study began from a prototype consisting of a surgeon-
defined lexicon of signs and symptoms for common complications
of colorectal surgery that most often result in hospital readmis-
sion.6,9 Two consecutive adaptations of the instructions arose from
structured revisions drawn from the health literacy (Figure 2) and
human factors (Figure 3) literature and under the supervision of ex-

Figure 3. Final iteration of the (A) discharge warning signs and (B) everyday care pages developed for patients receiving colorectal surgery as part of cancer
therapy.

978

perts. The structure and content of this patient-centered version was
then evaluated for usability by patients who recently underwent
elective colorectal surgery. Cognitive interviews demonstrated that
our discharge instructions were clear and usable for patients during
the critical first month following surgery. The usefulness of these
discharge instructions lies in their potential to trigger awareness and
facilitate communication between patients and their clinicians to po-
tentially mitigate common post-surgical complications.

Theoretical foundation
Our discharge instructions rely on a lexicon (ie, simple terms used to
communicate complex phenomena) to inform communication be-
tween patients and their clinical teams. The findings of this study sug-
gest that patients and caregivers can make sense of the meaning and
clinical usefulness of simple terms that describe warning signs and
symptoms signaling a potential postoperative complication.19 Fur-
thermore, patients grasped that different terms signified different lev-
els of urgency for action (ie, an urgency heuristic using commonly
understood green, yellow, and red signals). This sense-making lexi-
con was easily understood as a “warning signs” framework that pro-
vides clear instructions to patients on when to act.19 Breakdowns in
communication between patients and providers are commonly
associated with preventable readmissions.20 In qualitative studies, pa-
tients and caregivers often express frustration with their attempts to
obtain appropriate medical triage for post-discharge problems;21,22

however, the available literature has not addressed ways to improve
communication between patients and the health care system after dis-
charge.8 The lexicon developed in this study offers an important step
forward by providing patients with an understandable list of clinical
prompts that are patient-centered and actionable, and clearly com-
municate medical problems that have meaning for patients and clini-
cians that can potentially extend beyond colorectal surgery.19

The design of these warning signs is grounded in the naturalistic
decision-making processes of experts.23 This literature finds that
experts (eg, surgical nurse practitioners) often act intuitively using a
recognition model that takes into account the specific environment
(follow-up after colorectal surgery), relevant cues (wound is red and
patient has a fever), expectations about what those cues mean (likely
surgical site infection), and a course of action to address the issue
(schedule immediate appointment). To make appropriate postoperative
triage decisions, front-line clinicians (eg, nurses working at a 24 h

nursing help line) and surgical experts must first obtain information
from patients to identify the environment and relevant cues
(Figure 4). Insufficient information transfer between patients and
providers may lead to significant delays in medical care as additional
information is sought. Delays impact the health care system’s ability
to intervene in postoperative problems in the outpatient setting.
Patients and their caregivers can be activated regarding the concerns
that expert surgeons use to triage postoperative care with only mod-
est training at the time of discharge, using tools integrated into pa-
tient health portals, such as our discharge warnings, to reinforce this
training. Clear communication is an important skill for effective
teams, and improving team communication features prominently in
successful training programs in health care.24,25

The current study has limitations. Usability testing was per-
formed with a small number of veteran patients drawn from a single
health system whose perspectives may not apply to other settings.
While this important subpopulation (older, comorbid men) is often
linked to readmission following colorectal surgery,6 additional vali-
dation studies with a broader sample (gender, race, socioeconomic
and insurance status, etc.) are needed to confirm the usability of this
warning signs lexicon and its effectiveness in reducing readmissions.

Clinical implications
The findings of this study suggest that patient-centered discharge in-
structions can be easily understood and integrated into a warning
signs lexicon for patients following elective colorectal surgery. The
structure and content of discharge warnings are critical in activating
patients to monitor their health and communicate with clinicians
whenever warning signs of complications are present. Patients can
be given these warning signs as part of discharge instructions gener-
ated from electronic medical records and trained on how to report
them to their clinicians. Future studies should measure differences in
patient understanding, frequency of communication using the spe-
cific language of the discharge warnings, and ultimately changes in
emergency room or hospital admissions among those receiving in-
structions with and without this specific warning signs lexicon.