978-1-6654-5668-5/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE 

Designing Interaction of Institut Teknologi 
Bandung Mental Health Services 

Indra Febrio Nugroho 
School of Electrical Engineering and Informatics 
Institut Teknologi Bandung 
Bandung, Indonesia 

Fitra Arifiansyah, S.Kom., M.T. 
School of Electrical Engineering and Informatics 
Institut Teknologi Bandung 
Bandung, Indonesia 

Abstract— The increasing trends of mental health issues 
happened to Institut Teknologi Bandung students yet the small 
usage number of mental health services application provided by 
Bimbingan Konseling Institut Teknologi Bandung (BK ITB) 
causing the urgency to perform interventions to solve mental 
health issues. Mental health services are needed to perform any 
kinds of interventions such as assessment, diagnosis, treatment, 
and counseling to overcome students’ mental health issues. The 
goal of this paper is to design an interaction product that could 
solve usage problems found on the existing BK ITB application so 
that the usage number of ITB mental health services could be 
increased and the students’ mental health issues could be 
overcame. The user requirements of interaction design of ITB 
mental health services are gathered through research by 
questionnaires and interviews. User-centered design approach is 
used to design the interaction of ITB mental health services. The 
design solution is implemented in low-fidelity prototype and high-
fidelity prototype with effective to use (effectiveness) and easy to 
learn (learnability) usability goals, and helpful (helpfulness) user 
experience goals. The goals achievement is measured by some 
metrics, namely completion rate to measure effectiveness, Single 
Ease Question (SEQ) and System Usability Scale (SUS) to measure 
learnability, and Intrinsic Motivation Inventory (IMI) subscale 
value/usefulness to measure helpfulness. The results show that the 
design solution is effective to use with 100% completion rate, is 
easy to learn with 6,78 out of 7 SEQ score and with 92,5 out of 100 
SUS score, and is helpful with 6,33 out of 7 IMI subscale 
value/usefulness score. It can be concluded that the goals of the 
design solution have been successfully achieved. 

Keywords—interaction design, mental health services, user-
centered design, prototype, usability goals, user experience goals 

I. 
INTRODUCTION 

Mental health is one of the important aspects of health to be 
paid attention to. The impacted mental health could affect one’s 
physical condition and life quality, because mental health affects 
to how someone thinks, feels, acts, makes decision, handles 
stress, and interacts with others [1]. Research said that around 2 
out of 5 students in China have anxiety symptoms [2]. Other 
research said that around 71.26% students in United States are 
indicated to increasing of anxiety and stress level, moreover 
during the pandemic [3]. The increasing trends can also be seen 
in ITB. Many students have experienced mental health issues 
caused by various factors, such as high academical load, high 
expectations from surroundings for students' academic abilities, 

not having friends to share with (especially during the 
pandemic), and difficulty in adaptation for first year students [4]. 

One thing that can be done to overcome mental health issues 
is to ask for help from mental health services [1]. Currently, ITB 
has provided mental health services in the form of consultation 
with psychologists through Bimbingan Konseling ITB (BK 
ITB). However, there are many students who have not used the 
service and do not even know the existence of the service [4], 
even though in reality mental health services can help reduce the 
risk of chronic disease associated with stress and anxiety [6] and 
mental health service applications can provide mental health 
interventions with high efficacy both as a treatment tool and as 
a complement to traditional therapy [7]. Therefore, it is 
necessary to design an improved interaction of mental health 
services so that the usage number of mental health services at 
ITB could be increased and mental health interventions can be 
carried out more effectively. 

II. 
LITERATURE STUDY 

A. User-centered Design 
One of approaches mainly used to design an interaction 
product is user-centered design. The user-centered design 
approach places the user in the role who best knows the needs, 
goals, and preferences of the product. In the practice of 
implementing design, designers must involve users at all stages 
of the process, and put aside their personal preferences and focus 
more on user preferences [9]. The overall process of user-
centered design approach can be seen on Fig. 1 below. 

 

Fig. 1. User-centered Design Process 

2022 9th International Conference on Advanced Informatics: Concepts, Theory and Applications (ICAICTA) | 978-1-6654-5668-5/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ICAICTA56449.2022.9932965

The user-centered design approach is started by planning the 
design process. Designer decides the design problems scope and 
the research method used for the whole design process. 
Specifying the context of use is conducted by performing 
analysis on user characteristics, user problems, user goals and 
user tasks. Specifying the user requirements is conducted by 
deciding features, usability goals, and user experience goals of 
the proposed design based on the previous process. The design 
is then implemented and is evaluated to decide whether the 
targeted goals have been achieved or not. These processes are 
carried out iteratively as needed until design solutions have 
achieved the targeted goals. 

In achieving its goals, there are two terms that are often used 
as the criteria, namely usability goals and user experience goals. 
Usability goals refers to ensuring that interactive products are 
easy to learn, effective to use, and satisfying from the user's 
perspective [10]. Specifically, the intended goals are effective to 
use (effectiveness), efficient to use (efficiency), safe to use 
(safety), have good utility (utility), easy to learn (learnability), 
and easy to remember how to use (memorability). Meanwhile, 
user experience goals refers to explaining what experiences are 
obtained by users which include emotions and experiences that 
are categorized into desirable aspects and undesirable aspects 
[10].  

B. Usability Testing 

Usability testing is a test conducted to evaluate the 
achievement of usability criteria so that feedback can be 
obtained for product improvement [11]. There are three main 
components in usability testing, they are the facilitator as a 
participant guider in conducting the test, tasks as activities that 
the user might do in actual conditions, and the participant as the 
user of the product being researched [12]. Several metrics used 
to measure usability testing achievement, namely Completion 
Rate, Single Ease Question (SEQ), System Usability Scale 
(SUS), and Intrinsic Motivation Inventory (IMI). 

1. Completion Rate 

Completion rate is a metric that can be used to measure 
effectiveness of a design solution [13]. The completion rate is 
calculated by determining a binary value of 1 if the participant 
successfully completes a task, and 0 if the participant does not 
successfully complete a task. Effectiveness can be represented 
as a percentage by using equation in Fig. 2 below. 

 

Fig. 2. Completion Rate Percentage Equation 

2. Single Ease Question (SEQ) 

Single Ease Question (SEQ) is a 7-scale questionnaire that 
can be used to assess the level of difficulty of a task perceived 
by the user [14]. SEQ questions are asked after participants 
finished completing the task in usability testing [14].  

3. System Usability Scale (SUS) 

System Usability Scale (SUS) is a questionnaire containing 
10 questions on a scale of 5 with a value of 1 meaning strongly 
disagree and 5 meaning strongly agree. SUS is a valid and 

reliable metric, and is used to measure the perceived usability of 
users [15]. SUS score is calculated by subtracting the user's 
answer by 1 for each odd number, then subtracting 5 from the 
user's answer for each even number, then finally adding them all 
up and multiplying it by 2.5 [15]. The classification of SUS score 
can be seen on Fig. 3 below. 

 

Fig. 3. SUS Score Classification 

4. Intrinsic Motivation Inventory (IMI) 

Intrinsic Motivation Inventory (IMI) is a multidimensional 
measurement metric that is used to examine the subjective 
experience of participants related to certain activities in a test 
[16]. These metrics can test several participants' feelings one of 
which is value/usefulness in carrying out certain activities. The 
value/usefulness subscale is used in internalization studies 
where participants determine themselves in useful or valuable 
activities [16]. Usage of IMI in testing is performed by 
specifying the variable or factor to be tested, then using the items 
from these factors in random order (there are items that provide 
blank space to determine certain outcomes but can be left blank 
only to determine an activity as useful, helpful, or important), 
then finally assessing the IMI subscale scores by averaging all 
items on the subscale. 

C. Mental Health Services 

Mental health services are any interventions—assessment, 
diagnosis, treatment, or counseling—offered in private, public, 
inpatient, or outpatient settings for the maintenance or 
enhancement of mental health or the treatment of mental or 
behavioral disorders in individual and group contexts [5]. There 
are several mental health services that can address mental health 
problems, namely counselor, psychologist, and psychiatrist. 
Counselor services are trained to evaluate a person's mental 
health using therapeutic techniques based on specific training 
programs. Psychologist holds a degree in clinical psychology or 
another specialization such as counseling or education and is 
trained to evaluate a person's mental health using clinical 
interviews, psychological evaluations, and testing. Psychologist 
can make a diagnosis and provide individual and group therapy. 
Meanwhile psychiatrist is a medical doctor who have 
completed psychiatric training and can assess and diagnose 
mental health conditions, prescribe and monitor medications, 
and provide therapy [17]. 

III. 
USER RESEARCH AND ANALYSIS 
Problem analysis and designing solution will be conducted 
based on the whole process of user-centered design as described 
in Fig. 1.  

A. Planning Design Process 

To analyze problems, research is carried out to determine the 
characteristics of mental health service applications users. 
Research 
is 
conducted 
using 
two 
methods, 
namely 
questionnaires and interviews. Research with questionnaire 
method is carried out to obtain quantitative data that is used to 
identify characteristic patterns and generalize findings to the 
target audience [18]. The research is carried out by distributing 
forms to ITB students through social media. The target 
respondents for the questionnaire are 156 people representing 
the total number of ITB students around 17,000 students. The 
target number is obtained from the sample of population size 
with a confidence interval of 7.81 and a confidence level of 95%. 
On the other hand, research with interview method is conducted 
to obtain qualitative data that is used to understand the 
motivation, thoughts, and behavior of the target audience [18]. 
The research is conducted on five ITB students who are users of 
mental health service applications and on BK ITB psychologist 
as mental health service provider. 

Based on research results, it is found that the majority of ITB 
students do not know about the mental health service app 
(67.34%) with a small number of usage (3.8%). Some of the 
factors causing the small usage number of these services are 
worried about the negative stigma from surroundings, small 
awareness of the importance of maintaining mental health, 
insufficient knowledge about mental health, and difficult to 
access the services. Several usage problems such as the flow of 
usage that is difficult to understand and less effective, the lack 
of information regarding the application features, the 
unintegrated application notifications and information, and the 
less intuitive design elements are also to be the cause. These 
usage problems are causing ITB students failed to achieve their 
goal of overcoming mental health problems. Therefore, it is 
necessary to design an improvement interaction of mental health 
service application to overcome the increasing trends in mental 
health problems and the usage problems found earlier. 

At this stage, the scope of the design problem is also 
determined. The scope includes user scope, functionality scope, 
and development scope. The user scope of the interaction design 
is ITB students. The functionality scope of the interaction design 
is psychologist services with the main features of counseling and 
therapy (cognitive-behavioral therapy with journaling and 
mindfulness meditation methods) and referrals to psychiatrist 
medical services. The development scope of the interaction 
design is on the mobile platform. 

B. Specify The Context of Use 
 
At this stage, the research result from questionnaire and 
interview is being analyzed further to determine the user 
characteristics and behaviors, user problems, user goals, and 
user tasks on the interaction of mental health services.  

 
User characteristics are determined by their level of 
awareness and knowledge on mental health issues. From the 
questionnaire result, it is found that the average score of user 
awareness level is 3.83 out of 5 with 0.91 standard deviation 
score, and the average score of user knowledge level is 3.33 out 
of 5 with 0.90 standard deviation score. Meanwhile, from the 
interview with BK ITB psychologist result, it is found that ITB 

students were quite initiative in finding out information about 
mental health, as there was an increase in the use of mental 
health services lately, but often found self-diagnosed with their 
own framing of the problems they were facing and did not apply 
appropriate way of therapies, such as journaling and meditation, 
to overcome the problems they faced. These research results 
indicate that ITB students have already quite good awareness 
and knowledge level on mental health issues, but still could be 
improved. 

 
The user behaviors on using mental health service 
application can be seen on Table I below. 

TABLE I. USER BEHAVIORS 

No. 
User Behaviors 
1 
The usual activities are counseling, doing therapy (by meditation 
and journaling), and deepening knowledge about mental health. 
2 
Tend to use mental health services when facing serious problems. 
3 
Prefer to use mental health services through mobile platform to 
desktop platform. 
4 
Want an integration of other mental health service such as 
psychiatrist service. 
5 
Want a diagnosis of current mental health conditions and ways to 
prevent them. 
6 
Want an emergency access of mental health services. 
 

 
The user problems on using mental health service application 
can be seen on Table II below. 

TABLE II. USER PROBLEMS 

No. 
User Problems 
1 
Hard to understand how mental health services work when first 
start using the application. 
2 
Confused when choosing a suitable psychologist for the first 
counseling session. 
3 
No information on where the counseling will be held when 
registering new counseling session. 
4 
No information on when the counseling schedule is unavailable. 
5 
Repeatedly select a counseling date only to find one available 
psychologist schedule. 
6 
No information on when the approval time of the counseling 
schedule. 
7 
Unintegrated counseling approval notification with mental 
health service applications. 
8 
Unable to attend a counseling session after the session has been 
approved. 
9 
Unable to make changes to the counseling schedule. 
10 
Unable to give counseling feedback. 
11 
Unable to see the results of the counseling session. 
12 
Unaware of any information regarding emergency mental health 
services. 
13 
No information about mental health knowledge. 
14 
No information about mental health therapy. 
15 
No referral information for psychiatric medical services. 
16 
Unintegrated information on the counseling sessions with mental 
health service applications. 
 

The user goals and user tasks on using mental health service 
application can be seen on Table III below. 

TABLE III. USER GOALS AND USER TASKS 

Dial emergency hotline services 
Dial and navigate psychiatric medical 
service referral information 
 

C. Specifying User Requirements 

At this stage, the context of use specified earlier will be used 
for specifying user requirements. The features of the proposed 
design interaction of mental health services can be seen on Table 
IV below. There is one additional feature requested by ITB 
psychologist, namely Login with ITB Single Sign On (SSO), for 
the purpose of getting user information from student’s ITB SSO 
account. 

TABLE IV. FEATURES OF DESIGN SOLUTION 

No. 
Features 
1 
Help 
2 
Psychologist Profile 
3 
Counseling Registration 
4 
Notification 
5 
Counseling History 
6 
Mental Health Articles Feed 
7 
Therapy 
8 
Emergency Hotline 
9 
Psychiatrist Referral 
10 
Login with ITB SSO 
 

Features above will be correlated to each other to create a 
user flow for the proposed design solution. The user flow of 
prior BK ITB mental health services application can be seen on 
Fig. 4 below. 

 

Fig. 4 Prior BK ITB App User Flow 

Meanwhile the newly proposed user flow can be seen on Fig. 
5 below. 

 

Fig. 5. Proposed User Flow 

There are differences between the prior user flow and the 
newly proposed one. In the latter, user can access psychologist 
profile and emergency hotline after logging in to the application 
with ITB SSO. User can also access counseling approval 
notification inside the application. Some unrelated features to 
mental health services such as student affairs web homepage and 
student achievements dashboard are removed from the new user 
flow. 

To define the appropriate usability goals and user experience 
goals, analysis is performed on the context of use earlier. The 
defined usability goals and user experience goals are the 
intended goals to solve user problems in reaching their goals 
while using application. The usability goals and user experience 
goals can be seen on Table V below. 

TABLE V. USABILITY GOALS AND USER EXPERIENCE GOALS 

Goals
Definition
Elaboration
either 
psychologist 
or 
psychiatrist.
 

IV. 
DESIGN IMPLEMENTATION 

The design solution will be implemented in two level of 
prototypes, they are low-fidelity prototype and high-fidelity 
prototype. All prototype levels are implemented by using Figma. 

A. Low-Fidelity Prototype 

Low-fidelity prototype implementation prioritizes design 
concepts (in accordance with design principles in designing 
mobile platform [19]) and user flow (by adding some 
interactions between design elements). Some of the low-fidelity 
prototype interfaces can be seen on Fig. 6 below. 

 
Fig. 6. Low-fidelity Prototype Interfaces 

Some of the implementation of design principles [8] on the 
prototype can be seen on Table VI below. 

TABLE VI. DESIGN PRINCIPLES IMPLEMENTATION ON PROTOTYPE 

 

B. High-Fidelity Prototype 

High-fidelity prototype implementation is the continuation 
of the low-fidelity prototype, with additional visual aspects such 
as color, typography, and icon. There are changes made to the 

interfaces based on the user feedbacks received from the low-
fidelity prototype testing. Some of the high-fidelity prototype 
interfaces can be seen on Fig. 7 below. 

 

 
 

Fig. 7. High-fidelity Prototype Interfaces 

 
User will be shown login with ITB SSO page after the first 
time opening the application. After logging in, user can access 
the help menu to get explanation of application features. User 
is then shown the main home page in which user can access 
articles feed, counseling registration, notification, and other 
main menus such as counseling history, therapy, and 
emergency menu. While accessing counseling registration 
form, user can see psychologist profile. In the counseling 
history menu, user can see the details of each counseling 
session, make changes to the schedule, join the online session, 
and give feedback on the session.  

V. 
DESIGN EVALUATION 

Design evaluation is done in two iterations for each 
completion of the high-fidelity prototype. Usability tests are 
carried out on five participants. In the test, participants are given 
13 tasks to be performed in the form of an application usage 
scenario. Participants behavior while carrying the tasks are 
observed to know user understandings and to find possible user 
problems. Post-task interview is also conducted to gather 
qualitative feedback regarding design. Each tests achievement 
is measured by metrics to find whether the design has achieved 
its goals or not. The mapping of design goals and the 
explanation of correlated metrics can be seen on Table VII 
below. 

TABLE VII. MAPPING OF GOALS TO METRICS 

IMI is a metric used to examine the 
subjective experience of participants 
related to certain activities. With the 
value/usefulness 
subscale, 
this 
metrics can be used to test how 
helpful design for user after getting 
mental health services [16]. 
 
The completion rate results show that all participants 
succeed performing the given tasks (100%), meaning that this 
score has passed the general threshold (78%) and is categorized 
in the upper quartile (above 92%) [13]. Therefore, it can be 
concluded that users successfully achieved their goals while 
using application. 

The SEQ results show the average score of 6.78 out of 7, 
meaning that this score has passed the general threshold (5.5) 
[14]. Meanwhile, the SUS results show the average score of 
92.5 out of 100, meaning that this score has passed the general 
threshold (68) and is categorized acceptable, grade A+, and 
adjective best imaginable [15]. Based on these two metrics 
scores, it can be concluded that users find it easy to carry out 
every tasks. The interface has been designed based on the user's 
intuition so that it can be used easily. Therefore, the problems 
of users who often have difficulty using the application has 
been resolved. 

The IMI subscale value/usefulness results show the average 
score of 6.33 out of 7, meaning that this score is categorized 
good because it is above the scale median (4) and is near the 
maximum scale (7). Therefore, it can be concluded that users 
have achieved a helpful user experience after using mental 
health service applications. 

VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS 

Based on the research results, the factors causing the small 
usage number of ITB mental health services application are 
students are worried about the negative stigma got from the 
surrounding environment, low awareness of the importance of 
maintaining mental health, insufficient knowledge about 
mental health, and are difficult to access the services (usage 
problems). These problems are resolved by interaction design 
with effective to use and easy to learn usability goals, and 
helpful user experience goals. Based on test results, the design 
goals have been achieved considering each of the metrics score 
have passed the general threshold. 

For 
further 
development, 
implementing 
counseling 
registration 
flow 
repeatedly 
based 
on 
psychologist 
recommendations and push notification for therapy can be 
conducted so that users can be retained on using the application.