CHAPTER 8

Prototyping a Digital Platform to Promote
(Hyper)mediation Practices in the Territory

Eliza Oliveira, Daniel Carvalho, Fernando Ramos,
Luís Pedro, Maria João Antunes, Margarida Almeida,
and Oksana Tymoshchuk

Introduction

Mediation is understood as a means through which the processes of
dialogue and interaction between members of a community occur, estab-
lishing connections and nurturing the bonds of sociability, impacting
directly on the form and content transmitted by messages (Almeida,
2009; Hjarvard, 2015). With the emergence and pervasiveness of digital

F. Ramos
University Portucalense, Porto, Portugal

E. Oliveira envelope symbol · D. Carvalho · L. Pedro · M. J. Antunes · M. Almeida ·
O. Tymoshchuk
DigiMedia, Department of Communication and Art, University of Aveiro,
Aveiro, Portugal

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature
Switzerland AG 2023
F. Teles et al. (eds.), Territorial Innovation in Less Developed Regions,
Palgrave Studies in Sub-National Governance,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-20577-4_8

163

164

technologies, these processes evolve toward hypermediation, i.e., “(…)
the complex network of social production, exchange and consump-
tion processes that take place in an environment characterized by a
large number of social actors, media technologies and technological
languages” (Scolari, 2015). Info-communication technologies have signif-
icantly changed the way people interact, through voice, videos, images
and texts, turning social networks a typical part of their lives. In this
scope, the design of digital tools that work in an environment character-
ized by countless social actors, and supported by technological languages
is crucial (Scolari, 2015).

Simultaneously, smartphones made digital content accessible24/7,
while the diversity of smart devices helped to democratize handsets by
setting up the culture of everywhere and every time. These devices have
widespread use in all social strata, and mobiles-applications (m-apps) are a
valuable option to access services and information since they are presented
as a practical alternative to web browsers (Tan et al., 2017).

Several m-apps attributes and beneﬁts are worth mentioning. The
“always on,” “always on you” and location ﬂexibility of these apps help to
promote efﬁciency in consumers’ daily tasks (Kim et al., 2013). M-apps
also help to overcome the barrier associated with navigating websites not
optimized for mobile (Wang & Wang, 2010) and lead to greater level
of convenience, as they can be used to compare prices, obtain discounts,
conduct specialized research on products and services, locate stores and
access to timely information regarding restaurants, transportation, local
activities and, on top of that, share that information on social networks

D. Carvalho

L. Pedro

M. J. Antunes

M. Almeida

O. Tymoshchuk

8
PROTOTYPING A DIGITAL PLATFORM TO PROMOTE …
165

(Wang & Wang, 2010). From a business-oriented approach, m-apps can
promote customer loyalty, as they enhance the effectiveness of promo-
tions and serve as an opportunity to interact closely with mobile shoppers
anytime and anywhere (Cameron et al., 2012). Additionally, mobile appli-
cations have been used in areas of knowledge such as culture, tourism and
health, proving to be a viable alternative for users of mobile devices, as
they allow obtaining real-time information on nearby locations, prices,
distances and opinions about service / entity / event (Tan et al., 2017).

In this context, to achieve the last objective of the CeNTER project,
i.e., prototype and validate a pilot platform for territorial-based innova-
tion, the WP3 team developed a m-app prototype, whose primary focus
is to promote collaboration between the various agents (community-led
initiatives, public and private entities, networks and citizens), involved in
territorial-based innovation processes in the Centro Region of Portugal
(Oliveira et al., 2020), in order to promote a digital solution to foster the
participation and collaboration between the community actors of Portugal
Center Region.

In the next sections of this chapter, the most relevant information
concerning the design, development and validation stages of the proto-
type is presented, together with experts’ evaluation inputs and a discus-
sion regarding the future of the territorial innovation community-based
m-apps.

Digital Prototype Development Methodologies

Prototyping the CeNTER Mobile App

To create a product that fulﬁlls the ultimate goal of the CeNTER project,
a prototype was developed under the User Centered Design (UCD)
approach. Thus, the fundamental elements of the DCU were used to
develop the prototype (Fig. 8.1), being: (i) observation of the user to
try to understand their interests, motives and real needs, in order to iden-
tify which features will best support their assignment; (ii) devise different
solutions, such as conceptual models that allow identifying problems in
the design; (iii) create interactive prototypes; (iv) test and evaluate the
prototypes (Norman, 2013). Therefore, in order to accomplish the ﬁrst
item, the introductory phase of the project included the identiﬁcation of

166

Fig. 8.1
User centered design process

the users’ needs and comprised a systematic literature review and inter-
view with local agent and regional initiatives (Silva et al., 2019, 2020;
Tymoshchuk et al., 2019a, 2019b).

The focus of this article is on the other phases of the project. Under the
third and fourth elements above, considering the particular phases under-
lying this design approach, the next sections present the main relevant
stages proposed for the development of CeNTER m-app prototype.

Conceptual Stage
At this stage, ideas were discussed and the problems to be solved by the
platform were exposed. Brainstorming activities helped to identify the
features that should exist in the prototype. Hereafter, a user ﬂow was
created, allowing us to understand which screens to develop and how they
should be ideally connected to each other. From this user ﬂow, several
paper sketches (Fig. 8.2) were made to understand how the application
should look like in the future. Low-ﬁdelity mock-ups were created, tested
and discussed among the team members for validation.

Component Stage
The next stage included the conversion of the lo-ﬁprototypes to wire-
frames (Fig. 8.3), using the “Sketch” application. From the wireframes,
it was possible to understand how the texts, lines and other graphic
elements of the layout of each screen should be organized. After this,

8
PROTOTYPING A DIGITAL PLATFORM TO PROMOTE …
167

Fig. 8.2
Sample of sketches from the CeNTER platform (from left to right):
Main menu, map and details of an event selected by the user

more improvements were made, giving rise to wireframes that already
resembled the look and feel of the ﬁnal product (Fig. 8.4).

Interactive Stage
The screens developed from the wireframes (Fig. 8.4) were later used to
create a medium ﬁdelity prototype. The “Principle” application was used,
allowing to develop a prototype with more complex interactions, such
as dragging on a map, swipe on a carousel menu or tap on a menu to
collapse visible content. This prototype was later shared with users to be
evaluated in order to make ﬁnal improvements.

The home screen of the application consists of a main menu with an
interface for communities (Fig. 8.4b). The user has access to these tabs
that collapse or expand when the respective button is tapped. In each
of those tabs, a carousel with cards of different initiatives, events, enti-
ties, volunteers, resources and highlights is available. In this carousel, and
similar to the Tinder application, the user can swipe horizontally, being
able to continuously see other cards. On each card, it is possible to drag
and drop vertically each card to save it or remove it from the favorite
list. The map (Fig. 8.4c) has a layout and interaction features that are
similar to the Google Maps application. After a tap on the card, it expands

168

Fig. 8.3
Sample of the wireframes from the CeNTER platform (from left to
right): Main menu, map and details of an event selected by the user

Fig. 8.4
Sample of screens from the CeNTER platform (from left to right):
Tutorial, main menu, map and details of an event selected by the user

8
PROTOTYPING A DIGITAL PLATFORM TO PROMOTE …
169

to a new screen that shows more details (Fig. 8.4d), to which the user
swipes to scroll up and scroll down to see all the information. In the main
screens of the platform, menus were inserted in the header and footer of
the screen with buttons/icons and functions similar to those that exist in
the majority of mobile application menus, such as agenda; general search
for contents; access to ideas shared by the community, notiﬁcations and
settings.

Evaluation Methods

The user evaluation process of the CeNTER Project relies on a spiral
model of iterative design, including early testing of the low-ﬁdelity mock-
ups with team members, medium-ﬁdelity prototype evaluation by experts,
and tests with end-users. To accomplish the experts’ evaluation in order
to validate the CeNTER application prototype, two panels of experts were
assembled according to the evaluators’ expertise. The ﬁrst panel consisted
of 5 experts in the ﬁeld of digital technologies, who had knowledge and
experience in developing interfaces for mobile applications. The second
panel consisted of 5 experts in the ﬁeld of Tourism, Health, and Well-
being, who had knowledge of the respective domain and were involved
in different community projects. Since the tests with experts were essen-
tially aimed to validate the main functions of the prototype and the main
interaction paradigm used, the goals of the experts’ evaluation were: (i)
Validate the CeNTER prototype concept; (ii) Verify the acceptance of the
interactions modes within the prototype (e.g., drag and drop and swipe
interactions); (iii) Evaluate the user interfaces’ look and feel; (iv) Eval-
uation of the main usability issues; (v) Collect technical problems; (vi)
Gather prototyping errors and suggestions for improvement.

Two techniques were used during the evaluation process, in order to
achieve the goals of the test and maximize the identiﬁcation of the main
issues to be improved: i) inspection-based assessment methods through
Heuristic Evaluation: based on checklist and veriﬁcation items, which
allowed the evaluators to investigate and identify usability problems in
system interface solutions, not directly involving the end-user; ii) the
observation technique, in which an exploratory overview of the prototype
using a think-aloud protocol was encouraged.

For this study, speciﬁcally, a heuristic checklist was developed to eval-
uate the application prototype, based mainly on ten Nielsen heuristics
(1994), which were reinforced with three heuristics presented in the

170

MATCH scale (Salazar et al., 2012). Additionally, the interactions and
comments of the evaluators while performing the test were recorded by
the team members. Afterward, the recording data was organized in an
Excel spreadsheet and the repeated notes were discarded. Secondly, infor-
mation was merged according to their similarities, i.e., corresponding
screens, the expert who mentioned the issues, the priority of each item
to be modiﬁed at the prototype and the level of effort of the respective
modiﬁcation. Data were judged according to the nature of the inputs,
being evaluated as prototyping errors or suggestions for improvements.
This spreadsheet provided valuable information regarding the experts’
feedback of the prototype, allowing to achieve, together with the Heuris-
tics Evaluation, the main goals of the prototype’s assessment. Moreover,
the ﬁnal analysis of both spreadsheets gave rise to the most relevant
modiﬁcations to be made, according to the experts.

The heuristic evaluation process took place in three stages, according
to the proposal of Nielsen (1994): (1) preparation phase: in this phase,
the prototype screens for evaluation and the list of heuristics to be used
were deﬁned and organized; (2) evaluation phase, consisted of collecting
evaluation data from each evaluator, individually. The evaluators tested
the prototype by identifying the guidelines that were violated and the
degree of severity of the problem. Evaluations were made in person and
under equal conditions. The data were collected using the same heuristic
checklist and observation record; (3) results consolidation phase and results
report: at the end of the tests, data collected from the two panels of
evaluators were analyzed and compared.

Experts’ Assessment Results

Experts’ suggestions showed that the CeNTER prototype application is
a sustainable and timely proposal, although there are still some issues to
be addressed in order to improve it. The following results are presented
according to the assessment technique used, i.e., ﬁrst data that resulted
from the heuristic techniques and secondly data from the observation
and report. By reporting the interactions and comments of the experts
through the application of the think-aloud protocol during the tests, it
was possible to extract both qualitative and quantitative outcomes, while
the heuristic evaluation provides valuable quantitative data. To deﬁne the
main improvements to be accomplished at the prototype, the registered
inputs were organized into two tables, according to the corresponding

8
PROTOTYPING A DIGITAL PLATFORM TO PROMOTE …
171

test panel. Subsequently, each input was measured according to the level
of modiﬁcation priority of the item, and the level of effort it required.
The results are described below.

Heuristics Evaluation

The heuristic evaluation of the prototype was performed through a
comparative case study with the two evaluation panels. To consolidate
the heuristic validation results, a grid was created that gathered all the
results. The grids were then analyzed and compared. Table 8.1 shows the
number of problems identiﬁed by each group of evaluators, the severity
of those problems and the average severity.

Table 8.1 shows a signiﬁcantly higher number of usability problems
(109) identiﬁed by the Information and Communication Technology
(ICT) experts when we compare it to the problems identiﬁed by the other
panel (46). Regarding the severity of problems, it is important to note
that panel 1 identiﬁed 46 problems with score 1 (cosmetic problem only),
39 problems with score 2 (small usability problem), 21 problems with
score 3 (main usability problem) and 2 problems with score 4 (usability
catastrophe). Two problems with score 4 were identiﬁed by the same
evaluator from panel 1. These problems refer to the following heuris-
tics “Correspondence between the system and the real world” and “The
proposed interactions in the application are similar to real actions” and
“Information appears in a logical and natural order”. No violations with
score 4 were reported by the experts of the second group.

Regarding the assessment of the severity of the heuristic violation, both
panels were quite consistent. The highest Mean Severity identiﬁed by

Table 8.1
Number of Problems and Average Problem Severity identiﬁed by
each panel of evaluators

Expert panels
Total problems
Severity of problems
Severity
average
1
2
3
4

Panel 1—Technology
experts

109
46
39
21
2
1.78

Panel 2—Tourism,
health and wellness
experts

46
14
26
6
0
1.53

172

Group 1 was related to the following heuristics: “Help and Documenta-
tion” (2.75), “Recognition rather than Reminder” (2.5) and “Interaction
between person and application” (2.33). Group 2 reported as the highest
Mean of Heuristic Severities: Flexibility and Efﬁciency (2.25), Help and
Documentation (2.2), Recognition rather than Reminder (2) and Inter-
action between person and application (2). The Mean Severity in two
panels were low, with a score close to 1.78 (Panel 1) and 1.53 (Panel
2). The difference in results between groups also occurred in the types
of problems identiﬁed. The problems identiﬁed by panel 1 were focused
on prototype design, robustness and accessibility (Table 8.2). In contrast,
the problems identiﬁed by panel 2 were related to the suitability of the
prototype for each application domain, as well as the efﬁciency and type
of functionality available to users.

Table 8.2 presents the number of heuristic violations identiﬁed by the
panel 1 which included: “Readability and layout” (14, mean severity
1.5), followed by “User controls and free will” (13, mean severity 1,
54) and “Aesthetics and minimalist design” (12, medium severity 1.66).
Panel 2 identiﬁed the maximum number of heuristic violations: “User
controls and exercises free will” (11, mean severity 1.45), “Avoid errors”
(7, mean severity 1.86) and “Matching the system to the real world” (6,
mean severity 1.5). Identifying these heuristic violations made it easier to
identify and prioritize issues that needed urgent attention before the ﬁnal
deployment of the application.

Observation and Think-Aloud

One hundred and one (121) inputs were reported during the free explo-
ration by the ICTs experts, 83 of which were considered by the team as
suggestions for platform improvements, 30 as prototyping errors and 8
were interpreted as suggestions for improvement and prototyping errors.
Prototyping errors correspond to inconsistencies in the use of the proto-
type and the user interface, such as different icons representing the same
function, or lack of an icon that should be available by default (e.g., the
absence of the return icon on some screens, with consequent impossibility
to perform this action); screens with too much information and interac-
tions that conveyed a sense of lack of control of the prototype contents.
An example of a prototyping error comment is: “Standardize the ‘saved’

8
PROTOTYPING A DIGITAL PLATFORM TO PROMOTE …
173

Table 8.2
Type of violated heuristics and average severity identiﬁed by each
panel of evaluators

Nº
Heuristic
GR 1—Technology experts
GR 2—Tourism, health
and wellness experts

Number of
problems

Average of
severities

Number of
problems

Average of
severities

1
Visibility of
system status

11
2.18
1
1

2
Match between
system and the
real world

11
2.27
6
1.5

3
User control and
freedom

13
1.54
11
1.45

4
Consistency and
standards

7
1.57
3
1.66

5
Error prevention
5
1.6
7
1.86
6
Recognition
rather than recall

4
2.5
1
2

7
Flexibility and
efﬁciency of use

7
1.85
4
2.25

8
Aesthetic and
minimalist design

12
1.66
1
1

9
Help users
recognize,
diagnose, and
recover from
errors

10
1.1
4
1.9

10
Help and
documentation

4
2.75
5
2.2

11
Interaction
between person
and application

3
2.33
1
2

12
Physical
interaction and
ergonomics

8
1.75
0
0

13
Readability and
layout

14
1.5
2
1

Total
109
1.78
46
1.53

icons, on the right side of the ideas screen, with the rest of the app” (Panel 1—
Expert 1). An example of suggestions is: “In ‘Ideas’, add year information
and not just day and time” (Panel 2—Expert 2).

174

Regarding the inputs collected from experts from the second panel,
a total of 53 inputs were obtained during the free exploration of the
prototype, being 42 considered by the CeNTER team as suggestions
for platform improvements, 11 as prototyping errors and 1 as improve-
ment suggestion and prototyping error. Prototyping errors are the same as
group 1, i.e., correspond to inconsistencies, such as different icons repre-
senting the same function, or lack of an icon. An example of a prototyping
error is: “A person can get lost while switching between tabs, not sure how to
go back when opening one tab and how to minimize another” (Panel 2—
Expert 3). An example of suggestions for improvement is: “Change ‘sport’
by ‘physical and sport activity’. Sport is interpreted as competitive action”
(Panel 2—Expert 4). Table 8.3 shows the number of inputs registered by
the CeNTER team on both sets of evaluation.

It is important to note that there is a considerable difference regarding
the number of inputs registered between the two panels. It probably
happened due to the difference of expertise ﬁelds of the members of
each panel. Taking into account that panel 1 consisted of ICT experts,
it was expected that technical issues of the prototype should be pointed
out by them, along with personal considerations about the concept, func-
tionality, innovation and other elements. In contrast, specialists of panel
2 mainly commented on the concept of the CeNTER prototype, func-
tionality and effectiveness for the end-user, while technical factors were
not mentioned. One example is the fact that only the experts of the ICT
area were able to explore the drag and drop interaction without any clue
from the CeNTER team. Presumably, the nature of the expertise of each
panel can also be the reason for the differences of the heuristic evaluation
answers, namely in the severity of the heuristic violation and the type of
problems identiﬁed.

Data extracted in the evaluations were also analyzed according to the
priority of each item to be modiﬁed at the prototype. In the ﬁrst panel, 21
inputs were considered priority one by the team, since they were problems

Table 8.3
Expert’s
inputs
Inputs
T1
T2
Total

Total of inputs
121
53
174
Suggestions for improvement
83
41
124
Prototyping errors
30
11
41
Errors and suggestions
8
1
9

8
PROTOTYPING A DIGITAL PLATFORM TO PROMOTE …
175

Table 8.4
Priority of
the inputs
Priority of the
inputs

No. of inputs T1
No. of inputs T2

Priority 1
22
14
Priority 2
41
12
Priority 3
58
27

that affected the usability of the prototype, inﬂuencing the user experi-
ence. Forty-two inputs were considered priority two, or issues that altered
the usability of the system but did not impair the quality of the user expe-
rience, and 58 inputs were considered priority three, as they did not affect
the quality of the user experience. Regarding the second panel inputs, 14
were considered priority 1 by the Work Package 3 (WP3) team; 12 were
considered priority 2 and 27 were considered priority 3 (Table 8.4).

The effort level for the improvement of the prototype was also evalu-
ated. In the ﬁrst test panel, 57 inputs presented a low level of effort as they
required a short time to solve the error/problem. Forty-two were consid-
ered as holding an average effort level since they required some time for
error/problem resolution, and 22 were considered as a high effort level,
i.e., they required a long time for error/problem resolution (Table 8.5).

Lastly, the inputs were divided according to each correspondent screen.
Table 8.6 shows the number of inputs related to the main screens tested.

As previously said, with the intent to determine the main modiﬁcations
to be made for the prototype’s improvement, all the above information
was separated in two different tables, according to the corresponding test
panel. The key factors taken into consideration for choosing the modi-
ﬁcations to be made at the prototype were the level of priority of each
item and the level of effort for the improvement at the prototype. Thus,

Table 8.5
Level of
effort for the
improvement of the
prototype

Level of effort
No. of inputs T1
No. of inputs T2

Low level of
effort

57
9

Medium level of
effort

42
13

High level of
effort

22
31

176

Table 8.6
Inputs according to the prototype interface

Interfaces
No. of inputs T1
No. of inputs T2

Tutorial
11
2
Main screen
21
19
Proﬁle
10
3
Register of an initiative or activity
16
4
Ideas
16
2
Maps
7
3
Agenda
8
1
Saved
5
1
Notiﬁcations
6
2
Details of an activity / initiative / entity
16
9
Others
5
7
Total
121
53

the expert’s inputs were gauged at the level of priority and level of effort
of the respective modiﬁcation outlined. The items with a high level of
priority and low level of effort had the most chance to be taken for adjust-
ment. Thus, although all results are shown together in this paper, this is
done for comparison purposes only, as they were analyzed separately, and
each phase gave rise to modiﬁcations that reﬂect the inputs of each expert
set.

After the analysis of the tables, the ﬁrst panel of tests gave rise to four-
teen items to be modiﬁed at the prototype, all demanding a low level of
effort to be made. Six items presented a high level of priority, or priority
1, seven a medium level of priority, or priority 2 and one presented a low
level of priority, or priority 3. From the table of the second test panel,
twenty items were selected to be modiﬁed at the application prototype.
Thirteen items had a high level of priority, or priority 1, six a medium
level of priority, or priority 2 and one presented a low level of priority, or
priority 3. Regarding the required effort, 7 demand a low level of effort,
while 7 and 6 demand an average and high level of effort, respectively.

Examples of the selected improvements from the ﬁrst panel of tests
were: “It should be able to return to a previous screen in the tutorial” (Panel
1—Expert 1), “The search function on the screen ‘ideas’ should be consistent
with the rest of the app” (Panel 1—Expert 3 and 4), “The ‘search’ and
‘settings’ icons have the order changed on the ‘notiﬁcations’ screen, taking
into account what you see on the home screen or map” (Panel 1—Expert 5)

8
PROTOTYPING A DIGITAL PLATFORM TO PROMOTE …
177

and “Standardize the ‘saved’ icons, on the right side of the screed ideas, with
the rest of the app” (Panel 1—Expert 5).

Examples of the selected improvements from the second panel of tests
are: “Should be better hierarchized / explained to understand the contents
present in the platform (initiatives, activities, volunteers, resources, etc.)”
(Panel 2—Expert 4), “It is suggested to ﬁnd another nomenclature for
initiatives, as they are confused with activities” (Panel 2—Expert 1, 2,
3 and 4), “Drag and drop gesture is very fast. It seems to have no control
over the interaction elements” (Panel 2—Expert 1 and 4) and “On the
‘share’ screen: what is the difference between SMS and Phone icons?” (Panel
2—Expert 1, 2, 3 and 4).

Although there is a slight contrast in the number of inputs described
between the two panels, with panel 1 presenting a signiﬁcantly larger
amount, some inputs are highlighted, since they were pointed out by
both panels. Overall, it was consensual that the drag and drop interac-
tion system is a usability challenge. Only the experts of the ICT area were
able to explore this interaction mode without any clue from the CeNTER
team. However, taking into account that this kind of interaction is not
common and has been successfully used before by few other applications,
such as Tinder, we feel that users may become familiar with this interac-
tion after its use. Still, in terms of interaction, the swipe between the cards
had good acceptability among the evaluators, but according to most of
them, it will not be possible to use the carousel with a high amount of
information. According to some experts, an alternative could be using a
list format instead of cards.

Another signiﬁcant input is concerned with the confusion between
“Activity” and “Initiative” deﬁnitions. For the majority of the experts,
those two titles are equal and correspond to the same idea. The team
agreed to change the name “Activity” to “Event” since, in the context of
the CeNTER application prototype, the activity is related to any action
or event which happens in a speciﬁc place and date, or period. Addition-
ally, overall, the interface was well evaluated and received a lot of praise,
mainly the color palette used on the idealization and development of the
prototype. The size and font used were also appreciated by the experts of
both panels.

Finally, it is important to emphasize that the concept of the CeNTER
application prototype has been well evaluated among the experts of both
panels. In this subject, the “Resources” and “Volunteer” components
were highlighted as being the most innovative features of the platform:

178

“Resources and volunteers are the differentiating elements of the platform”
(Panel 2—Expert 5). Since the specialists of the second panel were more
acquainted with the existing territorial innovation services available, this
panel of evaluators proved to be a valuable choice for the prototype
assessment, as they were able to provide signiﬁcant contributions for the
success of the platform: “It is suggested to convert the app into a website in
order to be accessible to more people in Portugal. Make it a more universal
alternative because it is an innovative tool, and it can be complex and
demanding for the average user” (Panel 2—Experts 1, 5). In contrast,
panel 1 provided essential technical inputs, which directly impacted the
prototype usability: “Drag and drop visual feedback is required: card
absorption animation on save / delete balls. Swiping diagonally can lead
to the mistake of dragging the recommendation” (Panel 1—Experts 2, 3,
4).

The Future of the Center Prototype Application

After performing the evaluation of the prototype, we consider that the
general opinion was positive. Overall, the prototype had a simple inter-
face, the page layout was appropriate, easy to use, and did not require
much effort on the part of the user. No incongruities were detected in
the form of presentation, although some errors were indicated in the use
of some speciﬁc terminology in the area of Health and Well-being.

As the development of the CeNTER prototype requires an iterative
design process, performing early tests was a crucial part of the system
design, in order to detect usability issues and important improvements to
be made. Through the techniques used, it was possible to achieve valuable
data, as the experts were from different areas of knowledge. In this regard,
the nature of the experts’ area of each panel oriented the character of
suggestions, with the most technical issues naturally being pointed out by
the professionals of the technologic area.

Through the conducted tests, the development of a community-
based territorial innovation application proved to be a sustainable and
timely proposal, as the “CeNTER” prototype concept was approved.
Additionally, the prototype seems to be a remarkable novelty, since it
brings up new features, such as the “Resources” and “Volunteers”, and
comes up with unconventional interaction paradigms. The validation of
the CeNTER prototype is not near to be done, however. Future work
includes performing laboratory tests with end-users. But before further

8
PROTOTYPING A DIGITAL PLATFORM TO PROMOTE …
179

tests are made, the ﬁnal experts’ suggestions for improvements need to be
considered. The CeNTER team believes that the underlying conceptual
idea of the project can make an important contribution to the future of
territorial innovation, showing the potential of digital media to improve
community engagement in their territorial issues.

Acknowledgements This
chapter
was
developed
under
the
support
of
the
Research
Program
‘CeNTER
-
Community-led
Territorial
Innova-
tion’ (CENTRO-01-0145-FEDER-000002), funded by Programa Operacional
Regional do Centro (CENTRO 2020), PT2020.