User-Centered Design of a National Medical Registry for 

Tick-Borne Diseases 

Berglind Fjola Smaradottir1, Randi Eikeland2, Harald Reiso2 and Rune Werner Fensli1 

 

 
1 Department of Information and Communication Technology, University of Agder,  

Jon Lilletuns vei 9, N-4879 Grimstad, Norway 
2 The Norwegian National Advisory Unit on Tick-borne Diseases, Sørlandet Hospital,  

Post Box 783 Stoa, N-4809 Arendal, Norway 

Abstract. Tick-borne diseases are increasing in a global perspective, with Lyme 
disease and tick-borne encephalitis as the most frequent. The Norwegian Na-
tional Advisory Unit on Tick-borne Diseases is preparing the development of a 
national medical registry for clinical follow-up of patients with tick-borne dis-
eases based on the best practice guidelines and for research purposes. This pa-
per presents the methodological approach of a user-centered design process ap-
plied in the initial phase of the registry development. A user workshop identi-
fied user needs, requirements and proposed a service workflow for the registry 
operation. As the next step, a simulation of the proposed service workflow was 
performed in a clinical laboratory together with end-user groups. The main con-
tribution of this paper lies on the methodological descriptions of the user-
centered design process, and how to facilitate the active contribution of end-
users in a technical development process within a health care context.  
 
Keywords: User-centrered Design   Medical Registry   Simulation   Tick-borne 
Diseases  

1 
Introduction 

Ticks are arachnid organisms that can act as vectors for a broad range of human path-
ogens, see Figure 1 [1][2]. Tick-borne diseases (TBD) are an increasing health burden 
in a global perspective [3][4] impacted by climate- and environmental changes and 
leisure habits, that expose more people to tick-bites [2][5][6]. The most prevalent tick-
borne disease in the northern hemisphere is Lyme disease, caused by the Borrelia 
burgdorferi bacterium [4]. Lyme disease is a multistage and multisystem disorder, 
with a variety of clinical symptoms that predominantly affect the skin (erythema mi-
grans), but can also manifest in joints, the heart and the nervous system (neuroborreli-
osis). 7000 persons are treated for erythema migrans and 400 for more disseminated 
disease, whereof about 300 neuroborreliosis, per year in Norway [7]. Globally, neuro-
borreliosis is reported in 3-12% of the borrelia patients [4][8]. The Lyme disease di-
agnosis is guided by clinical examination and analysis of antibodies in blood and 
cerebrospinal fluid. Antibiotics are the main treatment.

Fig. 1. The castor bean tick, Ixodes ricinus, at different stages of the development (photo: Per 
Eikeseth Knudsen). 

In Norway, disseminated disease has been a nationally notifiable disease since 
1995 [9]. The tick-borne infection of the brain, the Tick-borne Encephalitis (TBE) is 
also increasing. It is caused by a flavivirus that is transmitted by ticks in a geographic 
area from western Europe to the eastern Japan. TBE can cause acute meningoenceph-
alitis and long-lasting sequelae occur among a third of the patients, with substantial 
impairment in quality of life and cognitive function. The diagnosis is based on anti-
bodies in blood. There is no existing specific treatment. Vaccination is the main pre-
ventive measure for TBE [6][10]. 

Previous studies have reported that there are constraints related to the diagnosis 
and clinical management of tick-borne diseases [2][4] and that there is a lack of relia-
ble data on the economic global impact [1][11]. This brings to light challenges with 
decision support following evidence-based clinical guidelines, particularly for diag-
nosed patients with remaining symptoms [12]. 

In this context, The Norwegian National Advisory Unit on Tick-borne Diseases 
[13] took the initiative to develop a National Medical Registry for Tick-borne Diseas-
es, together with the Centre for eHealth at the University of Agder, the Norwegian 
Lyme Borreliosis Organization and the industry partner Egde Consulting. The Na-
tional Medical Registry for Tick-borne Diseases has the aim to provide support in the 
follow up of patients with a verified tick-borne disease, based on an algorithm devel-
oped from international clinical guidelines. In addition, the registry will provide data 
for research on the prevalence of tick-borne diseases and the management in a long-
term perspective.  

In the initial project phase, a User-centered Design process was made that consist-
ed of two steps: 1) user workshop with end-users and stakeholders, and 2) simulation 
of the registry service workflow in a clinical laboratory. This paper presents the meth-
odology of the User-centered Design process in the initial project phase. The research 
questions (RQs) stated for this study were:  

RQ1: Which methodological procedures facilitate active end-user involvement in 
technical development projects within a health care context?  

RQ2: What are the lessons learned that are transferable to other technical devel-
opment projects within a health care context? 

Following this introduction, the methodology with a research background is pre-
sented. In the third and fourth section, the procedures from the User-centered Design 
process are described, also focusing on the infrastructure for laboratory simulation. 
The discussion and conclusion reflect on lessons learned and study contributions.

2 
Methodology 

The communication and information flow in health care services and between organi-
zations are complex by nature, and Health Information Technology (HIT) plays an 
important role for coordination, information processing and decision support [14] 
[15]. Development of efficient and user-friendly HIT, such as a National Medical 
Registry, requires a detailed analysis of the needs and preferences of the end-user 
groups and stakeholders.  

In the system development cycle, the approach of User-centered Design has the 
aim to actively involve end-users in every step and allowing them to provide sugges-
tions and evaluations regarding design and functionality [16][17][18]. For the Nation-
al Medical Registry for Tick-borne Diseases development, a User-centered Design 
approach was chosen to develop technology well-adapted to the clinical work pro-
cesses of tick-borne disease management, and considered easy to use. 

2.1 
The Data Collection  

Qualitative research methods [19] were used for data collection and analysis of the 
User-centered Design process that was applied in the National Medical Registry for 
Tick-borne Diseases development. The data collection was executed from August 
until November 2017 and included the methods observation and focus group inter-
view in the initial development phase. The User-centered Design process was divided 
into two parts: 1) the user workshop and 2) the simulation in laboratory, both were 
audio-visually recorded with a total amount of 6 hours recorded data. In the data anal-
ysis, the recordings were viewed and analyzed qualitatively [20]. In addition, the re-
search team made annotations during the different parts of the study, which is also 
included in the data collection. 

2.2 
Ethical Considerations  

Carrying out evaluations in real clinical environments is not recommended for le-
gal, ethical and privacy reasons [21]. Instead, user-based simulation with evaluation 
and test of an application can be made in a clinical laboratory, which has the strength 
of providing a controlled environment for the variables studied [22]. In a simulation, 
the end-users are asked to perform a role-play and do pre-defined tasks using a sys-
tem, while being observed and recorded. The goal is to test conceptual ideas and ana-
lyze how new technology influences the existing clinical workflow. Measurements 
can be made on time for task solving and number of errors. The aim is to provide a 
better understanding of the user interactions and the technology involved in clinical 
work process [23][24]. Actors are often used, such as in the patient role, to increase 
the realism [25].  

The Norwegian Centre for Research Data approved the study, with project number 
55163 [26]. The participation in the study was voluntary and the informants received 
written information about the project and signed an individual consent form. The 
authors declare that there are no conflicting interests with any of the participants, 
organizations or industry.

3 
User Workshop 

A user workshop with participants from end-user groups and stakeholders was hosted 
by The Norwegian National Advisory Unit on Tick-borne Diseases and lead by two 
researchers from the University of Agder, see Table 1 for overview of participants.  

Table 1.  The Workshop Participants  

Profession 
N=12 

Neurologist hospital 
2 
Nurse hospital 
1 
Microbiologist hospital 
1 
IT department hospital 
1 
Innovation unit hospital 
1… 
Research unit hospital 
1… 
Industry partner 
1 
Patient representative  
2 
Researcher University 
2 

The aim was to understand the context of use of the National Medical Registry for 
Tick-borne Diseases, and to work out the user requirements and make a conceptual 
plan for the service workflow of the registry. In addition, the workshop was a source 
of information and familiarization for people involved in the project.  

The workshop lasted 4 hours, including a break, and was divided into two parts. In 
the first part of the workshop, participants were introduced to the project National 
Medical Registry for Tick-borne Diseases with a presentation of the most common 
diseases and how the registry could support the clinical treatment. The conceptual 
idea for the National Medical Registry was that it should work as a two-way commu-
nication platform, connecting the patient with the clinician and provide decision sup-
port based on clinical guidelines.  

The workshop participants were asked to describe and write down user needs and 
how they expected the registry to function on colorful post-it notes for 10 minutes. 
Afterwards, each participant presented their suggestions to the group. The patient 
representatives described their preferred way of interacting with the registry applica-
tion in a home setting. A digital versus paper-based consent form was discussed, and 
the clinicians suggested digital consent to avoid double registrations and increase of 
the daily workload. 

In the second part of the workshop, a white board was used to identify the different 
user roles involved. A sketch was made to describe the service procedure and the 
operation of the National Medical Registry, where the case was a patient with a tick-
borne disease making registrations for a period of 12 months. The topics discussed 
were the administration of the consent form, what kind of information a patient would 
be expected to register, and what kind of feedback should be provided from the health 
care services or automatically from the system to the patient at home.

4 
Laboratory Simulation  

The service operation of the National Medical Registry for Tick-borne Diseases was 
carried out as a realistic clinical situation simulated in a laboratory environment to-
gether with end-user groups and stakeholders, see Table 2 for distribution of partici-
pants. The scenarios were constructed based on information gathered from the previ-
ous workshop, and led by two researchers experienced in simulation of health care 
services and usability evaluation.  

Table 2.  The Simulation Participants  

Profession 
N=11 
Neurologist hospital 
1 
GP/TBDs specialist 
1 
Nurse hospital 
1 
Adviser TBDs hospital 
1 
Industry partner 
3 
Patient representative  
2 
Researcher University 
2 

 

The simulations were executed in the clinical laboratory of the Centre for eHealth 
at the University of Agder, Norway. The laboratory consisted of two rooms; the con-
trol- and observation room and the test room that simulated an office at the neurologi-
cal outpatient ward at hospital. The rooms were connected through a one-way mirror 
with visualization towards the test room, see Figure 2. In the control- and observation 
room one researcher was in charge of the recordings and the remote control for the 
fixed camera. The simulation was followed simultaneously on four 55ꞌꞌ large monitors 
and through the one-way mirror.  

 

Fig. 2. The physical and technical infrastructure used in the laboratory simulations.

Recordings in the test room were made by the fixed camera and a document cam-
era placed on a stand for the mobile phone. The recordings from the camera sources 
were merged into one single video file using the software Tricaster, to ease the analy-
sis.  

In the test room, the patients’ own Samsung smartphone device were used to ac-
cess the National Medical Registry prototype application, which was developed with 
the software program proto.io. The smartphone application had a suite of modules that 
were separated by color coding and designed to support self-management activity, see 
Figure 3.  

a)
b)
c)
d)
e)
f)
 

Fig. 3. a) Start screen, b) Secure log in, c) The modules, d) Patient’s diagnose and last appoint-
ment, e) Patient’s administration of the clinicians’ access, f) Patient’s health information input.  

Considering the user group, accessibility precautions were important as neuroborreli-
osis patients can have decreased strength and sensation in fingers, and the design goal 
was a meaningful presentation with a smooth navigation flow. For the clinician in the 
test room, a web-based clinical portal was used to access the Medical Registry proto-
type, see Figure 4. 

a)
b)
c)
 

Fig. 4. a) Start screen with log in procedure, b) Registration of a new patient into the registry,  
c) Registration of clinical symptoms. 

Two sessions with simulations were run during one day. In each simulation, there 
were three different role-based scenarios, each with a description of a situation and 
tasks to perform. The roles were: a) patient at a first-time consultation the neurologi-
cal outpatient ward, b) doctor at the neurological outpatient ward, c) nurse at the neu-
rological outpatient ward, d) observer in the observation room following the role-play 
and technology interactions. The first three roles were assigned to one person at each 
time. The doctors played the doctor’s role, the nurse had the nurse’s role and the pa-
tient representatives acted the patient’s role. The observers were a group of 5-6 per-

sons having the role at the same time. In the test room, a moderator from the research 
team guided through the scenarios and asked the participants to speak aloud, as a 
think aloud protocol was used [27][28]. In the control- and observation room, one 
member from the research team instructed the observers.  

In each simulation session the scenario was: 1) a patient with tick-borne disease 
symptoms having a first-time consultation at the neurological outpatient ward with a 
doctor, 2) consultation with a nurse for guidance with installing the National Medical 
Registry application on patient’s own smartphone and 3) a second consultation with 
the doctor for medical results, instructions for treatment and use of the application. 
The information flow and the interactions with technology across the roles were espe-
cially observed and the time for each scenario and potential errors were annotated. A 
debrief session was organized after each simulation together with the participants. The 
aim was to use the group dynamics for discussing how the scenarios worked out, how 
the actions related to existing workflow and improvements were suggested.  

5 
Discussion 

This paper has presented how to involve end-users in technical development, based on 
the experiences from the National Medical Registry for Tick-borne Disease project. 
The lessons learned by the research team showed that the User-centered Design pro-
cess was an efficient way of involving end-users and stakeholders in the initial phase 
of the development. The research questions (RQs) formulated are answered below 
based on the results from the study. 

About the RQ1, which methodological procedures that facilitate active end-user 
involvement in technical development projects. The workshop which was organized 
in an early project phase together with end-user groups and stakeholders, efficiently 
outlined user needs and the context of use. It was the key to elicit users’ requirements 
of the application and taking on board different user roles and patient groups. In the 
second part of the workshop, a process model of the workflow was presented as a 
swimming lane diagram. That provided a good foundation for discussion, showing the 
participants the details in the service workflow, the user roles and what actions that 
were suggested. Such visual representations are meaningful in workflow discussions, 
to show who is supposed to do what and at what time. The outcome of the workshop 
provided the scenarios for the simulations performed later, where the service work-
flow and operation of the proposed technology was tested. 

The RQ2, lessons learned that are transferable and applicable in similar contexts. It 
was experienced in the User-centered Design process that the user workshop and sim-
ulations were of high importance for the project, providing a deeper understanding on 
the National Medical Registry’s mission and aims. The organization with active end-
user involvement in the workshop and laboratory simulation was considered as well 
structured and can be recommended to other development projects. In the simulation, 
the role-play and use of real patients as actors to create a realistic scenario was posi-
tively evaluated and can be recommended. Regarding the distribution of roles, the role 
as observer in the control- and observation room was important and allowed the par-
ticipants to actively follow the information flow and the interactions with technology

in the test room. The observers made notes and contributed at a detailed level to the 
group debrief after the simulations.  

This study had some limitations such as a reduced number of simulations (n=2) to 
test the service operation of the National Medical Registry prototype. However, a 
significant number of participants, with a total of 17 people belonging to different 
user groups and stakeholders, meaningfully represented the end-user groups of the 
application.  

6 
Conclusion 

This paper was made within the project National Medical Registry for Tick-borne 
Diseases, in order to share experiences on how end-users can be involved in technical 
development and how clinical scenarios can be simulated in a laboratory environment. 
The main contribution lies on the descriptions of how a User-centered Design ap-
proach can facilitate the active contribution of the end-user groups in a development 
process. In addition, the methodological procedures for simulation and the technical 
descriptions are applicable and transferable to other projects within a health care con-
text. The results presented are congruent with other studies of User-centered Design 
[16][29], highlighting the importance of involving the end-user groups early in the 
development. They also showed that simulation with low fidelity software prototypes 
allows a low-cost test of proposed service workflow and operation [22]. The role-play 
with real patients as actors in the simulations was useful and informative, and provid-
ed realism to the scenarios [24]. The clinical laboratory provided a controlled envi-
ronment, with audio-video recordings to retrospectively analyze the collected data. In 
terms of future work, a full development of the National Medical Registry for Tick-
borne Diseases is proposed, with an active end-user involvement in all phases.  
 
Acknowledgments. The authors thank the participants of the study for their disinter-
ested contribution. Special thanks to Åsmund Rodvig Somdal for technical support 
and assistance in the laboratory simulations. Financial support was provided by the 
Regional Research Fund of Agder [30] in Norway with Grant number 272978.