Based on Behavior Change in New Normal

Sheng-Ming Wang and Shiau-Ting Wang(B)

National Taipei University of Technology, Taipei, Taiwan

Abstract. Nowadays, working from home has been the ideal working condition
for people. Especially with the covid-19 pandemic, most of the ofﬁce workers are
forced to switch to work from home within a short period of time. This is no longer
a temporary change but will be a huge change affecting our lives now and in the
future. This research is based on human-centered design, at the very ﬁrst part we
do a widely-interview with people who work in different industries, the problems
are not only mental health but also come from user’s inner worlds, so we narrow
down to make a deeper interview to our target user, digital nomads, the one who
derives income remotely and online, rather than from commuting to an ofﬁce.
After it, we made the persona and user journey to ﬁnd out the touchpoint, to deﬁne
our problem more speciﬁcally, there’re three main points (1) it is ﬂexible but too
fragmented at home, (2) inefﬁcient working schedule, and (3) loss of connection
to working partners. In addition, behavior change takes a big part here, which
means when we ﬁnd the right mode of working at home and persist on the basis of
having a considerable level of satisfaction, it will become the new normal in the
future. We come out with a conceptual application combining with smart home
technology named Groovy, aims to let the user (1) reduce decision making time,
the application will tell you what time is best for what to do, (2) observe and suggest
better schedules for you, based on your working habits, and (3) reduce the feeling
of loneliness. And next, we made the interface prototype and use Kano model for
the evaluation to understand the services we provide are in which features.

Keywords: Work from home · Behavior change · User experience · Kano model

1
Introduction

As mentioned above, our work life at home varies from person to person, as technological
advances allow us to keep in touch with our colleagues remotely, the new working style
without going to the ofﬁce is gradually changing our lives, not only breaking through the
original framework of working hours, but also the original mode of using ofﬁce space
will also be facing changes. Working remotely is many people’s hope before the covid-
19 pandemic, but when we really experience the working from home situation, it’s not
that easy as how we think. After experiencing a few months of working from home, the
ideal working pattern has slowly worn-out people’s will, resulting in problems such as
inability to unplug from work, time management problems, managerial trust problems,
home health care, and worse working environment…etc.

© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2021
C. Stephanidis et al. (Eds.): HCII 2021, CCIS 1421, pp. 637–645, 2021.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-78645-8_81

638

2
Wild Interview and Aspects

Our interview was divided into two parts, we want to deﬁne the problem in the ﬁrst part
interview, therefore, tried to ask a wide range of interviewees, about any random ideas
about working from home, or any tiny embarrassing problems they have experienced.
Not only mental problems but also the physical unaccustomed is a problem that we often
ﬁnd. It is difﬁcult to summarize the situation of each person in one sentence, but we ﬁnd
out some pros and cons about working from home.

2.1
Positive and Negative

The main pros should be that ﬂexible schedule, we can ﬂexibly plan all day, second is
we save the time of commuting, no more trafﬁc jams, don’t have to wake up extra early,
more time with family, or with the people that you live together. In another hand, though
the pandemic was getting worse, people were suddenly forced to work from home, after
a few months, Gensler U.S. in 2020 make a “work from home” survey, the data was
collected from more than 2,300 anonymous U.S. workers, and the result shows 70%
of people want to work in the ofﬁce majority of their week, and more than 50% don’t
want to work from home anymore. The mental health is a pretty important reason in the
negative aspects, because of the loneliness, and they don’t talk with their colleges that
much more, feels like just stay at home do all kinds of stuff alone, and the stress from
work could cause depression.

3
Target User – Digital Nomads

Because of the limitations of the industry, it is impossible to meet the needs of everyone
working from home, but in the future, we will have to get used to one thing, that is,
working from home will be a normal part of life. In addition to that our target group of
the research would be the digital nomads, they are people who can start their work just
with a laptop and internet anywhere.

3.1
Interview II

These interviewees are all in the range of digital nomads, included human resources,
designers, front-end engineers, product managers, and management positions. What we
found interesting was that we saved a lot of time because we don’t have to go to the
ofﬁce anymore. From this interview we found out that many people don’t know what to
do after a big change in behavior or environment. Especially, the working life changed
from ofﬁce to home.

3.2
Persona and User Journey

These Persona is a method used to describe a speciﬁc target object, after the interview
of our target user - digital nomads, the persona was created as Fig. 1.

639

Fig. 1. “Persona, designer and developer were set, you can see the characteristics of these two
types of person” create by this research

After persona, we made the user journey to know the speciﬁc problem, as you can
see Fig. 2, the red area shows the touchpoints that have a big difference. For example,
you could no longer see your colleagues in person, so communication became tougher.
The meeting time could be longer because of technical problems. When you stay at
home alone, you sometimes forget to take a break. Or the other way around, that you
took too much of a break.

Fig. 2. “User journey of the persona” create by this research

4
Behavior Change

The process of behavior change is not a linear development, and the stickiness will
depend on satisfaction of the new experiences [1], as Fig. 3. In other words, the journey
to ﬁnd out the new routines will not be smooth, when there are huge changes in life and
new behaviors arise, in the process of ﬁnding out the new normal, people’s stickiness to
the new routine is proportional to the level of satisfaction with the experience gained,
that is, when we ﬁnd the right mode of working at home and persist on the basis of
having a considerable level of satisfaction, it will become the new normal in the future.

640

Fig. 3. “Behavior changes are not linear, and their stickiness will depend on satisfaction of the
new experiences.” by McKinsey & Company in June 2020

4.1
Invisible to Visible

In order to maintain a regular and efﬁcient work status, a healthy and balanced life, we
must start by establishing a strict life routine, in fact, this is the invisible part of we used
to have in the ofﬁce. While working from home, we often neglect to plan our schedules
before and after off-work hours, thinking that we will work from home instead, and the
stolen commute time gradually leads us into a mess, which in turn changes our daily
behavior in our daily life. For example, getting up in the morning and getting ready
for work, the commute gives us a sense of ritual to adjust to work, and the greeting
with colleagues when we enter the ofﬁce allows us to maintain communication and
socialization with the outside world, but these activities disappear instantly when we
switch to working from home. Paul [2] points out that whilst people say they’re about
as engaged with work as they were before, disconnection is the reason why they feel
disengaged. Buffer [3] also done a state of remote work in 2020, the report shows the
two unique struggles remain in the top three are (1) the difﬁculties with collaboration
and communication, and (2) with loneliness. However, people force themselves to turn
on the computer and go to work immediately after waking up. They have less space to
interact with colleagues and don’t have a clear break time or place during work, and
after work, they feel like they have been at home all day and don’t know how to get rid
of the tiredness… etc.

4.2
About Focusing

Even though things didn’t go as smoothly as we expected after we started working from
home, there are many people who support working from home because it gives us the
freedom to use our time. We can decide our own schedule anytime and anywhere, as
long as we schedule it well. It is clear that before enjoying the ﬂexible work from home
life, we should set up a personal routine for working from home, so that our body and
mind can adapt from inside out, not only the schedule at work, but also before and after
starting work. Daigo [4] in 2016 have said, twenty-four hours a day are given to all
equally. However, if you are able to harness the power of concentration, what you can
achieve in those 24 h will make an overwhelming difference… The important thing is to
focus on one behavior at a time and then habituate it, and by doing so, you will develop
ultimate concentration. Therefore, we know that working from home has caused many

641

changes and discomforts in our lives. It is not easy to ﬁnd the right solution in one go or
in a short time. The ﬁrst step is to create the right concept, with the help of technology
helps users to break the frame of their original working hours, they analyze the best
working pattern and create a friendly working environment. And the most important
part is to reduce the possibility of interference and decision from the outside.

5
How It Works

Since we save a lot of time commuting to and from work, and we can do what we want
at the time we want, or we say at the “right” time. We found that IoT might be a good
helper because most of the time we stay at home, and the furniture or spaces at home
can best know our current state. The situation is based on having smart devices at home
to observe and advise yourself on a better schedule. At certain times, a voice assistant
will come out to ask you about your work progress and keep track of your status.

5.1
Problems and Goals

Therefore, the problems we want to solve with the application are (1) it is ﬂexible but
too fragmented at home, (2) inefﬁcient working schedule and (3) loss of connection to
working partners. And the application aims to help the users (1) reduce decision making
time, the application will tell you what time is best for what to do, (2) observe and suggest
better schedules for you, based on your working habits, and (3) reduce the feeling of
loneliness.

6
Conceptual Application - Groovy

“Groovy”, a self-improvement tool for working from home”, for digital nomads to help
them maintain a productive work-from-home routine and keep people who work together
connected.

6.1
Schedule

User will see the to-dos of the day in this page. The color ﬁlled blocks and timeline
emphasis which project should be done at the moment. The energy wave in the back-
ground is the system’s prediction of user’s concentration level throughout the day based
on the data collection. The schedule is not only imported from the calendar, but also
suggested according to the energy wave. So, when the wave is high, it is suitable for the
work that requires a high level of concentration.

6.2
Ofﬁce

It’s a concept of virtual ofﬁce, you can see the screen in the middle (Fig. 4), this user is
working on a huge project called “boost”, as the main designer, she often needs to check
the progress with developers and the project manager. In this page, she can clearly see
who she is working with and the status of her co-workers, through that she always feels
connected and gain more motivation on work.

642

6.3
Learning

We provide users’ daily or weekly review, some fun fact and the devices from expert,
so user will have the opportunity to learn the reasons behind how Groovy gives sugges-
tions in the free time, either from user’s own behavior analysis or from expert advice.
Through different categories, groovy hopes that everyone will actively learn to increase
the motivation to change your behavior with visible growth and build a more sustainable
routine.

Fig. 4. “Behavior changes are not linear, and their stickiness will depend on satisfaction of the
new experiences.” by McKinsey & Company in June 2020

7
Evaluation

The Kano Model is used to analyses consumer preferences for different features and
group them into multiple categories. This allows ﬁrms to identify which features they
should focus on when developing a new product [5]. This research uses an online ques-
tionnaire, the questions were design from the three main functions, “Schedule”, “Ofﬁce”
and “Learning”, there’re three questions of each function. Based on Kano model, so every
question has positive and Table 1, the answers would be “I like it”, “I expect it”, “I am
negative perspective at the same time, you can see the questions as neutral”, “I can tol-
erate it” or “I dislike it”. Total of 7 questionnaires were collected, all of them are valid,
according to our persona, the test subjects are designer or developer. The template we
used was provided by Harrigan Davonport [5].

643

Table 1. Kano model queationnaire.

Kano model classiﬁes features into four categories, “Performance”, “Must-be”, “At-
tractive” and “Indifferent”, depending on how customers react to the provided level
of functionality. As you can see the result (Table 2), all the “Ofﬁce” functions are in
“Attractive” feature, there are unexpected features which when provided, cause a pos-
itive reaction, the only “Performance” feature is the function in “Schedule” which we
provide the corresponding time beside the energy waves. In general, the develop priority
of this category quadrant chart is “Must-be”, “Performance”, “Attractive” and “Indiffer-
ent” then, look back at the results of our data (Fig. 5), S2 and S3 in “Schedule” function
are “Performance” features, they are the ﬁrst priority to develop, the rest of others are
the second.

644

Table 2. “Behavior changes are not linear, and their stickiness will depend on satisfaction of the
new experiences.” by McKinsey & Company in June 2020.

Fig. 5. “Functional and Dysfunctional score” data collected by this research and analysis template
by conjoint.ly

8
Conclusion and Future Work

The daily schedule suggestion and the corresponding time beside the energy waves are
the functions that the more we provide, the more satisﬁed our users become. People like
the concept of virtual ofﬁce, if we have this kind of function, they would be satisﬁed,
and it also echoes the goal we mentioned earlier, to reduce the feeling of loneliness,
transparent the status of colleagues could stronger the connection between them. Kano
Model has the deeper analysis, it could show the importance of each function, but the
data we collected was not enough to verify the result from most of the users, so we didn’t
do that part, for the future work, could consider the user in other ﬁelds.

Acknowledgment. Special thanks to Hsin-Tung Chen and Yi-Ruo Lin from The University of
Applied Sciences Potsdam, this project was done by their support.