https://doi.org/10.1177/01939459221109813

Western Journal of Nursing Research
2023, Vol. 45(2) 144­–151
© The Author(s) 2022
Article reuse guidelines:
sagepub.com/journals-permissions 
DOI: 10.1177/01939459221109813
journals.sagepub.com/home/wjn

Research Report

Performing tracheostomy care on oneself or a loved one is 
stress-inducing for many. One study found that 40% of 
patients and caregivers stated that they need more psycho-
logical support for taking care of the tracheostomy after sur-
gery in the hospital (Richardson et al., 2015). Patients with 
limited information on tracheostomy care will have difficul-
ties during the transition from the hospital to their home 
(Nakarada-Kordic et al., 2018). Insufficient patient and care-
giver education before discharge causes unsafe performance 
levels in the management of tracheostomy after discharge. In 
an international survey assessing patients and informal care-
givers’ readiness to perform tracheostomy care at home 
(N = 220), only 48% of them felt “very prepared” at discharge 
to perform suctioning on a tracheostomy; furthermore, 40% 
of the patients went to seek urgent medical attention within 
one month after discharge (McCormick et al., 2015), sug-
gesting that patients themselves may need additional support 
on tracheostomy care preparation before going home. In a 
study of patients with tracheostomies in acute care settings, 
Sherlock et  al. (2009) identified that there was a lack of 
information on tracheostomy care and stated that providing 
more specific educational information for patients living 
with tracheostomy would improve their satisfaction with tra-
cheostomy care.

No “Readable” Education Resources on 
Tracheostomy Care

The insufficient educational support before discharge is well 
documented in the research literature (Mitchell et al., 2013). 
Nevertheless, only one discharge support program was found 
in the literature to address the skills and knowledge needed 

1109813 WJNXXX10.1177/01939459221109813Western Journal of Nursing ResearchWang et al.
research-article2022

1School of Nursing, University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong
2Frances Payne Bolton School of Nursing, Case Western Reserve 
University, Cleveland, OH, USA
3Seidman Cancer Center, University Hospitals of Cleveland, Cleveland, 
OH, USA
4Department of Otolaryngology, School of Medicine, Case Western 
Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, USA
5Section of Otolaryngology, Head & Neck Surgery, Louis Stokes Cleveland 
Veterans Affairs, Cleveland, OH, USA
6University Hospitals of Cleveland, Ear, Nose & Throat Institute, 
Cleveland, OH, USA
7Department of Head and Neck Surgical Oncology and Reconstruction, 
Ear, Nose and Throat Institute, University Hospitals of Cleveland, 
Cleveland, OH, USA

Tongyao Wang, School of Nursing, University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, 
Hong Kong. 

Development of a Pictorial Patient 
Education Handout on Tracheostomy 
Care: A Mixed-Method Study

Tongyao Wang1,2
, Susan R. Mazanec2,3, Nicolas Schiltz2, 
Nipun Chhabra4,5,6, Rod Rezaee4,7, and Joachim G. Voss2

Abstract
This article describes a qualitative and quantitative approach to the development and iterative revision process of producing 
valid, user-friendly pictorial patient education handouts (infographics) on tracheostomy care. An iterative user-centered 
design with health professional, patient, and family caregiver panels was used. The authors first developed a new evaluation 
tool for pictorial education handouts, the Perceived Infographics Usability Measurement (PIUM). The patient education 
handout, consisting of three A3-size posters with illustrations on key steps of daily tracheostomy care, reached a high 
consensus among health professional experts (88.3%) and patients and family caregivers (89.1%) on PIUM usability indexes. 
Patients and family caregivers expressed that the patient education handout would be an understandable teaching tool 
and procedure reminder, which would help alleviate fears about tracheostomy care. The PIUM demonstrated satisfactory 
content validity and reliability properties and was a quality tool to guide the transformation of text-based content to a 
pictorial patient education handout.

Keywords
health education, patient education, patient education handout, pictorial work, tracheostomy, user-centered design

145

for patients going home with tracheostomies. The one-hour 
Tracheostomy Care Anxiety Relief through Education and 
Support (T-CARES) program includes video instruction, 
group discussion, hands-on practice, and assessment of skills 
(Loerzel et al., 2014); although the study was limited by a 
small sample size (N = 12), there was a significant improve-
ment in anxiety (p = .008). Education on tracheostomy care 
usually discontinues at the point of discharge with patients 
and caregivers reporting that homecare nurses lack compe-
tency in tracheostomy care (McCormick et al., 2015). Online 
educational materials can be another source of available 
information. However, a readability assessment has shown 
that all the online tracheostomy care materials are currently 
beyond the recommended sixth-grade reading level (Kong & 
Hu, 2015). A website focused on tracheostomy care, the 
Global Tracheostomy Collaborative (http://www.global-
trach.org), was developed by physicians, nurses, and speech 
pathologists from the United Kingdom, United States, and 
Australia in 2012 who sought to provide instruction and sup-
port to patients and health care professionals in tracheostomy 
care (Bonvento et al., 2017). Unfortunately, only a text-based 
patient information brochure was found for adult tracheos-
tomy care. Similarly, information on stoma care provided by 
an international throat cancer support group (www.webwhis-
pers.org) contains text-based only instructions. These text-
based brochures were beyond a sixth-grade reading level, 
which made it hard for patients and caregivers to understand 
and follow the instructions. Furthermore, the text-based 
instruction sheet on how to perform tracheostomy care tends 
to make patients and families feel information-overloaded, 
perplexed, and anxious (Liu & Kuo, 2016). There is a lack of 
evidence in the current literature to address the unmet educa-
tional needs of patients and caregivers who need to perform 
tracheostomy care (Wang et al., 2021).
Health care professionals should not only train patients 
and their caregivers while they are in the hospital but also 
organize and develop readable educational resources to use 
as a reference outside hospital settings. In our review of the 
effectiveness of pictograph-enhanced discharge instructions, 
13 studies showed improvements in patient education out-
comes including information retention, comprehension, 
involvement in decision-making processes, and health man-
agement (Wang & Voss, 2021). Choi found that when nurses 
used pictorial handouts to deliver post hip replacement sur-
gery education to patients, there was a medium effect size on 
the patients’ comprehension and amount of recalled informa-
tion (Choi, 2016). Two studies with people living with HIV 
found that a pictorial information leaflet had a significant 
impact on their treatment adherence, self-efficacy, and cop-
ing behaviors (Dowse et al., 2014; Kalichman et al., 2013). A 
study in Iran tested a teaching method with pictorial images 
in comparison with the “teach-back” method and found that 
patients who received diabetic education with pictorial 
images had significantly higher diet adherence than those in 
the teach-back group (Negarandeh et al., 2013). Therefore, 

patients and family caregivers with infographic instructions 
are more likely to have a better “user experience” than those 
without, indicating that patients and family caregivers had 
better interactions and feelings with using pictorial education 
handouts than text-only handouts.

Purpose

We chose a qualitative and quantitative approach to develop a 
pictorial patient education handout, also called “infograph-
ics” by seeking feedback from all stakeholders. Stakeholders’ 
collaboration in the development and revising stages is of 
paramount importance to the infographics’ validity and 
usability. Patients’ and family caregivers’ feedback on how to 
present pictographs and captions to assist tracheostomy care 
learning should be valued and incorporated. The purpose of 
the study was to develop and validate infographics for patients 
and family caregivers who need to perform independent tra-
cheostomy care at home by using an author-developed 
Perceived Infographics Usability Measurement (PIUM).

Methods

Design

As shown in Figure 1, the study used a three-stage, mixed-
method design: (1) development, (2) revising with the health 
professional panel, and (3) revising with the user panel. The 
clinical content of the infographic follows the newest updated 
2020 version of a text-based patient information booklet 
from the study hospital.

Setting

The study was conducted at the outpatient oncology clinics of 
a 1,032-bed, tertiary medical center, the University Hospitals 
Cleveland Medical Center (UHCMC). The Seidman Cancer 
Centre at the UHCMC is a National Cancer Institute-
designated Comprehensive Cancer Center in Cleveland, 
United States.

Participants

Health professional panel.  We invited a total of 13 health pro-
fessionals to appraise the infographics. To ensure full repre-
sentation of the expertise in each professional field, health 
care professionals including physicians, health psycholo-
gists, and clinical nursing specialists were invited based on 
the expert selection criteria with a minimum score of 5 (Qua-
trini Carvalho Passos Guimaraes et al., 2016), which awarded 
four points for “clinical experience of at least four years in 
the specific area” and one point for “experience of at least 
one year in clinical teaching of the specific area and teaching 
of the nursing classification” or “experience on research with 
articles published in the specific area.”

146	
Western Journal of Nursing Research 45(2)

Patient and family caregiver panel.  We recruited 39 users of 
tracheostomy care infographics including 22 patients and 17 
family caregivers. Patient participants were identified by 
screening appointments of outpatient clinics at the Ear Nose 
and Throat Institute. The principal investigator (Author 
T.W.) was introduced by the physician to the patients and 
family caregivers in private outpatient consultation rooms. 
After the patient gave permission to contact his or her family 
caregiver, the principal investigator then approached and 
obtained consent from the caregiver participant. The princi-
pal investigator introduced the purpose of the study and 
delivered a copy of the tracheostomy care infographics to 
each patient and caregiver.
The inclusion criteria for the patient participants are as 
follows: (a) 18 years of age or older; (b) had a tracheostomy 
as part of head and neck cancer treatment and were not on 
mechanical ventilation; (c) the date of the related tracheos-
tomy surgery was within the past 6 months; (d) the ability to 
speak and read in English; and (e) had received discharge 
tracheostomy care education from the clinical nurse. The 
exclusion criteria were documented major physical or cogni-
tive disabilities that would limit the ability to give informed 
consent or answer survey questions.
The family/informal caregivers were “any relative, part-
ner, friend or neighbor who had a significant personal rela-
tionship with and provides a broad range of assistance for, an 
older person or an adult with a chronic or disabling condition” 
(Family Caregiver Alliance, 2014). The inclusion criteria for 

caregiver participants are as follows: (a) 18 years of age or 
older; (b) was the primary caregiver of an individual living 
with a tracheostomy as part of head and neck cancer treatment 
and who was not on mechanical ventilation; (c) the care recip-
ient’s date of the related tracheostomy surgery was within the 
past 6 months; (d) the ability to speak and read in English; 
and (e) had received discharge tracheostomy care education 
from the clinical nurse. Patients or family caregivers were 
excluded if they reported major physical or cognitive disabili-
ties that would limit the ability to give informed consent or 
answer survey questions.

Measurement

Perceived infographics usability measurement (PIUM).  Since no 
instrument was found to evaluate pictographic patient educa-
tion materials in the literature, we conducted a systematic 
review of related studies (Wang & Voss, 2021); consistency 
with clinical practice, content accessibility, and content 
friendliness were the three constructs we identified from tra-
ditional interview questions from previous studies employed. 
Accordingly, the authors incorporated these constructs and 
developed the PIUM with quantitative measurement and 
open narrative formats. All the items were tested by calculat-
ing a content validity index from ratings by three patient edu-
cation experts before being included in the PIUM. The eight 
items of the PIUM encompass are as follows: (1) consistency 
with clinical practice (for health provider participants only), 

Figure 1.  Study Model.
Note. NP: Nurse Practitioner, DNP: Doctor of Nursing Practice, RN: Registered Nurse, PIUM: Perceived Infographics Usability Measurement.

147

(2) graphics not introducing confusion, (3) captions not 
introducing confusion, (4) level of difficulty to follow, 
(5) level of usefulness, (6) informativeness, (7) comprehen-
sibility, and (8) simplicity. The first four items were scored 
with a 5-point Likert scale (strongly disagree = 1, disagree = 2, 
neither = 3, agree = 4, strongly agree = 5) to collect reviewers’ 
agreement levels. The agreement percentage of the first four 
items was the mean percentage level ([mean/5] %). The last 
four items were scored with a 0%–100% sliding scale, where 
“0” refers to “unnecessary,” “uninformative,” “not under-
standable,” or “complex” on each item, and “100” refers to 
“useful,” “informative,” “understandable,” or “simple.” To 
claim usability of the infographics on tracheostomy care, a 
minimum of 78% agreement (Polit et al., 2007) on each item 
must be achieved.

Psychometric properties of the PIUM.  Psychometric properties 
were analyzed with a total of 46 participants who responded to 
the PIUM in evaluating infographics version 3.0 including 7 
health professionals, 22 patients, and 17 caregiver partici-
pants. Participants used the PIUM to evaluate the infographics 
versions 1.0, 2.0, and 3.0; the Cronbach’s alpha values were 
α = .96, .84, and .95, respectively, indicating the PIUM had 
high reliability. We observed moderate to high correlations 
between items and decreases in the Cronbach alpha values if 
any item was deleted. Assumptions for the factor analysis, 
including sampling adequacy and correlation sufficiency, were 
verified using the Kaiser–Meyer–Olkin (KMO = .743) test 
and Bartlett’s test of sphericity (p < .001) (Field, 2013). A 
KMO score of above .60 demonstrated an adequate sample 
size for our study, and a significant Bartlett’s test of sphericity 
revealed that items were significantly intercorrelated for run-
ning a factor analysis. A principal component analysis was 
undertaken using oblique rotation as conceptually the items 
and factors were likely to be highly associated. A two-factor 
solution revealed that eigenvalues >1 explained 78.0% and 
18.3% of the variance individually. However, strong loadings 
between .84 and .92 of each item on the first factor and a com-
ponent correlation above .60 (r = .61) suggested that only one 
unique dimension existed in the instrument.

Study Procedure

In the Development stage, the principal investigator not only 
used simulation and videos to demonstrate tracheostomy 
care to a scientific illustrator but also communicated with her 
the purpose of the illustration and the RAIN (readability 
assessment instrument manual) readability principles (Singh, 
2003) for drafting a pictorial education handout. The RAIN 
readability principles refer to global coherence, local coher-
ence, unity, audience appropriateness, adjunct questions, 
writing style, illustration, and typography (Kirkpatrick & 
Mohler, 1999). Standard typography should include a 
14-point font, page design with sharp contrast, and appropri-
ate use of highlights and different colors. First, the principal 

investigator and the scientific illustrator worked together to 
identify key steps and items that required illustrations. After 
the scientific illustrator drew single images, she then collab-
orated with the principal investigator on the layout of the 
pictographs and added captions, which was version 1.0 of the 
infographic.
In the Revising with Health Professional Panel stage, ver-
sion 1.0 was distributed to the health professional panel. 
Online REDCap surveys were used to collect data from 
health professional experts. The PIUM was used to collect 
feedback and guide the revising process. Two rounds of revi-
sions were conducted until each item of PIUM reached a 
minimum of 78% agreement.
In the Revising with the User Panel stage, version 3.0 was 
tested with patients and family caregivers who provided their 
feedback. Participants were asked to review the tracheos-
tomy care infographics and provide their comments for revi-
sion via paper surveys with return envelopes and stamps or a 
REDCap link survey at home. Then, based on their feedback, 
we conducted a third revision and produced the final version 
of infographics on tracheostomy care, version 4.0.

Ethical Consideration

Institutional review board approval was obtained from the 
UHCMC. Written informed consent was obtained from each 
patient and family caregiver participant before participation 
in the study.

Analysis

Returned survey data were exported from REDCap and 
entered into SPSS 25.0. Mean, median, and mode were cal-
culated on the quantitative PIUM items. Factor analysis and 
reliability analysis were executed to analyze the psychomet-
ric properties of the PIUM. Paired sample t-test was per-
formed to analyze the changes in PIUM scores between 
version 1.0 and version 3.0. In addition, we performed a con-
tent analysis on the qualitative narratives of participants’ 
feedback on the infographics and their comments for 
revisions.

Results

Efficacy of PIUM Indexes to Improve Infographics 
Usability

Table 1 presents the PIUM scores from the reviews of info-
graphics Version 1.0, 2.0, and 3.0. In the review of version 
1.0, the health professional experts evaluated each step of the 
illustrated instruction with the PIUM, during which six out 
of the eight items of PIUM failed to reach 78% agreement 
and only two assessment items (usefulness and informative-
ness) had 85.2% and 82.5% agreement. After the first revi-
sion, the PIUM scores improved significantly (t = –6.83,

148	
Western Journal of Nursing Research 45(2)

p < .001) to above 78% agreement on all items with an aver-
age score of 88.3% in the review of version 2.0, indicating 
that version 2.0 achieved a satisfactory content validity. After 
the second revision, version 3.0 was presented to patients 
and caregiver participants for end-user review. Patient and 
family caregiver feedback had a minimum of 85.8% agree-
ment on all assessment items with an average score of 88.9%. 
Version 4.0 was the final infographics produced after inte-
grating health professionals and user panels’ feedback.

Iterative Revisions to Establish Infographics’ 
Validity

Based on the concerns pointed out by the review panel, the 
principal investigator and the scientific illustrator amended 
the infographics accordingly and verified the new revision 
with the experts. The panel requested the following four 
major types of amendments including (1) the labeling of all 
items depicted, (2) the use of nomenclature, (3) the extension 
of instruction with additional text, and (4) the expansion of 
instruction with additional pictographs. The panel found pic-
tures useful but limited when providing detailed instructions. 
Experts then suggested adding captions next to the pictures. 
For instance, one expert stated, “(the picture of) ‘clean the 
tube’ can be expanded, i.e., ‘clean the tube between passes by 
suctioning sterile saline. . .etc.” On the other hand, instruc-
tions with multiple steps in one sentence were less legible 
than the pictures. For example, the review panel was worried 
that when we asked patients to “use a clean work surface, 

wash hands and don gloves,” patients might misunderstand 
the sequence and forget to wash hands after cleaning the sur-
face. Therefore, we revised this step with additional pictures 
and arrows.
Iterative revisions were conducted for each step of trache-
ostomy care based on the comments from the health profes-
sional panel and the patient and family caregiver panel. 
Table 2 demonstrates the revising process of “Step 4: 
Insertion of trach tube” from the “How to suction your tra-
cheostomy at home” infographics. We also observed data 
saturation on common issues raised by the panel. For exam-
ple, multiple experts expressed their concerns about the illus-
trated step of “testing suction pressure” in version 1.0. Their 
comments included “Still need to state how to test suction” 
(reviewer #4), “Need to state how to check suction” (reviewer 
#5), and “Too simple. Is setting pressure pretty straightfor-
ward? May need to help them identify where the pressure 
gauge is located. So ‘locate the pressure gauge on the tubing. 
Set pressure between 80–120 mm Hg. Test suction pressure 
by placing the tube inside saline tray’, Or ‘fill the tray with 
saline then test suction pressure by placing the tube inside 
saline tray’” (reviewer #1), “How does one adjust the pres-
sure?” (reviewer #8).

Unique Revising Remarks from Patients and 
Family Caregivers

We invited patients and family caregivers to review the info-
graphics Version 3.0. Different from clinical providers who 

Table 1.  Quantitative Findings from the Perceived Infographics Usability Measurement (PIUM).

Items of PIUM

Mean Agreement Percentage

p
Value

Version 1.0
(n = 9 Health 
Professionals)

Version 2.0
(n = 7 Health 
Professionals)

Version 3.0
(n = 39 Patients and 
Family Caregivers)

1.  “The content is consistent with current clinical practice.”
76.4%
87.6%
N.A.
.043
2.  “The content is easy to understand and does not introduce 
confusion.”
74%
84.8%
85.8%
.043

3.  “The language/captions are accurate and do not introduce 
confusion.”
70.4%
88.6%
85.8%
.073

4.  “It would be easy for patients and caregivers to follow the 
steps.”
75.6%
89.6%
86%
.054

5.  “Usefulness”
85.2%
89.7%
91.8%
.016
6.  “Informativeness”
82.5%
87.4%
91.2%
.018
7  “Comprehensibility”
77.2%
88.3%
90.8%
.043
8.  “Simplicity”
77.3%
90.4%
92.2%
.050

Note.
Item 1–4 scoring: strongly disagree = 1, disagree = 2, neither = 3, agree = 4, strongly agree = 5; agreement percentage = [mean/5] %
Item 5 scoring: “unnecessary” = 0, “useful” = 100%
Item 6 scoring: “uninformative” = 0, “informative” = 100%
Item 7 scoring: “not understandable” = 0, “understandable” = 100%
Item 8 scoring: “complex” = 0, “simple” = 100%
p value: difference of agreement level between version 1.0 and version 3.0
PIUM: Perceived Infographics Usability Measurement.

149

were mostly concerned about the validity of the presented 
infographics, feedback from our end-users had their unique 
perspectives as they cared for patients’ feelings. For instance, 
both patients and family caregivers felt the need to prepare 
the patient before suctioning, as one caregiver stated, “as 
first-time users, it’s scary because you feel you’re choking 
the patient; maybe, instructing that gagging will occur and is 
somewhat normal.” This constructive comment was new and 
was not revealed in the health professionals’ review. They 
also stated that they needed clearer instruction on when and 
why to use the 3mL saline lavage to loosen dry secretions. 
Furthermore, some of the participants also suggested that 
future pictographic instructions were needed on “how to 
change your trach collar” and “how to insert the trach (if 
fallen out).”

Findings from the Qualitative Feedback

We identified the following three themes in the qualitative 
notes of participants’ feedback of the tracheostomy care 

infographics: (1) useful as procedure reminders, (2) useful as 
teaching material, (3) easy to follow and understandable, and 
(4) help alleviate fears.
The first theme of “useful as a procedure reminder” was 
observed in participants’ comments, which also corroborated 
their high agreement scores on the infographics’ validity and 
usability. Selected comments from patients and family care-
givers involved “Great resource and procedure reminder” 
(patient #1), “Directions were given at hospital about trach 
care before discharge. Handouts would have been useful as a 
reminder” (family caregiver #3), “The pictures and instruc-
tions were simply put. I believe when discharged the nurse 
shows the patient and caregiver what to do. These instruc-
tions refresh the memory on steps to take and are needed” 
(family caregiver #4), and “Wish we would have had these 
sheets when we were discharged!” (patient #19).
The second theme was “useful as teaching materials.” 
When patients could not conduct tracheostomy care due to 
lack of reading ability or finding it too challenging, family 
caregivers were the only tracheostomy care providers at 

Table 2.  Illustrated Revision Sample of Tracheostomy Care Infographics.

Step 4 of “How to Suction Your Trach at Home” Handout
Selected Comments

Version 1.0
•  “Without suction” is not a clear instruction.
•  Need to label the mirror.
•  Use nomenclature for inner cannula, tube could 
be confused with tracheostomy tube.
•  First, the proper term is “thumb port,” we do 
not usually call it “suction hole.” Second, you 
don’t have to tap the suction hole at the wrong 
time or not at the right speed, the secretions 
could fall back into the airway. Consider revising.
    — Health Professional Panel
Version 2.0
•  “Intermittently” might be above the reading 
level, consider revising.
•  Do not use colored font/ capitalized, which 
could be harder to read for some people, instead 
use bold.
•  Need to add the 3mL lavage saline tube here in 
the suction step.
    — Health Professional Panel
Version 3.0
•  Need to add the reason for using 3mL lavage 
saline. Patients do not need to use it every time.
•  For simplicity, probably do not need to repeat 
the less than 10 seconds twice here.
•  Use different typeface for legibility and clarity.
    — Health Professional Panel

Version 4.0
•  It is important to prepare the patient and let 
them know this is normal and do not be scared.
•  When do I know when to pull back the catheter?
•  Please add the swirling motion.
•  Please add how the 3mL saline can help, for 
example, use “to help with dryness and loosen 
secretions.”
    — Patient and Family Caregivers’ Panel

150	
Western Journal of Nursing Research 45(2)

home. Infographics had the potential to facilitate patients to 
overcome these learning barriers. Family caregivers stated 
that “This is great for my dad because he cannot read!” (fam-
ily caregiver #5), “This is going to help when I teach my son 
[the patient], he can now look at the pictures” (family care-
giver #10), “Better than previous [text-based trach education 
handout]!” (family caregiver #16).
The third theme was “easy to follow and understandable.” 
When asked about the comprehension level of the infograph-
ics, participants added their comments in addition to the slid-
ing scale including “I found the directions easy to follow. 
The diagrams are easy to read” (patient #5), “Very under-
standable!” (patient #6), “The handout was easy to under-
stand and follow” (family caregiver #8), and “This does not 
need much revision! Whoever made this is a genius” (family 
caregiver #15).
The last theme that emerged was “help alleviate fears” in 
patients when asked to perform tracheostomy care. One 
patient (#20) stated that “I really like these posters. I think 
they will be helpful in alleviating some of the fear that comes 
with taking care of your trach. I understand the pictures a lot 
better.”

Discussion

This is the first methodological report of pictorial education 
handout development on adult tracheostomy care with all 
stakeholders involved throughout the development process. 
We used the agreement score from the PIUM instrument to 
achieve judgment quantification and guide the iterative 
revising stage. Furthermore, the agreement scores also 
ensured that all the stakeholders’ comments were taken into 
consideration. Notably, there was no significant difference in 
agreement levels between the clinical experts and the patients 
and family caregivers, indicating that sufficient usability and 
validity were achieved after two rounds of refinements 
guided by the PIUM indexes. However, this does not mean 
that future efforts should not be undertaken to verify the info-
graphics with patients and caregivers because unique revis-
ing inputs were provided by our patient and family caregiver 
participants.
There is currently no protocol for infographics develop-
ment. Most infographics are primarily generated by clinical 
expert committees without any judgment quantification 
measures or involvement of patients (Wang & Voss, 2021). 
This mixed-method approach has shown great potential to 
guide the development and validation of future infographic 
studies to meet more educational development needs. 
Iterative review and revisions involving all stakeholders 
should be applied to the development of all patient educa-
tion materials. Improving the legibility of education materi-
als cannot only help to improve their understanding of 
self-care instructions but also empower them to continue 
self-care actions outside of hospital settings. This work 
shows a potential solution to engage patients and family 

caregivers with low health literacy levels in self-care learn-
ing and health management.
The tracheostomy care infographics have important 
implications for the education and practice of tracheostomy 
care for students, clinicians, and informal caregivers. Nursing 
and medical students who find tracheostomy care challeng-
ing will also benefit from the infographics. Clinicians with 
little experience in tracheostomy care may find the info-
graphics as a handy procedure reminder. In addition, con-
tinuing education infographics on tracheostomy care can be 
implemented in units in hospitals, home care agencies, and 
long-term care facilities for nurses and physicians who need 
to refresh their knowledge of tracheostomy care. In nursing 
homes with limited educational resources, tracheostomy care 
infographics can be used to facilitate consistent clinical stan-
dards for tracheostomy care with step-by-step instruction. 
Furthermore, the qualitative findings from our study rein-
forced that there is a need for comprehensible tracheostomy 
care education resources for informal caregivers outside of 
clinical settings. Nurses and physicians on our research team 
worked closely with local hospitals and organizations such 
as the Global Tracheostomy Collaborative (http://www. 
globaltrach.org) to make the tracheostomy care infographics 
accessible to informal caregivers.
This finding, while preliminary, suggests that health care 
providers should meet the patients’ and caregivers’ needs at 
their comprehension level. Health care providers should 
become more aware of patients’ readiness to learn and poten-
tial learning barriers such as information overload, insuffi-
cient health literacy, or reading levels. Training on how to 
communicate medical information with individuals without 
medical backgrounds should be embedded into the nursing 
and medical curricula. Future research questions include the 
following: (1) What are the facilitators and inhibitors of 
patients’ and family caregivers’ learning on tracheostomy 
care? (2) What are the risk factors for experiencing tracheos-
tomy care incompetency? and (3) Is tracheostomy care con-
tinuing education needed for patients and family caregivers? 
Further work is needed to establish the efficacy of infograph-
ics on self-efficacy, information retention, competency, and 
care engagement. More qualitative research is needed to 
identify preferences on pictorial education handouts in dif-
ferent patient groups.
Continuing efforts are needed to make tracheostomy care 
infographics more accessible to patients and family caregiv-
ers. The risk of introducing confusion with individuals’ dif-
ferent interpretations of pictographs makes it challenging to 
promote the use of infographic education on a larger scale. A 
key policy priority should therefore be to plan for national 
organizations such as the Agency for Healthcare Research 
and Quality of the U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services to provide guidelines and establish a consistent 
meaning of pictographs delivered for patient education. A 
public infographic repository that integrates consistent mean-
ing for pictographs should be developed and promoted.

151

Conclusion

These infographics on tracheostomy care showed a positive 
impact on improving patients’ and family caregivers’ learn-
ing experience and hold promise in preventing complications 
and reducing health resource utilization related to poor tra-
cheostomy care outside of clinical settings. The perceived 
infographics usability instrument we proposed is a simple 
and effective tool for evaluating and guiding the iterative 
revision process of infographics production. Similar info-
graphics development and validation studies should be con-
ducted in this manner to meet other patient education needs.