1

Formative evaluation of an emergency 
department clinical decision support 
system for agitation symptoms: a 
study protocol

Ambrose H Wong  ‍ ‍ ,1,2 Bidisha Nath,2 Dhruvil Shah  ‍ ‍ ,2 Anusha Kumar  ‍ ‍ ,2 
Morgan Brinker  ‍ ‍ ,2 Isaac V Faustino  ‍ ‍ ,2 Michael Boyce,1 James D Dziura,2,3 
Rebekah Heckmann,1,2 Kimberly A Yonkers,4 Steven L Bernstein  ‍ ‍ ,5 
Karthik Adapa  ‍ ‍ ,6 Richard Andrew Taylor,1,2 Polina Ovchinnikova,3,7 
Terika McCall  ‍ ‍ ,3,7 Edward R Melnick  ‍ ‍ 1,2

To cite: Wong AH, Nath B, 
Shah D, et al.  Formative 
evaluation of an emergency 
department clinical 
decision support system 
for agitation symptoms: a 
study protocol. BMJ Open 
2024;14:e082834. doi:10.1136/
bmjopen-2023-082834

	
►Prepublication history 
and additional supplemental 
material for this paper are 
available online. To view these 
files, please visit the journal 
online (https://doi.org/10.1136/​
bmjopen-2023-082834).

Received 05 December 2023
Accepted 31 January 2024

For numbered affiliations see 
end of article.

Correspondence to
Dr Ambrose H Wong;  
​wongambrose@​gmail.​com

Protocol

© Author(s) (or their 
employer(s)) 2024. Re-­use 
permitted under CC BY-­NC. No 
commercial re-­use. See rights 
and permissions. Published by 
BMJ.

ABSTRACT
Introduction  The burden of mental health-­related visits 
to emergency departments (EDs) is growing, and agitation 
episodes are prevalent with such visits. Best practice 
guidance from experts recommends early assessment of 
at-­risk populations and pre-­emptive intervention using 
de-­escalation techniques to prevent agitation. Time 
pressure, fluctuating work demands, and other systems-­
related factors pose challenges to efficient decision-­
making and adoption of best practice recommendations 
during an unfolding behavioural crisis. As such, we 
propose to design, develop and evaluate a computerised 
clinical decision support (CDS) system, Early Detection 
and Treatment to Reduce Events with Agitation Tool (ED-­
TREAT). We aim to identify patients at risk of agitation and 
guide ED clinicians through appropriate risk assessment 
and timely interventions to prevent agitation with a goal of 
minimising restraint use and improving patient experience 
and outcomes.
Methods and analysis  This study describes the formative 
evaluation of the health record embedded CDS tool. Under 
aim 1, the study will collect qualitative data to design and 
develop ED-­TREAT using a contextual design approach and an 
iterative user-­centred design process. Participants will include 
potential CDS users, that is, ED physicians, nurses, technicians, 
as well as patients with lived experience of restraint use for 
behavioural crisis management during an ED visit. We will use 
purposive sampling to ensure the full spectrum of perspectives 
until we reach thematic saturation. Next, under aim 2, the study 
will conduct a pilot, randomised controlled trial of ED-­TREAT at 
two adult ED sites in a regional health system in the Northeast 
USA to evaluate the feasibility, fidelity and bedside acceptability 
of ED-­TREAT. We aim to recruit a total of at least 26 eligible 
subjects under the pilot trial.
Ethics and dissemination  Ethical approval by the Yale 
University Human Investigation Committee was obtained in 
2021 (HIC# 2000030893 and 2000030906). All participants 
will provide informed verbal consent prior to being enrolled in 
the study. Results will be disseminated through publications 
in open-­access, peer-­reviewed journals, via scientific 
presentations or through direct email notifications.
Trial registration number  NCT04959279; Pre-results.

INTRODUCTION
Behavioural health-­related visits to emer-
gency departments (EDs) are growing.1–3 
Agitation, defined as excessive psychomotor 
activity leading to aggressive and violent 
behaviour,4 is a frequent symptom of such 
visits. An estimated 1.7 million agitation 
episodes occur annually in EDs across the 
USA alone.5 6 When an individual becomes 
agitated, they may cause harm to themselves, 
hospital staff, and property.7–9 Rapid manage-
ment of agitation is imperative and use of 
physical restraint may be necessary to facili-
tate patient assessment and prevent injury.5 
Although physical restraints are routinely 
used in the ED,10 11 they are associated with 
up to 37% risk of injury in patients, including 
blunt chest trauma, asphyxiation, respira-
tory depression, and sudden death.12–17 To 

STRENGTHS AND LIMITATIONS OF THIS STUDY

	
⇒Given limited prior evidence on real-­life implemen-
tation of best practice recommendations for agita-
tion symptoms, this study aims to identify patient 
and user-­centred strategies to develop a clinical 
decision support (CDS) system that facilitates man-
agement of agitation in an acute care setting.
	
⇒Our tool will include pragmatic strategies to im-
plement best practice recommendations for risk 
assessment and timely de-­escalation techniques in 
agitation management prior to definitive psychiatric 
treatment.
	
⇒The CDS design process will follow an iterative, user-­

centred approach with feedback from end-­users at 
every step to refine and develop an electronic health 
record embedded, fully functional prototype.
	
⇒Our risk assessment data, qualitative design, and 
pilot trial will arise from the same geo-­political area 
and health system, which may limit generalisability.

Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

 . 
Library

at Concordia University
 
 

2

address these challenges, the American Association for 
Emergency Psychiatry sponsored Project BETA (Best 
Practices in Evaluation and Treatment of Agitation).18 
Project BETA was a pioneer effort to create a comprehen-
sive list of five sets of best practices for preventing and 
managing agitation through multidisciplinary consensus 
panels. Key strategies within Project BETA included use 
of structured risk assessment4 to help clinicians screen 
patients at risk of developing agitation and pre-­emptive 
intervention using behavioural techniques,19 environ-
mental modification,20 and consensual use of medication 
therapy18 to obviate use of restraints.
Despite these established best practice recommenda-
tions, multiple systems-­level barriers challenge their prac-
tical implementation.21–23 Care delivery in the ED occurs 
in a uniquely complex environment. Clinical decisions 
are made under time pressure, using limited information 
and amidst multiple and frequent interruptions and other 
unpredictable factors due to the dynamic course of acute, 
undifferentiated conditions.24 As burden on the emer-
gency care system rises in the USA,25–28 these systems-­level 
challenges are particularly relevant for patients at risk 
for agitation because behavioural and de-­escalation tech-
niques require investment in time and effort to build a 
strong rapport and trusting therapeutic relationship with 
the patient. Given that clinicians may have difficulty accu-
rately identifying patients at risk for agitation and access 
to expert psychiatric evaluation in such settings may 
be limited,29–32 there is a significant mismatch between 
resources available and application of those resources 
to individuals who would most benefit from early risk 
assessment and intervention. A recent prospective study 
observing 100 at-­risk patients in the ED found that over 
60% of individuals develop agitation more than 30 min 
into their visit,33–35 presenting opportunities to prevent 
agitation earlier in the course.
Clinical decision support (CDS) tools can help address 
systems-­based challenges, facilitate risk assessment, and 
guide clinicians to use best practices strategies recom-
mended by Project BETA in the ED. CDS tools show 
increasing promise in the emergency setting to help 

clinical staff identify high-­risk patients and provide more 
efficient and higher quality of care,36 including indi-
viduals requiring use of high-­cost imaging37 and older 
adults.38–41 A CDS system encompasses any on-­screen tool 
designed to improve healthcare delivery by enhancing 
medical decisions with targeted clinical knowledge, 
patient data and other health-­related information.42 Use 
of a CDS tool to assist in assessment and management of 
potentially agitated patients may be an effective strategy 
in the ED.40 43 44

Rationale and aims
This study is one of the first that aims to prevent agitation 
and improve outcomes for ED patients with agitation. We 
will achieve this by (figure 1):
1.	 Designing and developing an electronic health re-
cord (EHR)-­embedded, user-­centred, CDS system, 
Early Detection and Treatment to Reduce Events with 
Agitation Tool (ED-­TREAT), using a contextual design 
approach to obtain input from key stakeholders and 
iterative user-­centred design process.
2.	 Conducting a pilot study to evaluate the feasibility, 
fidelity and bedside acceptability of ED-­TREAT. ED-­
TREAT aims to help ED staff and clinicians to iden-
tify patients at high risk for developing agitation, 
guide them through appropriate risk assessment and 
efficient decision-­making to implement best practice 
recommendations for preventing development of agi-
tation, and minimise use of restraints.
We hypothesise that, with the use of ED-­TREAT, ED 
staff will be able to identify at-­risk individuals, conduct 
appropriate risk assessment, implement interventions to 
minimise use of restraints and improve patient experi-
ence and outcomes related to agitation management in 
the ED. If this study is successful, a planned subsequent 
clinical effectiveness trial will compare effectiveness of 
ED-­TREAT to usual care across multiple ED sites in the 
future. The long-­term goal of this CDS tool is to increase 
fidelity with best practice recommendations for preven-
tion of agitation through early use of behavioural tech-
niques prior to onset of agitation.

Figure 1  Overview and steps for each phase of ED-­TREAT design and pilot implementation study. CDS, clinical decision 
support; ED-­TREAT, Early Detection and Treatment to Reduce Events with Agitation Tool.

Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

 . 
Library

at Concordia University
 
 

3

Open access

METHODS AND ANALYSES
Patient and public involvement
We invited patients to help us design, develop and test 
the intervention so that it is designed to improve the 
public good and help individuals with lived experience 
of mental illness and behavioural crises. In addition, we 
will solicit patient feedback and guidance on dissemina-
tion of study results to participants and the local commu-
nity through networks at our affiliated community-­based 
organisations that have had sustained engagement with 
our team for several years to implement a research 
agenda in agitation care that is patient centred and 
recovery oriented.

Aim 1: developing and refining ED-TREAT
With the goal of developing a final prototype that maxi-
mises usability, staff self-­efficacy, satisfaction and patient-­
centred care, ED-­TREAT will be designed, developed and 
refined in three phases (P1–P3) (figure 2). During phase 
1 (P1), we will conduct a needs assessment to collect input 
from key stakeholders including ED physicians, nurses, 
patient care technicians, behavioural health experts, 
informatics experts and patients with lived experience 
of being restrained in the ED. We will combine needs 
assessment findings with Project BETA recommendations 
for agitation management in the ED5 and risk factors for 
agitation from the literature to design an initial proto-
type. Next, in phase 2 (P2), we will conduct formative 
usability testing, which will consist of ‘think aloud’ proto-
cols, a standard usability procedure for CDS design,45 with 
clinician users and standardised patients in a controlled 
simulation setting to guide further modifications of the 
tool in an iterative fashion. Finally, in phase 3 (P3), we 
will conduct field testing in the ED through observational 
workflow analyses to identify and address barriers in the 
real-­world clinical environment.

Participant recruitment
We will design ED-­TREAT for use by staff members who 
work mostly closely with agitated patients in the ED.7 35 46–48 
These consist of ED physicians, nurses and patient care 
technicians. We plan to recruit these staff participants via 
email and biweekly staff meetings. In addition, we will 
also recruit patients with prior lived experience of being 
restrained in the ED to solicit their input and ensure 
that patient-­centred practices are considered during the 
design process. We will recruit these patients from the 
pool of peer support workers from local community-­
based recovery organisations via email and presentations 
at monthly staff meetings. These peer support workers 
have a history of mental health and substance use disor-
ders and have received training to become employed as 
patient advocates on community-­based treatment teams. 
Finally, our design team will interview informatics and 
behavioural health experts to solicit ideas and relevant 
CDS design strategies to improve decision-­making during 
agitation management.49 50

Phase 1: needs assessment and initial design of ED-TREAT
We will conduct focus groups and observations starting 
June 2023 via a contextual inquiry36 approach. This 
approach seeks to engage prospective users and partic-
ipants described above to understand clinical workflow, 
roles of different members of the patient care team and 
thought processes involved in managing a behavioural 
health crisis in the ED. We will first conduct in-­depth 
qualitative interviews with staff and patient participants 
using a semistructured interview guide that will include 
open-­ended questions to cover topics (online supple-
mental table 1) related to application of Project BETA 

Figure 2  Overview and steps for aim 1: ED-­TREAT user-­
centred design and prototype development. ED-­TREAT, Early 
Detection and Treatment to Reduce Events with Agitation 
Tool.

Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

 . 
Library

at Concordia University
 
 

4

recommendations in preventing agitation and user-­
centred design.37 Each focus group will consist of 2–5 
participants from the same stakeholder group and be 
approximately 60 min in duration. Sessions will be audio 
recorded after obtaining participant verbal consent 
(online supplemental file 2). In addition, members of the 
design team will conduct observation sessions in the ED 
to observe ED staff during real-­life agitation management 
events. These sessions will provide information about 
environmental and systems contexts, interactions among 
members of patient care team during an active agitation 
episode, and logistics of integrating CDS tool into EHR 
workflow to facilitate clinical decision-­making.
After identifying crucial user requirements in P1, we will 
develop an initial low-­fidelity prototype for ED-­TREAT. 
This will occur in collaboration with EHR analysts and 
informatics experts by incorporating Project BETA recom-
mendations for preventing and managing agitation5 
and potential risk factors for agitation to identify poten-
tial at-­risk patients in the ED. These risk factors (online 
supplemental table 2) will be based on existing litera-
ture on risk factors for agitation and workplace violence 
in the healthcare setting,4 42 51 our team’s prior work on 
agitation management in the ED,48 patient perspectives 
of ED visits resulting in restraint use,52 characterisation 
of physical restraint use among adults presenting to the 
ED with agitation,11 and attributes and levels of agitation 
impacting thresholds for restraint use in the ED.34 35

Preliminary work by our team has shown that identi-
fying risk factors for agitation and implementing EHR-­
based interventions for agitation are feasible in the 
emergency setting.46 The CDS will extract patient-­specific 
data on variables of interest from existing patient chart 
data via EPIC’s Cogito analytics performance suite.53 
Based on current expert recommendations from Project 
BETA,46 we anticipate that ED-­TREAT will likely stratify 
patients into three risk groups (table  1) and recom-
mend increasing levels of resource utilisation and pre-­
emptive management as the risk level increases based 
on best practices for preventing agitation from Project 

BETA. Depending on results from the needs assessment, 
ED-­TREAT’s recommendations may include automated 
order sets for medication therapy, staff instructions and 
communication orders and templated clinical docu-
mentation. Our team will collaborate with EHR analysts 
to create an initial interactive prototype within the 
EHR testing environment, ‘Epic Playground’, a non-­
production, functional, simulated EHR replica used for 
developing and validating new workflows. We anticipate 
that our final product will be an EHR-­integrated web 
application through a dedicated graphical Application 
Programming Interface.54

Phase 2: usability testing of ED-TREAT
Heuristic evaluation
We will first perform heuristic evaluation55 of CDS inter-
face usability before testing with clinician participants. 
This will consist of an expert team of three evaluators 
with experience in emergency medicine as well as CDS 
design who will navigate through different aspects of the 
CDS and judge the compliance and usability of the tool in 
agitation management triangulated between their exper-
tise and usability standards. Each evaluator will inspect 
the interface and assess the guidelines and recommenda-
tions provided by the CDS for various levels of agitation. 
After individual assessment is completed, we will debrief 
as a group and aggregate the results of each evaluator 
to examine deficiencies in the prototype design. After 
addressing concerns and refining the prototype CDS tool, 
we will conduct further usability testing with clinicians in 
simulated training protocols.

‘Think Aloud’ protocol
Next, our team will perform one-­on-­one ‘think aloud’ 
protocol45 sessions with clinician users in a quiet office 
at the EHR training classroom. We will ask participants 
to perform designated tasks with ED-­TREAT using mock 
patient charts in Epic Playground and ‘think aloud’ how 
they would use ED-­TREAT to test whether the user under-
stands and is using the CDS as intended. We will develop 

Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

 . 
Library

at Concordia University
 
 

5

Open access

a facilitator guide that focuses on domains related to 
usability of the prototype and design of the CDS inter-
face (online supplemental table 3). We will videorecord 
each usability testing session, incorporating user screen 
captures and field notes56 taken during the session. At 
the end of the session, each participant will complete 
the System Usability Scale (SUS)57 to measure perceived 
usability of and satisfaction with a health informatics tool. 
The SUS is a widely used and effective survey composed 
of ten statements assessed on a 5-­point Likert scale, with 
inter-­item correlations of 0.69–0.75 and a reliability coef-
ficient α of 0.91.58 Each session is expected to take 30 min.

Simulation sessions
Additionally, we will observe the clinical team in a simu-
lation session with a live actor or mannequin simulating 
being an agitated patient. Participants will be briefed on 
how the CDS tool works and will be encouraged to use 
it at various points in the care process. We will similarly 
videorecord each session and distribute the SUS to gather 
participant feedback. We will make iterative refinements 
to the prototype until the team reaches consensus that it 
has reached a threshold level of usability.

Phase 3: field testing of ED-TREAT
We will recruit staff participants working in the ED 
for field testing of the ED-­TREAT prototype through 
observational workflow analysis of ED visits with mild-­
to-­moderate or high risk of agitation (table 1). We will 
develop an observational guide based on sample topics 
of usability testing (online supplemental table 3) that will 
detail both the workflow of managing an at-­risk patient 
and barriers to adopting ED-­TREAT in the clinical envi-
ronment. Field notes will detail events, actions and their 
time and duration,56 while maintaining an open-­ended 
format to describe and follow variations or workarounds 
in workflow. Either the PI or a trained research associate 
will complete the observations as an unobtrusive non-­
participant observer through a patient’s visit from ED 
arrival to patient disposition, similar to procedures we 
developed for prior observations of agitation.34 35 We will 
enter field notes using a portable electronic tablet into a 
word document for free text and a spreadsheet for data 
elements.

Data analysis
In P1 (design and development), our team will use the 
iterative and phased approach of building an affinity 
diagram, a commonly used organisational tool that allows 
large numbers of ideas stemming from brainstorming 
and qualitative data to be sorted into groups, based on 
their natural relationships, for review and analysis.59 60 
Following completion of each focus group and contex-
tual inquiry session, we will conduct an interpretation 
session to review the user-­provided keynotes from the 
inquiry session and capture them as affinity notes.61 To 
help identify common issues, work patterns and needs, we 
will arrange the affinity notes into hierarchical categories 

(‘must-­have’, ‘good to have’ and ‘nice to have’) based 
on common themes in the data to create an affinity 
diagram.61 Building of the affinity diagram will occur 
online using Miro software (RealtimeBoard, San Fran-
cisco, California, USA).62 We will mock up a low fidelity 
prototype of ED-­TREAT based on current best practices 
and iteratively refine it based on user data from P1.
For P2 (usability testing) and P3 (field testing), field 
notes will be analysed using a deductive coding method 
to conduct directed content analysis63 based on predeter-
mined usability requirements and recommended tasks 
from ED-­TREAT (online supplemental table 3).64 We 
will use Dedoose (SocioCultural Research Consultants, 
Manhattan Beach, California, USA),65 a collaborative and 
cloud-­based qualitative software package, for thematic 
analysis and data organisation of transcripts. Codes 
identifying suboptimal or deficient performance of the 
prototype will uncover critical system factors impacting 
adoption and usability that need optimisation and adjust-
ment. Two trained reviewers will perform independent 
coding and we will calculate inter-­rater reliability assess-
ments with kappa scores. For the SUS,57 participants’ 
scores from each question of are added together and 
then multiplied by 2.5 to convert the original scores to 
continuous data from 0 to 100. Scores will be described 
using mean and SD, and >85 will be indicative of excel-
lent usability.66 We will use the results generated from 
this analysis process at each round of revisions to make 
appropriate adjustments to the ED-­TREAT prototype in 
close collaboration with the EHR analyst team until we 
derive a final deliverable prototype that will be ready for 
the pilot trial.

Sample size
We will use purposive sampling67 to ensure the full spec-
trum of perspectives for clinicians who will engage with 
ED-­TREAT and peer support workers who have had 
experience as patients in the ED. We will conduct data 
collection until reaching thematic saturation,68 when new 
concepts no longer emerge from iterative analysis of the 
data.69 For initial design (P1), we anticipate that this will 
occur after 5–6 focus groups with 6 participants (staff and 
patients) in each focus group.70 As enrolment of 10–12 
subjects can identify up to 90% of usability problems,71 
we will perform usability testing (P2) for approximately 
5 participants in each round of refinement and expect 
about three rounds of refinement (15 participants total) 
as per our prior published work.72 For field testing (P3), 
we plan to observe eight patient encounters to detect any 
usability problems when deployed in the ED.

Aim 2: pilot trial and feasibility testing
We will conduct a pilot randomised controlled trial 
(RCT) for ED-­TREAT to compare the intervention to 
usual care. This will allow us to evaluate acceptability of 
the intervention to its end-­users (ED staff), fidelity of 
its intended outcomes to identify at-­risk individuals and 
prevent agitation, feasibility of randomisation, ease of 

Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

 . 
Library

at Concordia University
 
 

6

subject enrolment and measurement of other outcomes 
of interest. This will be a mixed-­methods study, wherein 
we will quantitatively measure usability and efficiency 
of clinical decision-­making via the SUS57 and specific 
patient outcomes, as well as qualitatively assess the effect 
of ED-­TREAT on clinical workflow and patient care. In 
addition, this pilot trial will (1) test the integrity of the 
study protocol in preparation for a future comparative 
effectiveness clinical trial, (2) evaluate randomisation 
protocols, (3) estimate rates of recruitment and retention 
of trial subjects and (4) estimate effect size for sample 
size calculation in the subsequent trial.73 Pilot trials74 are 
not designed to test the efficacy of the intervention but 
will help establish acceptability and feasibility in prepa-
ration for a future multicentre RCT. We hypothesise that 
it will be feasible to implement the tool, measure identi-
fied outcomes, be acceptable to its end-­users and work as 
intended.

Study setting, participants and randomisation
We will conduct the pilot trial at two adult ED campuses 
that belong to a large regional healthcare system in the 
Northeast USA, with a planned trial start date in the Fall 
of 2024. Prior to initiation of the pilot trial, all emergency 
physicians, ED nurses and ED patient care technicians at 
both campuses will receive an email introduction and a 
link to a brief training regarding the use of ED-­TREAT. 
Eligibility criteria for patients and recruitment will 
include ability to provide verbal consent for the study and 
a score of ‘4’ (quiet and awake; normal level of activity) 
or less on the Behavioural Activity Rating Scale (BARS),75 
an accepted seven-­point scale to assess levels of agitation 
in acute care settings. We will first perform screening for 
eligibility via an ED-­TREAT administrative interface that 
performs risk assessment for each ED patient on arrival. 
Inclusion criteria for ED patients include adult (age ≥18) 
patients, presenting to the ED during the pilot trial period, 
deemed to have a mild-­moderate or high risk of agitation 
as determined by ED-­TREAT, do not require physical 
restraint orders within <30 min of arrival, with a score 
of ‘4’ (quiet and awake; normal level of activity) on the 
BARS, have comfort with conversational English, and able 

to provide verbal consent. Exclusion criteria include pres-
ence of a restraint order <30 min of arrival and presence 
of a non-­violent physical restraint order where indications 
are not due to agitation (eg, for protecting intubation or 
life-­preserving equipment). A research associate will then 
approach eligible patients and their designated clinician 
team members for enrolment after confirming ability to 
consent and assessing patient BARS scores as close to the 
beginning of the visit as feasible. Study procedures, risks/
benefits of participating, and the purpose of ED-­TREAT 
will be described, and verbal consent will be obtained 
for patients and staff participants. Since we plan to enrol 
patients prior to onset of agitation, we anticipate that 
most patients should be able to engage in decisions and 
provide verbal consent. Our prior work found that >70% 
of ED patients with subsequent agitation arrived with a 
normal mental status and BARS scores ≤4.34 35 We will 
perform 2:1 randomisation at the patient level and also 
recruit a higher proportion of high-­risk patients in each 
arm, as a primary aim of the pilot trial is to test the accept-
ability of ED-­TREAT and we anticipate that our interven-
tion will recommend more tasks for high-­risk patients. 
Randomisation will occur using sequentially numbered, 
opaque, sealed envelopes that will only be opened by the 
research team member after enrolment of each patient. 
In the intervention group, ED-­TREAT will automatically 
launch as part of the clinical team’s workflow in the EHR 
after randomisation. We anticipate that critical steps in 
ED-­TREAT will occur at four stages of a visit (figure 3): 
(1) at initial arrival with automated risk stratification 
using predetermined criteria set during the CDS design 
process; (2) at triage assessment; (3) at initial nurse 
interaction and (4) at initial clinician interaction. In the 
control group, ED-­TREAT will notify the research team 
regarding the patient’s risk group but will not launch for 
the clinical team’s interfaces.

Data collection
Our anticipated data collection strategy is summarised in 
table 2. In addition to visit characteristics (system factors, 
relevant clinical data) collected through the EHR during 
the visit, we will collect acceptability and fidelity measures, 

Figure 3  Anticipated clinical steps for the intervention arm of ED-­TREAT. ED-­TREAT, Early Detection and Treatment to Reduce 
Events with Agitation Tool.

Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

 . 
Library

at Concordia University
 
 

7

Open access

feasibility assessment and potential outcomes of interest 
for each visit.
For all clinicians caring for patients in the intervention 
group, we will administer the SUS57 either in person at 
the end of the ED visit or within 72 hours by email. In 
addition, we will perform observation workflow analyses 
as described earlier using a task checklist to determine if 
clinicians were using ED-­TREAT as intended, and if any 
barriers or unintended consequences occurred because 
of the intervention. We will perform brief, semistruc-
tured interviews with patients either at the end of a visit 
or within 1 week after disposition to evaluate the impact 
of ED-­TREAT on their experiences.

Feasibility
To assess the feasibility of a comparative effectiveness 
trial, we will evaluate the following at 3-­month inter-
vals: (1) available number of potential subjects (# of 
eligible patient visits), (2) subject identification (% of 
eligible patients/staff approached), (3) enrolment (% 
of patients/staff with consent to enrol) and (4) retention 
(% of visits with completed outcome measures). We will 
also conduct brief, semistructured interviews with staff 

participants to evaluate their experiences with ED-­TREAT 
and effect on clinical workflow.

Outcome measures
The anticipated primary outcome of the compara-
tive effectiveness trial will be the presence of a physical 
restraint order during the ED visit (>30 min after arrival). 
Additional secondary outcomes include the presence of 
an intramuscular chemical sedative order, the highest 
level of agitation on the BARS75 during visit, disposition 
and length of stay.

Sample size and data analysis
As this pilot trial is not designed to test the efficacy of 
ED-­TREAT, a power calculation is not appropriate.73 
To determine the sample size for this pilot randomised 
trial, we will use the outcome of fidelity as measured by 
the proportion of visits in the intervention arm that are 
adherent to >80% of the observational workflow check-
list. To estimate the proportion achieving this level of 
fidelity with a reasonable precision (95% CI with a width 
of ±20%), a total of at least 26 eligible subjects will be 
enrolled in the pilot trial. We will determine ratings from 
the SUS57 and calculate proportions of each clinician 
group with scores of >85, indicating excellent usability. 

Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

 . 
Library

at Concordia University
 
 

8

We will consider ED-­TREAT to be acceptable if ≥90% 
of each clinician group give ratings >85. For feasibility, 
we will measure the proportion of potentially eligible 
patient visits with successful enrolment and collection of 
all outcomes of interest. Based on our group’s anecdotal 
experience with pilot studies, we will consider a compara-
tive effectiveness trial feasible if ≥30% of visits assessed for 
eligibility are enrolled and ≥90% of all outcome measures 
are collected. Qualitative data obtained from interviews 
will be analysed with Dedoose using the analytic strategy 
mentioned earlier for iterative refinement of the study 
protocol in preparation for a comparative effectiveness 
trial.

ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION
We plan to conduct our study in accordance with the 
Yale Institutional Review Board (IRB). We have obtained 
the necessary regulatory and human subjects protec-
tion approvals for each aspect or phase of our protocol. 
Ethical approval by the Yale University Human Investiga-
tion Committee was obtained in 2021 (HIC# 2000030893 
and 2000030906). After careful review, Yale IRB has 
approved Aim 1 of this study to be eligible for exemp-
tion of full IRB review under 45 CFR 46.104(d)(4), since 
any information collected by the investigator will be in 
such a manner that the identity of the human subjects 
cannot readily be ascertained directly or through identi-
fiers linked to the subjects. Aim 2 of the study has been 
approved as a full protocol for a clinical trial and is under-
going annual continuing review. As we work with struc-
tured EHR patient data, we will maintain deidentification 
where necessary and keep access to datasets secure. 
Additionally, all clinicians and patients participating in 
focus groups, feasibility testing or the pilot trial will be 
informed of their rights as subjects. Clinicians will retain 
the right to retain control of their practice and patients 
will retain the right to not participate and request termi-
nation of participation at any point in the study. All staff, 
participants and patients will provide verbal consent prior 
to involvement with the study. Sample consent forms for 
patients and staff are included as online supplemental 
materials. The pilot trial is registered at ​ClinicalTrials.​gov 
(clinical trial registration number: NCT04959279).
Monitoring for data integrity and safety will be the 
responsibility of the principal investigator (AHW) and 
the Yale Human Investigation Committee, and a data 
safety monitoring board (DSMB). DSMB members will 
be composed of experts in care disparities and health 
equity for vulnerable and disadvantaged populations, 
clinical trials for mental illness and substance use disor-
ders, measurement and risk stratification for disinhibited 
behaviours, and an expert in statistical analysis of clinical 
trials in emergency medicine. Twice annually, the DSMB 
will review the progress of the study and frequency of 
serious adverse events. All adverse events, as well as any 
unanticipated problems that arise, will be reported within 
48 hours to the Human Investigation Committee. A full 

report will be provided annually or on request to the 
IRB and the sponsor’s Programme Official. The effect of 
adverse events on the risk/benefit ratio of the study will 
be re-­evaluated by the investigators with each event, with 
appropriate adjustments made to the protocol or consent 
forms if needed. Given the minimal risk of the study 
and intervention, the investigators do not anticipate the 
occurrence of any serious adverse events.
Results and outcomes of the study will be disseminated 
through peer-­reviewed journals and presentations at rele-
vant scientific meetings throughout the study timeline. A 
successful pilot trial will aid in a future full RCT to fully 
measure the effectiveness of the ED-­TREAT CDS tool in 
agitation management in ED settings. At the time of publi-
cation of any manuscripts that arise from this research, 
the deidentified data for that manuscript will be made 
available to share for scholarly activities. Sharing of the 
data will require a data use agreement to be established 
between the requesting and host institutions. Data will be 
shared through secure file transfer.

Author affiliations
1Yale New Haven Health System, New Haven, Connecticut, USA
2Department of Emergency Medicine, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, 
Connecticut, USA
3Department of Biostatistics, Yale School of Public Health, New Haven, Connecticut, 
USA
4Department of Psychiatry, University of Massachusetts System, Worchester, 
Massachusetts, USA
5Department of Emergency Medicine, Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, 
Lebanon, New Hampshire, USA
6Carolina Health Informatics Program, University of North Carolina System, Chapel 
Hill, North Carolina, USA
7Section of Biomedical Informatics and Data Science, Yale School of Medicine, New 
Haven, Connecticut, USA

Twitter Ambrose H Wong @ambrosehwong, Richard Andrew Taylor @EM_
Informatics and Terika McCall @TelementalHlth

Acknowledgements  We would like to sincerely thank Mr. Justin Laing for his 
contributions to preparing and drafting of the figures within this manuscript.

Contributors  AHW, JD, KAY, SLB and ERM designed the study protocol and 
obtained funding. AHW is responsible for the overall logistical and scientific aspects 
of the study, data collection and analysis, and draft of this manuscript. DS, AK, MB, 
PO and IVF provided administrative and logistical support for the study. BN, RH, 
KA, MB, RAT and TM contributed statistical, scientific and design expertise in the 
development and planned scientific activities of the protocol. All authors contributed 
to critical revisions and gave final approval of the manuscript.

Funding  This study is supported by the National Institute of Mental Health (Award 
Number K23 MH126366).

Disclaimer  The funder had no role in the design or conduct of the study; 
collection, management, analysis, or interpretation of the data; preparation, 
review, or approval of the manuscript; or the decision to submit the manuscript for 
publication.

of Health outside the conduct of the study. ERM reported receiving grants and 
contracts from the National Institute of Health, Agency for Healthcare Research 
and Quality, American Medical Association, and Centers for Medicare & Medicaid 
Services outside of this study. TM reported receiving grants from the National 
Institute of Health, Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, and Google outside 
of this study. TM is a member of the Clinical Diversity Advisory Board at Woebot 
Health and Advisory Board at RACE Space. RH reported receiving salary support 
from the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services to develop, implement, and 
maintain clinical performance outcome measures that are publicly reported, in 
addition to receiving research support from the US Food and Drug Administration, 

Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

 . 
Library

at Concordia University
 
 

9

Open access

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Institute of Health, Connecticut 
Department of Public Health, and from the Community Health Network of 
Connecticut for her work as a medical consultant. All other authors declare no 

Patient and public involvement  Patients and/or the public were involved in the 
design, or conduct, or reporting, or dissemination plans of this research. Refer to 
the Methods section for further details.

Patient consent for publication  Not applicable.

Provenance and peer review  Not commissioned; peer reviewed for ethical and 
funding approval prior to submission.

Supplemental material  This content has been supplied by the author(s). It has 
not been vetted by BMJ Publishing Group Limited (BMJ) and may not have been 
peer-­reviewed. Any opinions or recommendations discussed are solely those 
of the author(s) and are not endorsed by BMJ. BMJ disclaims all liability and 
responsibility arising from any reliance placed on the content. Where the content 
includes any translated material, BMJ does not warrant the accuracy and reliability 
of the translations (including but not limited to local regulations, clinical guidelines, 
terminology, drug names and drug dosages), and is not responsible for any error 
and/or omissions arising from translation and adaptation or otherwise.

Open access  This is an open access article distributed in accordance with the 
Creative Commons Attribution Non Commercial (CC BY-­NC 4.0) license, which 
permits others to distribute, remix, adapt, build upon this work non-­commercially, 
and license their derivative works on different terms, provided the original work is 
properly cited, appropriate credit is given, any changes made indicated, and the use 
is non-­commercial. See: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/.

ORCID iDs
Ambrose H Wong http://orcid.org/0000-0001-7471-1647
Dhruvil Shah http://orcid.org/0009-0003-4120-451X
Anusha Kumar http://orcid.org/0009-0008-2999-7410
Morgan Brinker http://orcid.org/0009-0000-9989-3192
Isaac V Faustino http://orcid.org/0000-0001-7445-4265
Steven L Bernstein http://orcid.org/0000-0002-9964-7036
Karthik Adapa http://orcid.org/0000-0002-3970-588X
Terika McCall http://orcid.org/0000-0002-8143-5393
Edward R Melnick http://orcid.org/0000-0002-6509-9537