Protocol

A Patient-Centered Mobile Phone App (iHeartU) With a Virtual
Human Assistant for Self-Management of Heart Failure: Protocol
for a Usability Assessment Study

Lingling Zhang1, ScD; Sabarish V Babu2, PhD; Meenu Jindal3, MD; Joel E Williams4, PhD; Ronald W Gimbel4, PhD

1College of Nursing and Health Sciences, University of Massachusetts Boston, Boston, MA, United States
2School of Computing, Clemson University, Clemson, SC, United States
3Department of Medicine, Greenville Health System, Greenville, SC, United States
4Department of Public Health Sciences, Clemson University, Clemson, SC, United States

Lingling Zhang, ScD
College of Nursing and Health Sciences
University of Massachusetts Boston
100 Morrissey Blvd
Boston, MA, 02125
United States
Phone: 1 6172877845

Abstract

Background: Heart failure (HF) causes significant economic and humanistic burden for patients and their families, especially
those with a low income, partly due to high hospital readmission rates. Optimal self-care is considered an important
nonpharmacological aspect of HF management that can improve health outcomes. Emerging evidence suggests that self-management
assisted by smartphone apps may reduce rehospitalization rates and improve the quality of life of patients. We developed a virtual
human–assisted, patient-centered mobile health app (iHeartU) for patients with HF to enhance their engagement in self-management
and improve their communication with health care providers and family caregivers. iHeartU may help patients with HF in
self-management to reduce the technical knowledge and usability barrier while maintaining a low cost and natural, effective
social interaction with the user.
Objective: With a standardized systematic usability assessment, this study had two objectives: (1) to determine the obstacles
to effective and efficient use of iHeartU in patients with HF and (2) to evaluate of HF patients’ adoption, satisfaction, and
engagement with regard to the of iHeartU app.
Methods: The basic methodology to develop iHeartU systems consists of a user-centric design, development, and mixed methods
formative evaluation. The iterative design and evaluation are based on the guidelines of the American College of Cardiology
Foundation and American Heart Association for the management of heart failure and the validated “Information, Motivation,
and Behavioral skills” behavior change model. Our hypothesis is that this method of a user-centric design will generate a more
usable, useful, and easy-to-use mobile health system for patients, caregivers, and practitioners.
Results: The prototype of iHeartU has been developed. It is currently undergoing usability testing. As of September 2018, the
first round of usability testing data have been collected. The final data collection and analysis are expected to be completed by
the end of 2019.
Conclusions: The main contribution of this project is the development of a patient-centered self-management system, which
may support HF patients’ self-care at home and aid in the communication between patients and their health care providers in a
more effective and efficient way. Widely available mobile phones serve as care coordination and “no-cost” continuum of care.
For low-income patients with HF, a mobile self-management tool will expand their accessibility to care and reduce the cost
incurred due to emergency visits or readmissions. The user-centered design will improve the level of engagement of patients and
ultimately lead to better health outcomes. Developing and testing a novel mobile system for patients with HF that incorporates
chronic disease management is critical for advancing research and clinical practice of care for them. This research fills in the gap
in user-centric design and lays the groundwork for a large-scale population study in the next phase.

JMIR Res Protoc 2019 | vol. 8 | iss. 5 | e13502 | p. 1

International Registered Report Identifier (IRRID): DERR1-10.2196/13502

(JMIR Res Protoc 2019;8(5):e13502) doi: 10.2196/13502

KEYWORDS
heart failure; mobile health; self-management; patient engagement; virtual human

Introduction

Background

Heart failure (HF) is a chronic condition associated with
significant morbidity, early mortality, and impaired quality of
life (QoL), which poses tremendous economic and humanistic
burden on patients, families, the health care system, and society
[1]. Hospital readmission rates for HF are among the highest
of any chronic disease [1,2]. Half of the patients with HF
experience rehospitalization within 6 months of hospital
discharge [3]. Those previously hospitalized for HF had the
greatest rates of HF rehospitalization or cardiovascular death
[4,5]. Limited access to care may be an additional problem
among patients with limited socioeconomic means. Patients
lacking access to primary care physicians after hospital
discharge often experience clinical deterioration, necessitating
hospital readmission [6]. This problem is especially magnified
with uninsured patients, who may be forced into a cycle of
relying on using costly emergency room visits [7].

According to the American College of Cardiology Foundation
and American Heart Association guidelines for the management
of HF, lack of improvement in health-related quality of life
(HRQoL) after discharge from the hospital is a powerful
predictor of rehospitalization and mortality [8-10], and no
pharmacological therapy is a consistent determinant of HRQoL
[8]. Previous studies have shown that self-management, which
is expected to be integral to both the maintenance of wellness
and the management of illness [11], can improve patients’
HRQoL [12-14]. As most chronic conditions are related to
lifestyle, self-management was designed to meet the needs of
managing daily treatment and life activities to improve health
and health behaviors [11].

Mobile Health and Heart Failure

To foster the ability of patients to practice more effective
self-management and offset the difficulties due to lack of access
to care, telemonitoring systems may be useful tools in reducing
rehospitalization and improving QoL for patients with HF, as
suggested by emerging evidence [1]. However, special digital
devices required for telemonitoring are costly, limiting its
potential for wide use, especially among low-income patients.

Optimal 
self-care 
is 
considered 
an 
important
nonpharmacological aspect of HF management that can improve
health outcomes [15]. Mobile health (mHealth) technologies
have emerged as a way to actively engage patients in
self-management and health care decision-making processes
[16]. The access to mobile phones makes it possible for mHealth
apps to transform treatment adherence through improved

self-management [17]. About 85% of adults aged 65 years or
above in the United States owned a mobile phone, and this
proportion is increasing in all age groups [18]. The use of mobile
phones to manage daily self-management of chronic diseases
has been reported even among older adults with no experience
in technology [14]. However, the dedicated, persistent use of
self-monitoring systems and user engagement rates are still low
[19,20]. Standardized, systematic mHealth usability assessments
need to be performed, but even these have been insufficient in
the past [21]. The Technology Acceptance Model [22]
hypothesized that perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use,
and attitude toward the technology were three factors
determining whether the user would ultimately use or reject the
technology. Patient involvement in the development of new
information and communication technology (ICT) is crucial,
given that the typical patient with chronic disease is an older
adult with difficulties in understanding and using standard ICT
equipment [23]. In order to support acceptance and later
adoption of the new system, the innovation process should
include the perspective of patients and the needs of other
stakeholders in the care of chronic diseases [23].

Virtual Human and Patient Engagement

To date, mobile phone–based apps for HF monitoring and
management have not been widely researched. To address this
gap, iHeartU—a mobile phone app with a novel virtual human
assistant (“iHeartHelper”)—was developed to help patients with
HF in their self-management by providing a holistic engagement
experience (Figure 1). Its prototype has been undergoing
usability testing since April 2018.

Patient engagement is a key mediator for behavior changes in
patients with HF since patients who are engaged as
decision-makers in their care tend to be healthier and have better
outcomes (Figure 1) [17]. The development of iHeartU is based
on the guidelines of the American College of Cardiology
Foundation and American Heart Association for the management
of HF and the validated Information, Motivation, and Behavioral
skills behavior change model. This model emphasizes on
information and knowledge about patient behavior, motivation
to perform the behavior, and the patient’s behavioral skills [24].

A unique feature of this app—iHeartHelper—is an interactive
virtual human or embodied conversational agent that resembles
a human assistant and provides natural social interaction with
users of the system. The personalized conversational interactions
facilitated by the iHeartHelper can increase the engagement of
patients with HF, health care providers, and family caregivers,
which may lead to an improvement in patients’health outcomes
and reduction in hospital readmission rates.

JMIR Res Protoc 2019 | vol. 8 | iss. 5 | e13502 | p. 2

Figure 1. Conceptual framework for iHeartU: IMB model with patient engagement as mediator. HF: heart failure; VR: virtual reality.

There are existing studies that use virtual environment
simulation to treat patients with posttraumatic stress disorder,
fear of heights [25,26], and public speaking anxiety [27] and to
conduct medical training [28]. However, whether the use of
virtual human interface will improve patient engagement has
not been systemically studied. The research assumption of this
study is that a patient-centered mobile phone app with a virtual
human assistant can improve engagement of patients with HF.

Objectives

This study focuses on the user-centered design and assessment
of the iHeartU mobile phone app. Unlike mHealth apps in
previous studies, iHeartU is featured by the use of virtual human
interface, which may involve more assessments in its usability
testing but with the expectation of better user experience.
Usability testing is the term used to describe the assessment of
how easy a user interface is to operate [29]. The objectives of
this study are two-fold: (1) to determine the obstacles to
effective and efficient use of iHeartU among patients with HF
and (2) to evaluate HF patients’ adoption, satisfaction, and
engagement with regard to iHeartU.

Methods

Study Design

A single-arm prospective observation study is currently
underway for the usability assessment of the iHeartU app. A
mixed method design is used for this study, including several
established usability evaluations through surveys, direct
observations, interviews, think-aloud protocol, and focus groups.
Additionally, the researchers have been working closely with
the Patient Engagement Studio (an HF panel of patients and all
stakeholders, including patients, family caregivers, physicians,
nurses, and other health care providers) at Greenville Health

System (GHS) to seek input and feedback on the design,
development, and evaluation process.

Participants

With the approval of the Institutional Review Board of GHS
(Pro00066413), we aim to recruit 10 patients with HF to conduct
the usability testing. The sample size is in accordance with the
existing literature [30,31], where Kushniruk [30] and Vizri [31]
have shown that 70% of severe usability problems can be
discovered by the first five users and up to 85%, by the eighth
user, following which less problems tend be identified, and
these problems are also less significant. Patients are eligible to
participate in this study if they have a clinical diagnosis of HF,
are English-speaking, are able to operate study devices, have a
New York Heart Association Functional Classification I-III,
and are willing to provide informed consent for participating
in the study. Patients are recruited by their direct care team
during scheduled clinic visits. They are informed about the
purpose of the study upon providing written consent for
participation. There are no expected risks or discomforts in the
study other than possible confusion when using iHeartU.
Participation in this study is completely voluntary; therefore,
patients can refuse to participate or withdraw from the study at
any time. Patients who are unable to operate the devices and
have a limited cognitive ability, as determined by the patient’s
clinician, will be excluded from consideration.

Health care providers in the direct care team for patients with
HF, including physicians and nurses, are also involved in the
testing. One representative of each group is asked to complete
the survey questionnaires after providing consent. The research
team collects their feedback and input to provide a helpful
clinical perspective for improving the design of the mobile
phone app.

JMIR Res Protoc 2019 | vol. 8 | iss. 5 | e13502 | p. 3

Measures

An iterative approach is used to refine iHeartU for patients with
HF based on their experience of interacting with this app while
aiming for continual patient satisfaction. Patients will be the
primary users of the app. Health care providers will help identify
patient needs and health problems. The following instruments
and methods will be used to collect data:

•
A demographic and background questionnaire to describe
personal and health information as well as experience with
mobile phone use.
•
Usability evaluation metrics, guided by the International
Organization for Standardization 9241-11 Usability
framework and mobile health usability research [21], to
evaluate effectiveness, efficiency, and satisfaction.
Engagement will be added as the fourth dimension (Table
1).

•
Think-aloud protocol to capture patients’ cognitive
processes while performing representative tasks on the app
[30].
•
Individual interviews with open-ended questions to evaluate
task-specific user satisfaction regarding what study
participants think about the interface and functions of the
app as well as any specific issues that they find confusing.
•
Networked minds survey to evaluate social presence in
terms of communication [32] when the user interacts with
the virtual human assistant.
•
System usage logs to quantify patient engagement with the
system and guide improved app design and development
[33] and nonscheduled patient-initiated feedback to indicate
patient satisfaction and engagement.
•
Focus groups to define the essential expectations and needs
that are personally and clinically relevant and to achieve a
consensus on the key features and functions of iHeartU and
the overall mobile self-management system.

Procedure

The usability assessment will follow the phases below and last
for about 17-24 months.

Enrollment Phase

A panel of patients, family caregivers, and health care providers
was hosted in the GHS Patient Engagement Studio to provide
initial thoughts and suggestions on the preliminary product of

iHeartU. A meeting with a group of health care providers for
patients with HF was also held during the prototype development
for advice on the design. The eligible patients with HF were
introduced for enrollment by their direct care team at GHS.

Intervention Phase

HF patient representatives and health care providers who care
for patients with HF complete the demographic and background
questionnaire, navigate the features of iHeartU, and test its
functions along with the use of supplemental devices. Users
perform predefined tasks by the research team and conduct
interactive conversations with the iHeartHelper to input clinical
variables: weight; systolic and diastolic blood pressure; heart
rate; and subjective reports for medication adherence, dietary
sodium and fluid intake, and physical activity. In case of any
technical difficulty, patients can always choose to enter the data
manually. This assessment is conducted by using usability
evaluation metrics, the think-aloud protocol, individual
interviews, and networked minds survey. The smartphone and
supplemental devices are provided by the research team.

Follow-Up Phase

Iterative usability testing with the improved iHeartU app is
conducted and evaluated among patients after their use at home.
The usability regarding patient engagement is examined by
using system usage logs and the User Engagement Scale. A
focus group discussion is organized with the patient participants
to further identify the essential needs and desirable features and
functions of iHeartU to improve patient satisfaction and
engagement.

Data Analysis

Quantitative analysis will be performed on the survey data. The
descriptive statistics will be summarized on patients’background
and experience. The significance of overall System Usability
Scale [26] will be assessed by using the Student t test [37,38].
The User Engagement Scale [36] and Networked Minds survey
[32] will be used for analysis. The significance of iHeartU use
will also be assessed by comparing the ratio of observed use to
expected use to the hypothetical mean of 1.0 by using the
Student t test [38]. The interrater agreement of raw system
usability scores will be assessed by the intraclass correlation
coefficient with 95% CIs [39]. The Cronbach alpha test will be
performed on the data to evaluate the internal consistency of
the responses.

Table 1. Usability evaluation metrics.

Method
Measure
Aim

Effectiveness
•
•
Direct observation
Task completion: with ease, with minor mistakes, or failure
•
Error coding

Efficiency
•
•
Count
Time used to complete a task

Satisfaction
•
•
Questionnaire
System Usability Scale [34]
•
Poststudy Usability [35]

Engagement
•
•
Questionnaire
User Engagement Scale [36]
•
•
System usage log
Built-in tracker

JMIR Res Protoc 2019 | vol. 8 | iss. 5 | e13502 | p. 4

Qualitative analysis will be performed on the data collected
through think-aloud protocol, individual interviews, and focus
groups by using the Grounded Theory to identify emerging
themes directly from patients’ own words and thoughts. Each
think-aloud protocol will be reviewed line-by-line by two
researchers in order to reach a consensus on the coding. The
ease of use will be assessed and coded by scrutinizing the
recorded details (such as facial expression and finger movement)
of patients’performance on using iHeartU. Individual interviews
and focus group discussions will be analyzed using the constant
comparative method. The transcript will be reviewed and coded
for recurrent themes independently by two researchers. Themes
will be combined by agreement of the two researchers who will
create theme tags based on the recurrent themes, and the
transcripts will be rereviewed collaboratively by the two
researchers in order to tag all instances of the themes. Major
themes and subthemes will be developed via an iterative review
process.

Results

Development of iHeartU

The development of iHeartU started in May 2017 with
developmental approval from the Office of Compliance at
Clemson University. Institutional review board approval was
obtained (#Pro00066413) from the GHS in October 2017. The
prototype of the mobile phone app has been produced. The
screenshot of its interface with the iHeartHelper is indicated in
Figure 2. A variety of outfits for the iHeartHelper and
background options are available for random picking every time
when the user opens the app. Key self-care behaviors, including
adherence to prescribed HF therapies such as medications,
dietary sodium and fluid restrictions, and exercise, are built into
the daily checkup page [40]. Besides these HF therapies, patients
are taught to recognize and manage changes in symptoms and
seek health advice when such changes occur.

The iHeartHelper proactively engages the patient at times
prescribed by the clinician; requests the patient to provide a

report of their general progress, medications, activity, and other
behavioral aspects via natural dialogue; and records the patient’s
responses as audio files. Real-world interactions between
physicians and patients were shadowed at the GHS Heart Failure
Clinic by the research team and used to enrich the conversation
scenarios with the iHeartHelper. The sample scripts are
demonstrated in Textbox 1. A closed caption is installed to meet
the needs of patients who may have hearing impairment. The
iHeartHelper’s speech speed can be customized as per the
patients’ preference.

The iHeartHelper serves as a health assistant who checks on
the health of the patient three times daily and records vital signs,
diet, fluid intake, weight, and any symptom that the patient
would like to report. The objective data are manually input by
the patient in the current development phase, with error checking
for a numeric format. Patients receive a push notification to
remind them to open the app when it passes the preset time.
Patients have the facility at any time to convey messages and
alerts to their health care provider and caregivers by reporting
issues to the iHeartHelper through audio recording. Two
representative screenshots are illustrated in Figures 3 and 4.

Audio files as well as other data can be periodically uploaded
by a reporting module to a central data repository, which allows
the health care provider to monitor the patient’s progress as
needed via a Web-based interface (Figure 5). The Web portal
for health care providers has also been developed and linked
with the iHeartHelper (Figure 6). The audio files and any
information (eg, vital signs and weight) recorded by the patient
can be accessed by the care team (eg, physician, physician
assistant, nurse, and disease manager). Once the patient’s data
exceed the predefined thresholds with respect to the clinical
guideline and physician’s suggestions, the health care provider
will be alerted. According to the severity of the situation, the
health care provider can send a message to the patient through
the portal to give him/her suggestions or schedule a phone call
or visit. The message is delivered to the patient by the
iHeartHelper. There are two-stage confirmations to ensure that
the message is delivered to the patient.

Figure 2. Example of the interface of iHeartHelper.

JMIR Res Protoc 2019 | vol. 8 | iss. 5 | e13502 | p. 5

Textbox 1. Sample scripts of the conversation scenarios between the virtual human assistant (iHeartHelper) and the patient.

Have you had anything to eat since we last talked?

•
Yes - What did you have to eat?

•
No - Please be sure to eat three times daily!

What fluids have you had to drink today and how much of each did you drink? Have you taken your medication for this meal yet?

•
Yes - Great!

•
No - Please remember to take your medications at every meal.

Have you done any exercise since our last session?

•
Yes - what kinds of activities did you do?

•
No - Alright, try to do a little bit of exercise every day.

Have you felt any shortness of breath since we last spoke?

•
Yes - Can you please describe the shortness of breath and when it happened?

•
No - Okay, good! Remember to always alert your doctor immediately if you feel any shortness of breath.

Do you have any other symptoms you would like your doctor to be aware of?

•
Yes - What are the symptoms that are worrying you?

•
No - Okay, please keep your doctor informed if you experience any unexpected symptoms.

Figure 3. Example of daily check-up and monitoring by the iHeartHelper.

JMIR Res Protoc 2019 | vol. 8 | iss. 5 | e13502 | p. 6

Figure 4. Example of follow-up and notifications by the iHeartHelper.

Figure 5. Data transfer structure for iHeartU patient-centered mobile self-management system. CG: caregiver.

Usability Assessment

Two panel meetings with all key stakeholder representatives,
including patients, family caregivers, and health care providers,
have already been conducted to collect inputs and suggestions
at the GHS Patient Engagement Studio before and during the
development of iHeartU. The feedback was also solicited from
a meeting with health care providers in the Department of
Internal Medicine and the Department of Cardiology at GHS.
The suggestions from the stakeholders and health care providers
were incorporated into the iHeartU development for usability
testing. Enrollment of study participants began in January 2018.

As of September 2018, the preliminary data collection in the
intervention phase has been completed. The follow-up phase is
expected to be completed and the entire usability testing is
expected to be concluded by the end of 2019. The data will be
analyzed accordingly, and the results will be submitted for
publication upon completion of the study. Two representatives
of health care providers will be invited to conduct a usability
assessment following the same process as patients and provide
inputs from their perspectives. Their feedback will serve as
important supplemental information to guide further
improvement on iHeartU. Thus far, testing has been completed
by a physician in the direct care team.

JMIR Res Protoc 2019 | vol. 8 | iss. 5 | e13502 | p. 7

Figure 6. Screenshot of the Web portal for health care providers.

Discussion

Uniqueness of iHeartU

The main contribution of this work is the development of an
HF patient–centered self-management system with a virtual
human interface, which may support patients’self-care at home
and strengthen communications among patients, health care
providers, and family caregivers for better care transition and
coordination. To our knowledge, this is the first mobile phone
app with a virtual human interface for HF self-management.

There are several foreseeable advantages to this design of
iHeartU. First, the virtual human assistants can carry out
conversations proactively to record a daily log for patients’
self-management behaviors. Since most patients with HF are
older adults with relatively lower rates of technology adaption,
the intuitive voice-based data collection and easy-to-use features
are better than the features of traditional mobile apps that require
patients to manually input data. The interactive process aims to
resemble the clinical workflow in reality but be more proactive
with closer monitoring on patients. Second, the virtual human
interface may provide more psychological comfort and
companion to patients with HF by sharing news, weather, and
jokes with patients to make daily conversions more engaging
and socially motivating. Third, the virtual human interface
provides personalized health coaching through virtual
“face-to-face” communications using education materials
tailored for patients’ individual situation. Fourth, the virtual

human interface serves as a digital personal assistant to remind
patients of their daily medication use, which may improve
patients’ compliance to HF therapies. This virtual assistant can
also remind patients of their physician office visits and facilitate
their follow-up visits. This feature will be expected to expand
their accessibility to care, improve care coordination, and reduce
the cost incurred due to unnecessary emergency visits or
readmissions, especially for low-income patients with HF. Fifth,
data collection via this mobile self-management system in
community settings may lay the groundwork for future clinical
studies and big data analysis.

Further Development of iHeartU

Besides the embedded functions described above, the
Bluetooth-enabled devices (eg, weight scale and blood pressure
monitor) will be integrated into iHeartU. For patients with these
Bluetooth sensors, data will be automatically transmitted to
iHeartU. They can also choose to record their data with
validation and error checking. The manual input option will be
still available as a backup.

A personalized customization on the iHeartHelper such as
gender, race, and age will be developed. The entertainment
features will also be embedded in the app. The iHeartHelper
can talk about jokes and report the weather and news as per the
user’s commands. Such interaction may resemble the interaction
of the user with Alexa and Siri. The iHeartHelper will put on
an outfit according to the weather change as well, for instance,
wearing a rain coat when it is raining.

JMIR Res Protoc 2019 | vol. 8 | iss. 5 | e13502 | p. 8

During the usability assessment, besides testing the
close-to-finish product, a list of desirable features will be
obtained from the end users to know their thoughts and solicit
feedbacks. Thereafter, further development and improvement
will be undertaken and tailored to the needs of patients based
on the outcome of the usability testing.

The Web portal for health care providers will be further
enhanced. In addition, the mobile phone app for family
caregivers will be developed. The caregiver app will show the
real-time patient’s data (with the patient’s consent) and receive
messages from the patient’s health care providers, so that he/she
can help monitor the patient’s health. An overall assessment
will be conducted on the entire mobile self-management system
after its full development.

Conclusions

Findings from the standardized usability testing on iHeartU will
be used to refine its preliminary design and contents, which
may enhance its implementation and dissemination in the later
phases. Such a usability testing model can be translational and
adapted to other health management programs through
disease-specific customization with the involvement of patients
and key stakeholders. Further research is needed to establish a
standardized, systematic mHealth usability assessment for
chronic HF patient care, which can improve methodological
consistency and make it possible to compare findings across
different mHealth app evaluations [41].