PROGRAM CASE STUDY

Applying Human-Centered Design to Replicate an Adolescent
Sexual and Reproductive Health Intervention: A Case Study of
Binti Shupavu in Kenya

Nancy Njoki,a Meghan Cutherell,b Abednego Musau,c David Mireri,a Alex Nana-Sinkam,d Mary Phillipsb

Key Findings

n
Human-centered design (HCD) has the potential
to be a powerful tool for replication of evidence-
based interventions and guide decision-making
on which program components to adapt and
which to maintain.

n
An adolescent reproductive health intervention in
Kenya provides a case study for the use of HCD
during replication to quickly build on lessons from
existing contexts while adapting for the new users
when needed.

n
Binti Shupavu, the intervention resulting from the
design process, replicates an existing user
journey to support adolescent contraceptive use
while still being responsive to the unique needs of
adolescent girls in Kenya. In the first year, more
than 21,000 girls became new contraceptive
users after participating in the intervention.

Key Implications

n
Program managers looking to translate evidence-
based interventions to new contexts should
consider applying HCD processes to effectively
build on valuable knowledge and learning while
ensuring the intervention meets the needs of the
new target audience.

n
Public health practitioners working in HCD should
share additional experiences of using design for
replication to build the evidence base and theory
of change for this work.

ABSTRACT
We present a case study describing the use of human-centered
design (HCD) to determine how to adapt intervention components
from an existing contraceptive uptake program for adolescent girls
in 4 geographical contexts (Ethiopia, northern Nigeria, southern
Nigeria, and Tanzania) for use in Kenya. First, we prioritized
existing intervention components to be tested in Kenya using sacri-
ficial concepts. Through these concepts, we identified key insights
and behavioral archetypes from which to build higher-fidelity pro-
totypes, leveraging existing program knowledge and resources
while responding to unique opportunities for Kenyan adolescent
girls. After 2 rounds of prototyping, we launched a high-fidelity in-
tervention designed to improve contraceptive uptake among girls.
We used program experience to identify strategies for improvement
during early implementation. The resulting model, Binti Shupavu, is
designed to tap into girls’ aspirations and connect them with con-
traceptive use, build their trust in the health system, and work with
influencers to build support for adolescent contraceptive use, follow-
ing the global user journey. In the first year of implementation
(January–December 2022), the intervention was scaled from 90 fa-
cilities to 360 facilities and reached 60,111 adolescent girls aged
10–19 years. Of these, 21,698 were new voluntary contraceptive
users (36%) and an additional 3,873 (19%) were continuing users.
Our design process suggests that HCD is a promising tool for
navigating replication. The emphasis on users’ perspectives, test-
ing to learn, and collaboration facilitated a deep understanding
of the new user population, thus guiding program designers to
balance using existing components with developing new ones
based on the population’s unique needs. Finally, HCD has poten-
tial to support the localization agenda if design teams are sup-
ported by national, regional, and global experts to be aware of
and use the evidence and implementation experience from earlier
work.

INTRODUCTION
I

n Kenya, 40% of all women of reproductive age are
younger than 24 years. Two of 3 sexually active un-
married girls and 1 in 4 married girls aged 15–19 years
has an unmet need for contraception.1 As girls transition
to adulthood, they have a critical need for accurate and
relevant sexual and reproductive health information
and services. Adolescents, especially adolescent girls,
face a wide range of well-documented social, systemic,
economic, and political barriers that prevent them from
accessing information and support at a time when they

aPopulation Services Kenya, Nairobi, Kenya.
bPopulation Services International, Washington, DC, USA.
cPopulation Services International, Nairobi, Kenya.
dIDEO.org, Nairobi, Kenya.
Correspondence to Abednego Musau (amusau@psi.org).

1

are most in need.2 These barriers include system-
level limitations, such as weak supply chains,
laws limiting the provision of contraception to
minors, health provider bias, as well as user-
level barriers, including social pressure to prove
fertility, stigma surrounding use, fear of side
effects, and poor knowledge about the available
options and correct usage of contraceptive meth-
ods.3,4 Designing solutions that overcome these
barriers requires innovation and a multisectoral
response. There is also growing agreement in the
community of practice—researchers, policymakers,
and implementers included—that young people
have a right to participate in the design and imple-
mentation of programs and bring important insights
and experiences that can be used to develop more
responsive programming.5–7

Human-centered design (HCD) has increas-
ingly been recognized as a valuable tool to tackle
the complex challenges that the global health
community faces and to address community needs
by facilitating faster innovation, better collabora-
tion, and more effective scale.8,9 HCD, as applied
to public health, can be defined as an iterative
and participatory approach to building global
health interventions that achieve health impact
in close collaboration with end users.8 HCD pro-
vides tools that allow teams to quickly and easily
test and build on ideas, make strategic pivots based
on learning, and make decisions alongside end
users in a way that cedes power to participants
and gives greater assurance that the resulting in-
tervention will be effective, desirable, and sustain-
able.7 Yet, a potential challenge in the application
of HCD in global health is that, to respond to
specific end-user needs, the responsiveness of
solutions—how “tailored” they are to unique
user and context needs—is often prioritized
over opportunities to build on already estab-
lished evidence-based practice.10

Transference of evidence-based interventions
from one context to another, with rigid adherence
to program fidelity and without adapting for new
conditions and intended populations, risks less ef-
fective interventions.11,12 Guidance for scaling up
such practices consistently recognizes the need
to adapt interventions to fit with the new imple-
mentation context.13,14 Frameworks to clarify the
factors affecting implementation of health interven-
tions suggest that characteristics at the structural,
organizational, provider, client, and innovation
levels influence and interfere with the implementa-
tion outcomes of health interventions.15 Given the
wide-ranging factors of influence, it is not surprising
that the evidence base for adapting interventions in

new contexts is complex and that the differences
across context, team, and health system capacity
can make it difficult to understand why interven-
tions succeed or fail in new settings.16–18 Correctly
navigating the tension between what program
components should be maintained and what
should be adapted is one of the most challenging
tasks in an adaptation exercise.16–19

Interventions adapted for a new health system
must respect the capabilities of that system or risk
failure to be sustained. However, interventions
with a singular focus on health system capacity,
without attention to user needs and preference,
especially among vulnerable populations, are likely
to be underaccessed and fail to address health
disparity.20,21

We present a case study of work done to repli-
cate an intervention targeting improvements in
contraceptive use among adolescent girls in low-
income countries in a new geography—Kenya.
Replication, as we defined it, is the effort to repro-
duce, in a new setting, the positive results of an in-
tervention that has already been shown to be
effective. Rather than copy the existing intervention
exactly, we sought to recreate the key components
of the intervention in a contextually appropriate
way. This allowed us to replicate the essence of the
intervention instead of just the form.19 We hypoth-
esized that HCD, with its focus on building solutions
in partnership with users and rapid iteration based
on real-world testing, could provide a structured
process to guide decision-making on whether to re-
tain or adapt intervention components to improve
fit for the new context. We explain how we used
HCD to guide our replication process in 5 counties
in Kenya, the resulting intervention, and the lessons
learned.

REPLICATION OBJECTIVE

Adolescents 360
In 2016, Population Services International and its
consortium of partners launched Adolescents
360 (A360) with funding from the Bill & Melinda
Gates Foundation and the Children’s Investment
Fund Foundation. In its first investment phase
(2016–2020), A360 worked directly with young peo-
ple to design and deliver interventions that increase
demand for and voluntary uptake of modern contra-
ception among adolescent girls aged 15–19 years.
A360 designed and implemented 4 unique interven-
tions across 3 countries—Smart Start in Ethiopia,
Kuwa Mjanja in Tanzania, Matasa Matan Arewa in
northern Nigeria, and 9ja Girls in southern Nigeria.22

Each intervention leads with discussion of girls’

Transference of
evidence-based
interventions from
one context to
another, with rigid
adherence to
program fidelity
and without
adapting for new
conditions and
intended
populations, risks
less effective
interventions.

2

aspirations, inclusive of motherhood, and then
positions contraception as a tool that can assist
girls and, as relevant, couples to achieve their
goals. In addition, the approach strengthens the
health system to respond to the unique needs of
adolescents and to provide adolescent girls with a
full array of short- and long-acting contraceptive
method options in a supportive environment.
The external evaluation of A360’s interventions
showed their promise in addressing the reproduc-
tive health needs of adolescents. At a population
level, although the interventions did not lead to
increased use of modern contraceptives across all
geographies, they demonstrated improved out-
comes among girls who were exposed to the
interventions. The evaluation concluded that
these novel approaches needed to be accompa-
nied by intensified efforts to address the contex-
tual drivers of low modern contraceptive use,
especially when intended for unmarried adoles-
cents who face unique stigma around contracep-
tive use.23,24

The A360 Global User Journey is a visual rep-
resentation of key touchpoints the programming
offers adolescent girls to support their decision to
take up and continue to use a contraceptive meth-
od and reflects the general activities (mobilization,
aspirational engagement, counseling and service
delivery, and follow-up), as well as the mindsets
and emotions, the interventions seek to prompt
at each stage (Figure 1).25 This journey is a synthe-
sis of our experience in Ethiopia, Nigeria, and

Tanzania and served as a blueprint for replication
activities.

Replication in Kenya
In its second investment phase (2020–2025),
A360 received funding to expand its programming
into Kenya. With HCD as a key tool, the project
crafted a strategy to replicate its global user jour-
ney in Kenya, building on components of the pre-
viously designed interventions as well as lessons
learned from the first phase of programming to ac-
celerate the timeline. Additionally, we sought to
use this replication in Kenya as an opportunity to
strengthen areas identified for improvement in
the first investment phase. Priority areas included
long-term potential for institutionalization in gov-
ernment systems for sustainability and more em-
phasis on gender-transformative programming
addressing contextual barriers to contraceptive
use. This process aimed to generate a final inter-
vention design in Kenya that built on our existing
user journey for contraceptive uptake and contin-
uation among adolescent girls while also ensuring
the output was uniquely suited to the needs and
preferences of adolescent girls in Kenya.

REPLICATION APPROACH USING
HCD
The design team consisted of program staff from
Population Services Kenya, A360’s local imple-
menting partner in Kenya, technical support

FIGURE 1. Summary of the A360 Global User Journey

3

from Population Services International staff based
in the United States and Kenya, and members of
IDEO.org who were based in Kenya and the
United States. Due to COVID-19 restrictions, only
members of Population Services Kenya participat-
ed in program implementation work. For this pro-
cess, we adopted the IDEO.org HCD framework
because of its simple structure, focus on design
mindsets, and the design team’s familiarity with it
from previous HCD work.26 On top of this frame-
work, we layered subphases to create clarity on
the goals and steps of each part of the process, tak-
ing advantage of the existing body of evidence and
experience that was generated in the first phase of
A360. The process outlined in the framework is
the same process we followed to develop the inter-
ventions in the program geographies in the first
phase. Two notable additions include the decision
to use design briefs to define our objectives and to
begin design implementation work with sacrificial
concepts rather than from scratch.
Sacrificial concepts are early, raw concepts
that are made visual or physical and used as a tool
to encourage reactions, responses, and discussion
among users and design teams.27 They are
designed to be quickly discarded if they do not
work well. Typically, when used early in a design
process, these are highly conceptual and may be
provocative or outrageous, designed to elicit sub-
stantial feedback and insight. We chose to use
stripped-down components of our own program-
ming as sacrificial concepts, hypothesizing that
there would be 2 benefits to this approach. First,
we knew why different components worked in
our other geographies; if something worked or
did not work in Kenya, we might be able to as-
sume a similar underlying condition or motiva-
tion. Second, these components were all well
developed, with assets, facilitation guides, and
multiple iterations. If a rough concept was appeal-
ing in Kenya, it would be easier to develop the
prototype to a higher fidelity.
To support the emphasis on replication, our
design partner introduced and encouraged the
mindset of “designing forward,” with a focus on
creating low-fidelity prototypes to test existing
assumptions, thereby accelerating the insight-
gathering process. These subphases were mapped
to the project timeline (Figure 2).

METHODS

Study Setting
We conducted the HCD process in 5 counties
across 10 subcounties: Kabondo Kasipul and

Karachuonyo (Homabay), Suna East and Suna
West (Migori), Kajiado Central and Kajiado East
(Kajiado), Narok North and Narok South (Narok),
and Kilifi South and Magarini (Kilifi). Given their
demographic similarities and geographic proximity,
we grouped Homabay and Migori together in a re-
search and design cluster and Narok and Kajiado to-
gether while Kilifi remained on its own. As part of a
process evaluation, the project’s learning and evalu-
ation partner conducted qualitative research on the
replication activities and collected lessons from the
perspective of designers and programmers based pri-
marily in Kenya and the United States.

Participant Recruitment
Participants for the design and process evaluation
were recruited using purposive sampling to ensure
diversity of respondents within the subpopulation
of adolescent girls (married, unmarried, in-school,
out-of-school, and with and without children).
Community health volunteers, health providers,
and the program team members familiar with the
community used recruitment scripts to identify and
invite potential participants. Recruiters linked eligi-
ble and interested individuals to the design and re-
search team. All participants received detailed
information about the design and evaluation pro-
cess, its goals, and expectations for their involve-
ment and provided written consent before their
involvement.

Data Collection Methods
During the design process (January to November
2021), the design team engaged 677 adolescent
girls, 49 husbands of adolescent girls, 195 mothers
of adolescent girls, and 145 community influen-
cers (including local government officials, reli-
gious leaders, chamas [savings group members],
and leaders of community-based organizations).
In each phase, we included adolescent girls and
their key influencers. We applied a range of meth-
ods drawn from qualitative research and design
practice with the goal of deepening our under-
standing of our audience and how best to address
their barriers to contraception use (Table 1). For
all data collection methods, the tools were devel-
oped in English and translated into the local lan-
guage in each county: Dholuo in Homabay and
Migori, Masai in Kajiado and Narok, and Kiswahili
in Kilifi. The design team responsible for data col-
lection consisted of trained youth innovation
champions (Kenyans aged 18–25 years employed
by the project to build rapport and trust with inter-
view participants, as well as contribute their lived

4

experience as young people), research assis-
tants, and county health officials. The design
team used an iterative process, choosing from a
predefined set of data collection tools but main-
taining flexibility to shift between different
methods in response to the insights gathered in
real-time from participants. This iterative pro-
cess allowed teams to be more experimental
and quickly discard prototypes that did not
work well. In turn, it allowed the team to focus
on methods that provided deeper insights and
fostered meaningful engagement between the
design team and participants.
Process evaluation activities took place be-
tween May and December 2021 and included 2 fo-
cus group discussions with adolescent girls in
Kajiado (n¼10) and Kilifi (n¼8) counties and 14
in-depth interviews (8 Kenya-based program
members, 3 health workers in Kajiado and Kilifi
counties, 2 global staff members, and 1 staff mem-
ber from IDEO.org). Process evaluators also partic-
ipated in key reflection moments in the design
process and reviewed project documents.

Program monitoring data were used to track
implementation
following
the
design
phase.
Providers located at participating health facilities
captured key performance indicators (Table 2) us-
ing existing contraceptive uptake indicators in the
national health information management system
that were reported and visualized on DHIS2. For
indicators not available through the health infor-
mation management system, we implemented a
parallel data collection system consisting of inter-
vention activity tools.

Data Analysis
Notes and interview responses were initially written
by hand by design team members. Additionally,
some interviews were recorded, and an assigned re-
search assistant managed the digital files and was re-
sponsible for transcription after the end of the
implementation work. Each day, the team gathered
for “downloads,” where team members shared par-
ticipant responses that were notable or surprising,
including quotes. As a result of travel limitations
due to COVID-19, we leveraged a digital whiteboard

FIGURE 2. Replication Intervention Design Approach Timeline Phases

Abbreviation: ASRH, adolescent sexual and reproductive health.

5

platform (Miro) to record and document the process
with the global design team. Data were recorded di-
rectly onto Miro or written in a Word document and
later transferred to Miro. After the completion of
data collection, the design team met to review the
data. Data were first grouped deductively into key
themes. These themes were then reviewed by a
multistakeholder team and used to develop insights

that spoke to realities or challenges on the ground or
key areas of interest for the design process. These
insights were reviewed by a team of technical
experts for accuracy, usefulness, and originality be-
fore being finalized. Transcripts from the process
evaluation were analyzed by the research team de-
ductively using thematic analysis as suggested by
Braun and Clarke.28

TABLE 1. Design Methods Used by Design Phase and Type of Participants Involved to Replicate an Adolescent Sexual and
Reproductive Health Intervention in Kenya

HCD Phase
Methods
Participants

Insight gathering and synthesis

Individual interviews


Focus group discussions


Photo-narratives: Participants are asked to spend a full day taking photos of
their daily activities and describe these to data collectors.


29 adolescent girls


9 community influencers

Prototyping

Skits: Data collectors either act out or ask participants to act out a fictional
scenario to gain audience reactions.


Card sorting: Data collectors provide participants with a set of cards on a
specific topic and ask them to sort them in various ways and provide reasons
for their responses.


Vox props: Data collectors provide a short prompt to participants (often in the
form of a story) and ask them questions to understand their reactions and
opinions.


Sample advertising: Data collectors present different branded materials and
ask participants to explain what they do and do not find appealing.


78 adolescent girls


16 husbands of adolescent girls


21 mothers of adolescent girls


34 community influencers

Live prototyping

Small-scale implementation: Design teams create a version of the intervention that
can be run under real-world conditions to assess feasibility. Data collection meth-
ods include participant observation, quantitative monitoring of behaviors, and
qualitative interviews to understand what appealed to participants and what did or
did not prompt new behaviors or outcomes.


570 adolescent girls


33 husbands of adolescent girls


174 mothers of adolescent girls


102 community influencers

TABLE 2. Key Performance Indicators Captured to Monitor Adolescent Sexual and Reproductive Health Intervention Performance
Post-Design in Kenya

6

Ethical Approval
Ethical approvals were obtained for all phases of
the design process as well as for process evaluation
activities from the AMREF Ethics and Scientific
Review Committee (approval number P926-2021)
in Kenya. Permissions were obtained from the rele-
vant government departments from the 5 counties.

HCD PHASES

Insight Gathering and Synthesis
We began the insight-gathering and synthesis
phase with the goal of rapidly understanding sim-
ilarities and differences in Kenya compared to the
earlier project geographies. With this understand-
ing, the design team could make more informed
decisions about which intervention components
were likely to be effective. To do this, the team be-
gan by studying the interventions developed for
other geographies in the first phase, breaking
them into their component parts and creating
rough prototypes of those components to serve as
sacrificial concepts. To complement this, we also
used traditional inquiry methods, such as in-
depth interviews and focus group discussions
with the participants listed in Table 1.

Together, the design team assessed the differ-
ent interventions and prioritized the 2 that were
the most promising for the selected counties in
Kenya based on shared demographics and cultural
context. We chose the interventions with unmar-
ried adolescent girls in southern Nigeria (9ja Girls)
and Tanzania (Kuwa Mjanja). Additionally, the
team examined the components of each interven-
tion and chose those considered core to driving
voluntary contraceptive uptake and continuation
while in need. This process resulted in a final set
of 11 sacrificial concepts (Figure 3).
Girls’ and influencers’ reactions to the sacrifi-
cial concepts, as well as the corresponding inter-
views, helped us understand the topics that
interested girls, how they thought about and
accessed health services, and the intervention
components that were attractive to this audience.
Using these data, the team synthesized 7 key
insights. These insights provided an initial idea of
the design opportunities that existed to address
the barriers girls encountered to contraceptive
use and autonomy (Table 3). The insights were
consistent with the barriers identified in the global
evidence base and similar to those identified in
other project geographies. This validated for the

FIGURE 3. Sacrificial Concepts to Determine Topics of Interest for Adolescent Sexual and Reproductive Health
Intervention

The design team
assessed the
different
interventions and
prioritized the
2 that were the
most promising
for the selected
counties in Kenya
based on shared
demographics
and cultural
context.

7

TABLE 3. Themes From Insight Synthesis and Design Opportunities to Address Barriers to Adolescent Girls’ Contraceptive Use and
Autonomy

Insight
Description
Illustrative Quotes
Design Opportunities

Wayfinding amid an ocean of
misinformation
Despite girls’ curiosity to better under-
stand contraceptive options, accessing
information often felt overwhelming
and confusing without clear support in
navigating misinformation.

“If the methods don’t work with your
blood. . . you can easily get pregnant.”
—Adolescent girl in Migori
“When I hear contraception. . . it means
the user doesn’t want to get many
children.”
—Adolescent girl, Kajiado

How might we design approachable and
convenient access points for girls and their
surrounding communities to receive accu-
rate information?
How might we frame education around
myths and misconceptions as a community-
wide goal and not just a burden on girls?

Experiencing fear at the
forefront
Girls experienced fear, shame, and
uncertainty when learning about con-
traceptive methods and thus did not
feel empowered to explore their bod-
ies or their choices.

“When you adopt a contraception meth-
od you must hide it so that your parents &
friends won’t consider you as a person
with loose morals.”
—Adolescent girl, Narok

How might we equip girls to identify, ex-
press, and overcome the fears that they are
experiencing when learning about contra-
ceptive methods?
How might we support the community sur-
rounding girls to understand the impact
they have on how she feels about her body
and choices throughout adolescence?

Discretion and privacy
Girls valued access points to discuss
their concerns and options but re-
quired more discretion than was often
offered to feel safe in expressing
themselves openly.

“I tell or ask my family or a friend be-
cause then it remains private.”
—Adolescent girl, Homabay

How might we create opportunities for girls
to discreetly engage in conversations about
SRH on their own terms?
How might we design SRH programming
that offers girls both the support of an en-
couraging community alongside the right
amount of discretion and privacy?

Enabling the community to
support and champion girls
The community surrounding girls sig-
nificantly impacted her beliefs and
concerns; although most mothers,
fathers, and partners wanted to help,
they lacked the information and expo-
sure needed to guide the adolescent
girl on her SRH journey.

“Boyfriends & men don’t know much &
also don’t want to hear that you have
adopted contraceptives because they
also have similar concerns about its neg-
ative effects.”
—Adolescent girl, Homabay
“Nani kama Mama –who is better than
mum” – she won’t fear to tell you the truth
and she wants the best for you in life.”
—Adolescent girl, Kilifi

How might we enable role models and
influencers to support girls in accessing
supportive information when making SRH-
related decisions?
How might we build awareness with role
models and influencers as to the importance
of their role and the potential of their influ-
ence on a girl’s life and decision-making
power?

Her experience in facilities, her
relationship to providers
Health facilities were where girls
needed to go to get access to informa-
tion and services, but they didn’t trust
providers, nor did they feel like these
spaces were for them.

“I was in the hospital and the doctor told
me that these methods are being phased
out because of the side effects. Especially
the injection method.”
—Adolescent girl, Migori

How might we engage and equip health
facilities and providers to strengthen their
youth and girl-friendly services and offers?
How might we support girls in understand-
ing their rights, building a practice of open
expression of concerns and shameless de-
sire for informed decision-making about
their bodies?

Building her confidence for the
future.
Adolescent girls’ dreams were bound
by their exposure to what was possi-
ble. Girls were well aware of the diffi-
culties and challenges of building
toward nontraditional goals, like con-
tinuing education or entrepreneurship.
She needed a “reality check” but also
belief from those surrounding her that
she was capable, despite the chal-
lenges, and that she could learn and
grow toward more.

“We are a digital generation and you
should consider upskilling us with so-
phisticated skills -not the usual basics.”
—Adolescent girl, Migori
“The boy child should also be included in
the education, so that they [support us
and] don’t idle around and get us into
temptation.”
—Adolescent girl, Homabay

How might we ensure programming
includes resources and tools that equip the
adolescent girl to dream forward for herself
– whether that’s starting a family, continu-
ing her education, or becoming a business-
woman?
How might we consider dissolving the gen-
der barrier in future-forward programming,
including the perspective of the adolescent
boy and seeking to transform adolescent
boys into supporters, collaborators, and
advocates?

Continued

8

design team that it made sense to try and replicate
the existing user journey. Design opportunities
were articulated in the form of “how might we”
questions, which reframe the problem to encour-
age the generation of solutions.

User Archetype Identification
An additional activity during this phase was to de-
velop behavioral archetypes of the different ado-
lescent girls based on findings from insight
gathering (Figure 4). Archetypes (sometimes
known as personas) are a way to synthesize
insights collected to define the needs, goals, and
challenges of different types of user groups.29 We
used the archetypes to create clarity on which
type of girls the intervention should be designed
for, as the archetypes showed that subpopulations
of girls had different levels of need for and barriers
to using contraception. With limited resources,
the project had to narrow its focus to priority
archetypes to develop successful solutions. Across
the archetypes, all girls demonstrated a strong de-
sire to access information about sexual reproduc-
tive health to make their own choices about their
bodies and their futures. The team chose to focus
on the “devoted wife” and “resolute mother,” as
these 2 groups offered the greatest potential for
impact (unmet need for contraception) and scale
(largest population). The use of behavioral arche-
types in addition to demographic data allowed the
design team to deepen its understanding of which
existing interventions were most promising in the
Kenyan context. The “resolute mother” was simi-
lar to the girls reached in Tanzania, but the addi-
tional focus in Kenya on the “devoted wife”
meant that the design team could consider compo-
nents from our programming for married girls in

Ethiopia and northern Nigeria. These decisions
also meant that key influencers we needed to
reach would include both mothers of the adoles-
cent girls (who were often still helping to support
the “resolute mother” group) and husbands.

Prototyping
The design team then used the insights, opportu-
nities, and archetypes to build a set of prototypes
(Figure 5). A prototype is a preliminary version of
a product or service that invites the end user to
experience the design idea and is realistic enough
for the user to provide substantive feedback but
does not require substantial resources to build.
Findings from this phase helped our design team
test in small-scale ways intervention components
that would be effective among Kenyan adoles-
cents and their influencers in attaining better
SRH outcomes.
These prototypes built on the initial sacrificial
concepts identified as promising after the insight
gathering phase. As concepts were developed, we
incorporated additional components from the
project’s other interventions to make them more
robust. For example, because mothers were iden-
tified by girls as key influencers, the project was
able to adapt messages developed in southern
Nigeria for mothers of adolescent girls. At the
same time, there were some unique prototypes
proposed in Kenya because of specific needs and
opportunities identified in this context, as well as
our added focus on programming for the enabling
environment. Although the team borrowed the
messages from Nigeria, they found that audiences
in Kenya responded better to storytelling than lec-
tures or information-sharing, and so developed
ways to share key messages with mothers in

TABLE 3. Continued

Insight
Description
Illustrative Quotes
Design Opportunities

Self-expression, optimism, and
ownership
She was excited and curious about her
future; she craved support to build her
confidence and take ownership over
her own story.

“Girls would like to have the ability to
make important choices that affect their
lives and would like to be empowered
enough to avoid overdependence on
their communities, who could impose
their decisions on them.”
—Service provider, Kilifi
“Having girls themselves take on a visible
leadership role within the community and a
sense of responsibility can be positive forces
for change in the lives of young girls.”
—Community influencer, Kilifi

How might we create an environment in
which girls are confident to take up space,
speak up, claim ownership of their deci-
sion-making and feel fully engaged in in-
tervention activities?
How might we prioritize components that
are cocreated with girls, integrating their
perspectives and preferences into the final
product?

Abbreviation: SRH, sexual and reproductive health.

9

narrative form from lived experiences. In the pro-
ject’s first phase, early-stage testing moved slowly,
as we were uncertain about the pathway to con-
traceptive uptake for adolescent audiences. In the
replication process, we were able to use the
established user journey as a guide and focus on
replicating the specific activities, mindsets, and
emotions for each step. We were able to draw
from many well-developed scripts and delivery
approaches, which allowed us to build more
complex prototypes faster and to be alert to
what was new or similar from previous experi-
ences, permitting us to learn faster. This process
reflects a distinctive value in the replication de-
sign process, which allowed for building on earli-
er lessons while underlining the importance of
leaving space to create something new for a
unique context (Table 4).
We tested these prototypes in 2 rounds.
During testing, adolescent girls and their influen-
cers were asked whether they would like this
type of intervention, how they might react when
presented with the intervention, and other ques-
tions to gauge desirability of the prototypes. In

between rounds of testing, the design team syn-
thesized these responses and made small, iterative
changes to incorporate feedback to enhance desir-
ability for girls and their influencers (Figure 6).

Live Prototyping
At the end of the prototyping phase, the design
team consolidated the 3 concepts, each of which
had a specific role in the user journey, into a holis-
tic intervention system. We ensured there were
clear linkages between the different prototypes,
for example, between Mastory Za Kikwetu (for-
merly Mentor þ Her) and Y-Facility sessions, to
ensure girls understood the value of engaging
with different intervention components and
would be referred for different types of services
across the intervention, depending on their
unique needs.
Before live prototyping, we also partnered
with girls through a cocreation process to generate
a new name and cohesive branding for the inter-
vention. Branding is an important component of
effective adolescent sexual and reproductive health
interventions. We have found that a country-

FIGURE 4. Adolescent Girl Behavioral Archetypes Used to Develop an Adolescent Sexual and Reproductive
Health Intervention in Kenya

10

FIGURE 5. Prototype Concepts for Adolescent Sexual and Reproductive Health Intervention

TABLE 4. Kenya Prototype Replication Influences From A360’s Other Interventions

Kenya Prototype
Replication Influences
Unique Kenya Components

Mentor þ Her/Mastory za Kikwetu

9ja Girl’s (southern Nigeria) approach to influ-
encer engagement, particularly the messages
used in mothers’ sessions


Kuwa Mjanja’s (Tanzania) parents’ sessions
designed to build empathy for adolescent girls

Storytelling to build empathy and spark discussion
around girls’ agency and the place of contracep-
tion. Stories were taken from adolescent girl testi-
monials and recorded on video or audio.

Y-Facility

Kuwa Mjanja’s existing in-clinic service model


Service delivery model in both 9ja Girls and
MMA (northern Nigeria)


9ja Girls’ “life mapping” activity

Dedicated adolescent-girl service days at govern-
ment-run health facilities to support the goal of sus-
tainability and institutionalization into government
systems.

Community Fair

Kuwa Mjanja’s out-of-clinic models, particularly
the opportunity for adolescent girls to see skills
demonstrations and understand the opportunities
available to them in their communities.


Curriculum from 9ja Girls’ skills classes (goal-
setting, budgeting and saving, health and nutri-
tion, decision-making and communication, and
income-generating skills sessions.)

Instead of being an event dedicated only to girls,
this was a moment to pique girls’ and community
members’ interest about the intervention and for
girls to showcase their skills to others and mobilize
additional girls into the intervention.

11

specific or culturally specific brand can help build
trust and credibility with the intervention and
help adolescent girls see that the product is
intended for them. Brands help build visibility of
the intervention, build cohesion between com-
ponents, and create ownership among girls, in
contrast with traditional contraceptive delivery
interventions that are typically branded without
user or cultural consultation. Together, we decid-
ed on the brand Binti Shupavu, meaning strong or
fearless young woman in Swahili.
After determining the initial intervention de-
sign, live prototype testing took place over 8 weeks
in 10 different sites with the goal of testing the
feasibility of the full intervention model in a real-
world setting. Adolescent girls and their influen-
cers in the selected communities were invited to
attend Binti Shupavu programming through local
mobilizers who included community volunteers,
health providers, and local administrators. The
team gathered data on how well the intervention
performed. The design team collected user feedback

primarily through participant observation and
interviews. Client exit interviews were conducted
with adolescent girls after their participation in
Binti Shupavu (n¼95) across the 5 counties in
October 2021. Data suggested that girls found the
intervention inspirational and appealing and that
it helped them understand how contraception
could help them achieve their goals (Table 5).
However, we also saw that many girls (n¼74)
were still hesitant to participate in a session with
a provider. Even among those who spoke with
the provider, over half expressed that they wanted
counseling or “advice” only. With further probing,
many girls cited needing permission from a part-
ner or parent before accepting a method. This sug-
gested that additional refinement was needed
around the contraceptive counseling moment.
Together, we used these data to formulate recom-
mendations for improvements to Binti Shupavu
(Table 6).
During live prototyping, we were able to acceler-
ate problem-solving by leveraging lessons learned in

FIGURE 6. Binti Shupavu Prototypes With Iterations Incorporating Feedback

Abbreviations: ASRH, adolescent sexual and reproductive health; SRH, sexual and reproductive health.

12

the other program geographies. As challenges or
questions arose in Kenya that were encountered in
the first investment phase, project staff on the global
team connected the Kenya team members with key
staff members from other country programs to share
experiences and brainstorm solutions together. The
following key topics were explored.

1.
Keeping girls engaged during the facility-
based sessions: Girls did not always come on
time to the Y-Facility session. This resulted in
attrition or frustration from girls waiting for
activities to start. Kenya borrowed from a
technique from the project’s intervention in
Tanzania that included facilitation of games
during these wait periods to keep girls en-
gaged—something that the Tanzania team
tested in 2019 when it started to see girls leav-
ing events before receiving counseling during
lulls in activity.

2.
Facilitating an opt-out contraceptive service
delivery moment: Seeing that many girls
were hesitant to speak with providers during
the Y-Facility prototype for fear that it would
stigmatize them, Kenya implemented an
“opt-out” provider visit approach. Borrowed
from Tanzania, this approach makes it stan-
dard for all girls to receive a one-on-one
counseling moment. Making it a default for
all girls to attend counseling destigmatizes

care-seeking behaviors and gives girls privacy
to discuss whatever they wish with the
provider.

3.
Outreach-based events: Girls were eager to
have service delivery spaces closer to them.
The design team pulled lessons from Tanzania’s
out-of-clinic community-based pop-up events
and Nigeria’s outreach events to explore how
the Y-Facility prototype could be operated out-
side of the static facility setting. This allows the
intervention to take services closer to the girls
for whom distance is a barrier to accessing
health services.

4.
Peer connections: We noted that with little
formal support, girls were motivated to sup-
port young women like themselves. Girls
tended to connect better with youthful mobi-
lizers and community health volunteers.
Borrowing from the program’s youth cadres
in Tanzania (Kuwa Mjanja Queens) and in
Nigeria (Big Sistas), Binti Shupavu sought
models to incorporate more youthful voices
in the intervention and establish tools and
processes for engagement in the interven-
tion’s delivery and ongoing improvement.

Final Intervention Design
At the end of live prototyping, the design team fi-
nalized the Binti Shupavu intervention model by

TABLE 5. Adolescent Girls’ Feedback on What They Learned at Binti Shupavu

Feedback Item
No. (%)
N595

I believe using a method to prevent or avoid getting an unintended pregnancy is important
to help me achieve my goals for life.

Agree or strongly agree
94 (99)

Disagree or disagree strongly
1 (1)

What were the most useful things that you learned during this visit today?a

How to delay and space pregnancies
67 (71)

Identifying my goals and that of my family
58 (62)

Other health issues
31 (33)

How to plan to achieve my goals and that of my family
29 (31)

Other
20 (22)

Self confidence
11 (12)

How to talk to my husband/partner about goals for our family
8 (9)

Menstrual health
2 (3)

a Multiple responses possible. Results total more than 100%.

13

incorporating the feedback received (Figure 7)
and adjusting the design of components in re-
sponse to this feedback. Binti Shupavu is designed
to tap into girls’ aspirations, understanding their
experiences and placing their needs first. The in-
tervention supports girls’ agency and contracep-
tive decision-making by creating a safe space
(Binti Shupavu Clinic) for young women to build
trust in the health system, learn about contracep-
tion, and share experiences and stories with their
peers. It works with providers to improve their
counseling capacity to address young women’s
concerns and promote the provision of a full range
of contraceptive options. The intervention engages

and educates influencers in the community and
those closest to young women (via Binti Shupavu
Stories sessions) so that they can collaboratively ad-
dress misinformation and support the decisions girls
make about their bodies and futures. This culmi-
nates in a moment for girls and those around them
to come together to celebrate the unique contribu-
tions of young women within their communities
(Binti Shupavu Fest). The intervention creates fur-
ther opportunities for smaller groups of adolescent
girls to gain additional skills and to cocreate plans
for this celebration moment together with the im-
plementation team. This additional training gives
girls the opportunity to gain a broader set of

TABLE 6. Live Prototyping Insights and Recommendations for Adaptation to Binti Shupavu in Kenya

Insight
Recommendation

Girls were interested in the Y-Facility prototype, but they expressed a
desire to have these girl-friendly spaces and service delivery moments
closer to their communities and wanted them to address more diverse
health topics.

Test different adaptations to the Y-Facility model to reach girls in harder-
to-reach areas and incorporate additional information on health topics
outside of contraception that interest girls (e.g., sexually transmitted
infections).

Girls wanted to see the providers on their own schedule to receive con-
traception, which required repeat attendance at the facility to achieve
contraceptive uptake.
“Let me go think about it then I will come back next week even as I come
along with my friend to also attend the sessions.” —Adolescent girl, Migori

Work with providers to be more flexible to girls’ preferred timing during
individual counseling moments. Continue to refine and strengthen the
contraceptive service delivery moment as “opt-out,” so there is the ex-
pectation that all girls should speak with the provider during the event,
even if it is just to ask questions or learn more.

Despite targeting married adolescent girls and teen mothers, other
cohorts of girls participated. Inconvenient timing and the need to com-
plete other tasks affected attendance of key audiences, particularly
among married adolescent girls.
“I was told about the sessions but I have to go wash clothes to get paid
because my child depends on me.” —Adolescent girl, Kilifi

Shift mobilization approaches so that girls can participate at a time and
day that works for them. Use all available mobilization channels,
including phone calls and SMS, where appropriate.

Service providers were overwhelmed with a high workload, and service
sites were understaffed, resulting in limited time to attend to girls.
“I am the only one who provides [family planning] services and I also
attend to other patients so I will attend girl sessions if I have cleared the
queue.” —Service provider, Narok

Maximize the health service providers’ technical expertise but try to task
shift some of the role of implementation to other cadres (such as com-
munity health volunteers) who could relieve some of the heavy burden
on service providers.

Girls liked the Binti Shupavu brand but were confused that each of the
3 components had a different name.
Align all components of the intervention so it points in a consolidated
way toward the Binti Shupavu brand (e.g., rename Y-Facility to Binti
Shupavu Clinic, rename Mastory za Kikwetu to Binti Shupavu Stories).

Girls were interested and excited by the skills classes in advance of the
community fair. However, the classes were time-consuming for the staff
to plan and conduct.
“From the lessons received I moved from zero to somewhere. I love
coming and meeting my peers who have gone through the same thing,
I’ve realized that [I] am not alone.” —Adolescent girl, Kilifi

Refine the skills sessions based on available resources and scale down
the number of classes being provided to maintain girls’ interest within
the confines of available resources.

The Mastory za Kikwetu prototype doubled as a community entry point
because 67% of girls were referred to the Y-Facility during live proto-
typing through the Mastory za Kikwetu sessions.

Initiate Binti Shupavu stories ahead of Binti Shupavu in-clinic sessions to
drive community buy-in and mobilization.

Girls tended to connect better with youthful mobilizers and community
health volunteers.
“We prefer the skills session to be conducted by someone youthful to
allow us to freely ask questions and express ourselves.” —Adolescent
girl, Homabay

Build out the role of youth mentors within the intervention, using the
example of Matasa Matan Arewa mentors, Kuwa Mjanja Queens, and
other cadres in A360’s implementation geographies.

Abbreviation: SMS, short message service.

14

knowledge and be empowered and equipped with
new skills to link them to economic opportunities.
Through Binti Shupavu, young women gain accu-
rate information and receive support to make
decisions about their bodies and their futures
with confidence.
Binti Shupavu is a Kenyan experience on a
user journey that our global adolescent reproduc-
tive health program now understands very well.
Girls feel contraception is relevant for them; they
are supported in a way that feels aspirational and
goes beyond health; their key influencers are
engaged; and services are local, relevant, and
friendly. We strove to replicate this approach in a
fit-for-purpose way through contextualized stor-
ies and branding, working with the health system
that exists in the geographic context, and being
curious about and accommodating to the wide di-
versity of girls who need services locally.

Early Implementation Results
In the first year (January–December 2022), the in-
tervention reached 60,111 adolescents aged 10–
19 years. Of these, 21,698 were new contraceptive

users (36%), while an additional 3,873 (19%)
were continuing users. We scaled Binti Shupavu
from 90 facilities at the end of 2021 to 360 facilities
at the end of 2022. The new user reach increased
every month throughout the course of the year
(Figure 8). This increase is the result of more than
just an increased geographic footprint: the total
number of facilities increased 4-fold from January
to December 2022, while new contraceptive users
per month increased 7-fold. This demonstrates that
the intervention also became more effective at
reaching new users even as it scaled. Conversion
rate, a marker of success both in targeted mobiliza-
tion and in contraceptive counseling coverage, also
showed significant improvements over the year,
from 22% in January to 87% in December 2022.
Forty-eight percent of new contraceptive users
supported through Binti Shupavu in 2022 selected
an injectable contraceptive method, followed
closely by implants (44%) (Figure 9). Given that
only 37.1% of contraceptive users nationally are
using an implant, high rates of implant uptake
among this population are a promising indication
that the intervention is removing barriers for girls

FIGURE 7. Final Binti Shupavu Intervention Design

15

to take up contraceptive methods that are aligned
with their preferences.30

A little more than half (56%) of new contra-
ceptive users supported through Binti Shupavu in

2022 were aged 18 or 19 years, which is to be
expected because contraceptive need increases
as girls get older (Figure 10). One-quarter of new
contraceptive users were aged 16 years or younger,

FIGURE 8. Performance of Binti Shupavu Intervention, Kenya, 2022

FIGURE 9. Contraceptive Methods Chosen by New Contraceptive Users Through Binti Shupavu, Kenya, 2022

16

suggesting that the intervention effectively reaches
younger girls who often face greater barriers to con-
traceptive uptake.
Differences in context, such as size of the target
population, strength of the health system, and
norms around family planning, make it impossible
to make a perfect comparison. However, how
Binti Shupavu performed in the first year against
our other interventions in their initial implemen-
tation phase helps us understand if our replication
efforts were successful. In Kenya, we were able to
expand the intervention’s reach rapidly and out-
performed all other geographies except Tanzania.
Kenya had the highest number and proportion of
continuing users, which is likely due to the higher
rates of contraceptive uptake among adolescent
girls in Kenya when compared to the other geog-
raphies. Kenya and the southern Nigeria interven-
tion, 9ja Girls, share the lowest conversion rate
(44%), but as previously noted, Kenya’s conver-
sion rate improved throughout the year as mobili-
zation became more targeted and the opt-out
counseling moment during clinic sessions was
strengthened.
Overall,
monitoring
data
from
Binti Shupavu suggest that the intervention in

Kenya can be favorably compared to the other
interventions and that we were able to successful-
ly replicate the user journey for contraceptive up-
take in a Kenyan context (Table 7). The question
of effectiveness of the user journey to sustain
long-term contraceptive use among adolescents
in Kenya will be answered through an ongoing ex-
ternal evaluation to be concluded by the end of
2024.

LESSONS LEARNED ABOUT
REPLICATION USING HCD
The following reflections summarize what we see
as the benefits, limitations, and opportunities for
the application of HCD during a replication pro-
cess and may be useful for others interested in ap-
plying HCD in a similar way.

The Value of an HCD Replication Approach
In this case study, we argue that HCD is a promis-
ing tool for navigating the replication of evidence-
based practice in a new context. The complexity of
health systems and the diversity of populations
they serve mean that it is not possible, nor

FIGURE 10. Age of New Contraceptive Users Through Binti Shupavu, Kenya, 2022

We argue that
HCD is a
promising tool for
navigating the
replication of
evidence-based
practice to a new
context.

17

desirable, to replicate an evidence-based interven-
tion with perfect fidelity in a new setting. Instead,
implementers must make challenging decisions
about what to keep and what to adapt to maximize
the chances of success. The benefits of design in
public health more generally—keeping user per-
spectives at the center, solving problems through
testing to learn, and collaborating with communi-
ties and organizations—served our replication
efforts.8

The design team was able to use HCD approaches
to define the target population and understand their
needs at a level deeper than demographic analysis
permitted. This helped guide us in identifying
promising intervention components from other
geographies to test. HCD mindsets of cocreation
and listening to users meant that, even as the goal
was replication, the design team was open to in-
corporating new components. Many of the sacrifi-
cial concepts that we tested during the initial
phase of this Kenya design process did not appeal
to adolescent girls in Kenya despite being effective
components of our interventions elsewhere. In
these instances, feedback from users sparked new
ways of delivering messages or providing services
that were refined over time with input from ado-
lescent girls, providers, and community members.
Additionally, using HCD to replicate the user jour-
ney for contraceptive uptake was a simpler, faster
process than designing a new intervention. Few of
our staff members had experience with design;
thus, there was a learning curve to adapt to
and implement HCD mindsets and approaches.
However, having a blueprint for what we hoped
to build made it easier to assess progress and eval-
uate the outcomes of prototyping. By building on
what already existed and adapting based on users’
needs, we were able to quickly assemble the core
components of our proposed intervention. We
approached the HCD replication process as fluid

and continuous, which meant we were able to
benefit from not just the original intervention
models but also from the lessons learned through
testing and implementation. The application of
the full scope of existing program learning allowed
us to take advantage of valuable insights that ex-
pedited the refinement of the intervention. This,
in turn, accelerated our design timeline from ap-
proximately 18 months in the first phase to about
10 months for replication. We urge others who
are considering using HCD to replicate an inter-
vention to draw on previous lessons throughout
the process, including the early implementation
phases.

Cautions and Considerations in the Use of
HCD for Replication
Determining Effectiveness
As with any tool, there are limits to what design
can offer. The goal of replication is to adapt
evidence-based interventions to a new setting to
make better use of scarce resources and improve
health outcomes. However, replication efforts are
often ineffective, and it can be challenging to iden-
tify why. As we have argued, HCD has potential to
support the development of more desirable pro-
ducts, services, and interventions, and design can
be completed more quickly when there is already
an understanding of what conditions and prompts
support users to change their behavior. In the case
of A360, our approach builds on what is known to
work for AYSRH demand and services—training
health workers, improving facility friendliness,
and generating demand through multiple chan-
nels.31 Yet, the layering of an additional focus on
tapping into girls’ aspirations and making the
link to contraception as a tool for them to achieve
their goals is different from many traditional
approaches. We recognize that the lessons learned
in HCD are no substitute for traditional public

TABLE 7. Binti Shupavu in Kenya Compared to Other A360 Programs in Different Countries

Abbreviation: LARC, long-acting reversible contraception.

18

health methods used to determine the effective-
ness of interventions.32 Although we are optimis-
tic that our own monitoring suggests we have
successfully replicated our user journey and that
initial use of contraceptive methods by adolescent
girls has been high, the short time frame of the de-
sign process and monitoring data are not able to
show us if girls are continuing to use those meth-
ods to act on their own fertility preferences to
delay and space children. Additional studies are
being conducted to look at the rate of contraceptive
continuation as well as assess the population-level
impact of Binti Shupavu on modern contraceptive
use among adolescent girls in the intervention
areas. As others have called for, although we
view design as an essential tool, it is evolving
and should be used in collaboration with cross-
disciplinary tools and resources in service of
health impact.8

Resource Intensive
Even when used for replication, HCD processes
are often more resource intensive than anticipat-
ed. Although the design process in Kenya was fas-
ter, at 10 months, it was still a significant use of
staff time and resources. Given that we deeply un-
derstood the challenge of adolescent contraceptive
use from our work in other geographies, an addi-
tional opportunity to streamline the design pro-
cess includes skipping the “insight gathering”
phase. In our process, we spent about 2 months
preparing and executing the initial inquiry phase,
and our results ultimately reflected both the evi-
dence base and what we had seen in other pro-
gram geographies. We could have begun with
clearly stated assumptions about our target audi-
ence and their needs and moved directly into ide-
ation and prototyping based on the intervention
components that already existed in our other ge-
ographies. This would have allowed us to take
full advantage of design’s strengths in global de-
velopment, such as collaboration with communi-
ties and building to learn, without spending time
relearning what we already knew. Additional
tools to support this targeted testing of key inter-
vention components would be a valuable contri-
bution to the community of practice.

Setting Expectations
We could have done more to align our internal
teams on what to expect during an HCD replica-
tion process, and we recommend others using
this approach take the time to set expectations
with their own team. HCD is often misunderstood

and requires work to align.33 This is even more
true of design replication, which is not well under-
stood in the evidence base nor by design practi-
tioners. Among our team, we had to reinforce
that borrowing ideas from what had worked be-
fore, even early in the design process, was a poten-
tially powerful tool in a context such as ours,
where much was already understood about the
problem and pathways to solutions.

HCD as a Vehicle for Localization in
Replication of Evidence-Based Practice
As a result of travel limitations imposed on us
because of the COVID-19 pandemic, only our
Kenya-based team could conduct prototyping
and observe testing in person. Although our origi-
nal intent in the second phase of the project was to
transfer more ownership over the HCD process to
country-based leadership rather than external
consultants or U.S.-based staff, the pandemic ac-
celerated the speed at which this happened and
the extent to which it was required. Localization
of decision-making and building capacity of more
diverse teams to conduct HCD aligns with the spir-
it of design and the goal of developing more equi-
table, sustainable solutions.
A challenge that arose for us was the need to
support local decision-makers to be aware of and
use the evidence and implementation experience
from earlier work. The design team worked hard
to minimize the feeling of distance by using online
tools and sharing pictures and voice memos, but it
was not possible to convey everything. This poses
a particular challenge for HCD replication process-
es. One of the benefits of replication is that project
implementers are already familiar with the early
signs of behavior change or problems. Although
we did our best to communicate these nuances
virtually, the HCD process is one that floods teams
with data. It is difficult to synthesize that data rap-
idly and identify what intervention components
will be the most important to achieving the pro-
ject’s goal. An experienced implementer can help
teams prioritize which iterations to address first
and should be an important resource when
replicating.
For example, we knew from our previous ex-
perience that properly targeted mobilization, or
the recruitment of eligible young women to attend
program activities, supports program efficiency by
ensuring services reach girls in need. Following
the design process, improving mobilization was
among several recommendations made and took
several months to achieve. We speculate that we

A challenge that
arose for us was
the need to
support local
decision-makers
to be aware of
and use
the evidence and
implementation
experience from
earlier work.

19

could have improved contraceptive uptake more
quickly if a staff person from Tanzania or Nigeria
had been able to come in person, as our other
geographies also struggled with this element ini-
tially. This suggests there is a vital role for national,
regional, and global experts to play in service of
more effective localization, and we encourage
other practitioners who are considering applying
this approach to support local decision-making
and make use of in-country support wherever
feasible.

Acknowledgments: We acknowledge the significant work led by the
program team in Kenya to facilitate this design process, along with the
support provided by the project’s design partner, IDEO.org. We are
grateful for the support provided by Adolescent 360’s (A360) program
teams in Ethiopia, Nigeria, and Tanzania to share learnings with the
newly formed Kenya team in pursuit of replication. A360 recognizes its
partnership with Itad in the facilitation of the process evaluation activities
referenced in this report. Special gratitude goes to the government
partners in Kenya whose commitment and collaboration contributed to
the program’s outcomes and learning.

Funding: This work was supported, in whole or in part, by the Children’s
Investment Fund Foundation [R-1911-04245].

Disclaimer: The funders had no role in study design, data collection and
analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the article.

project administration, supervision, writing–original draft, and writing–
review & editing. DM and AN: data curation, formal analysis,
investigation, and validation. AM and MP: visualization, writing–
original draft, and writing–review and editing.