Human Vaccines & Immunotherapeutics

ISSN: 2164-5515 (Print) 2164-554X (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/khvi20

Development and preliminary data on the use
of a mobile app speciﬁcally designed to increase
community awareness of invasive pneumococcal
disease and its prevention

Donatella Panatto, Alexander Domnich, Roberto Gasparini, Paolo Bonanni,
Giancarlo Icardi, Daniela Amicizia, Lucia Arata, Nicola Luigi Bragazzi, Alessio
Signori, Paolo Landa, Angela Bechini & Sara Boccalini

To cite this article: Donatella Panatto, Alexander Domnich, Roberto Gasparini, Paolo Bonanni,
Giancarlo Icardi, Daniela Amicizia, Lucia Arata, Nicola Luigi Bragazzi, Alessio Signori, Paolo
Landa, Angela Bechini & Sara Boccalini (2016) Development and preliminary data on the
use of a mobile app speciﬁcally designed to increase community awareness of invasive
pneumococcal disease and its prevention, Human Vaccines & Immunotherapeutics, 12:4,
1080-1084, DOI: 10.1080/21645515.2015.1114196

To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/21645515.2015.1114196

© 2016 The Author(s). Published with
license by Taylor & Francis© Donatella
Panatto, Alexander Domnich, Roberto
Gasparini, Paolo Bonanni, Giancarlo Icardi,
Daniela Amicizia, Lucia Arata, Nicola Luigi
Bragazzi, Alessio Signori, Paolo Landa,
Angela Bechini, and Sara Boccalini.

Published online: 10 Mar 2016.

Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 1449

View related articles 
View Crossmark data

Citing articles: 2 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=khvi20

SHORT REPORT

Development and preliminary data on the use of a mobile app speciﬁcally designed to
increase community awareness of invasive pneumococcal disease and its prevention

Donatella Panattoa, Alexander Domnicha, Roberto Gasparinia, Paolo Bonannib, Giancarlo Icardia, Daniela Amiciziaa,
Lucia Arataa, Nicola Luigi Bragazzia, Alessio Signoria, Paolo Landac, Angela Bechinib, and Sara Boccalinib

aDepartment of Health Sciences, University of Genoa, Genoa, Italy; bDepartment of Health Sciences, University of Florence, Florence, Italy; cDepartment
of Economics, University of Genoa, Genoa, Italy

ARTICLE HISTORY
Submitted 20 July 2015
Revised 9 October 2015
Accepted 26 October 2015

ABSTRACT
Given the growing use and great potential of mobile apps, this project aimed to develop and implement a
user-friendly app to increase laypeople’s knowledge and awareness of invasive pneumococcal disease
(IPD). Despite the heavy burden of IPD, the documented low awareness of IPD among both laypeople and
healthcare professionals and far from optimal pneumococcal vaccination coverage, no app speciﬁcally
targeting IPD has been developed so far. The app was designed to be maximally functional and conceived
in accordance with user-centered design. Its content, layout and usability were discussed and formally
tested during several workshops that involved the principal stakeholders, including experts in IPD and
information technology and potential end-users. Following several workshops, it was decided that, in
order to make the app more interactive, its core should be a personal “checker” of the risk of contracting
IPD and a user-friendly risk-communication strategy. The checker was populated with risk factors
identiﬁed through both Italian and international ofﬁcial guidelines. Formal evaluation of the app revealed
its good readability and usability properties. A sister web site with the same content was created to
achieve higher population exposure. Seven months after being launched in a price- and registration-free
modality, the app, named “Pneumo Rischio,” averaged 20.9 new users/day and 1.3 sessions/user. The ﬁrst
in-ﬁeld results suggest that “Pneumo Rischio” is a promising tool for increasing the population’s awareness
of IPD and its prevention through a user-friendly risk checker.

KEYWORDS
application software;
community awareness; e-
health; invasive; mobile app;
pneumococcal disease;
pneumococcus; prevention

Invasive pneumococcal disease (IPD) refers to severe condi-
tions occurring in the event of pneumococcal diffusion in nor-
mally sterile sites, such as cerebrospinal ﬂuid or blood, and
includes e.g. bacteremia, meningitis and bacteremic pneumo-
nia. IPD carries a signiﬁcant burden (especially in the elderly
and speciﬁc risk groups): 20,785 cases were notiﬁed in 2012 in
Europe – a notiﬁcation rate of 5.2 per 100,000 inhabitants.1

Furthermore, among vaccine-preventable bacterial infections,
IPD has the highest mortality.2

Despite its heavy burden and the availability of safe and
effective vaccines, pneumococcal vaccination coverage remains
suboptimal in most industrialized countries.2 A large European
survey3 has established that people’s main reasons for not being
vaccinated are lack of recommendation by general practitioners
(GPs), scant awareness of vaccination availability and inade-
quate perception of the risk of contracting pneumococcal dis-
ease. Moreover, awareness of the disease is relatively low
among medical doctors; indeed, only 50% and 71% of GPs and
specialists, respectively, know the term “IPD.”3

Today, the use of smartphones and mobile apps is increas-
ingly common. The potential of apps is well-documented; for
instance, they are able to provide information on disease-

speciﬁc topics,4 thereby raising community awareness. As yet,
however, no app speciﬁcally targeting IPD has been developed.
The objective of this project was to develop and implement a
user-friendly mobile app to increase laypeople’s knowledge,
awareness and personal risk perception of IPD and motivate
app users to request further information on IPD and its preven-
tion from their doctors.
Development of the app involved several steps: after veriﬁca-
tion of the public health need for the app, its design, content
and target group were conceptualized and established; pilot
versions were created and formally tested; the ﬁnal version was
drawn up and launched, and its usage was assessed.
The need for an evidence-based online resource on IPD was
evaluated from the perspective of supply-based infodemiology
techniques5 by assessing the prevalence of IPD information (by
quantifying the absolute number of web pages on IPD and syn-
onyms retrieved from www.google.it).
The app was designed to be maximally functional and simple
to use. The design of the app was conceived in the fashion of a
user-centered approach. Its content, layout and user-friendli-
ness were discussed during several workshops held either face-
to-face or via voice/video conferences. The team was composed

CONTACT Donatella Panatto

Department of Health Sciences, University of Genoa, via Pastore 1, 16132 Genoa, Italy.
Color versions of one or more of the ﬁgures in the article can be found online at www.tandfonline.com/khvi.
© Donatella Panatto, Alexander Domnich, Roberto Gasparini, Paolo Bonanni, Giancarlo Icardi, Daniela Amicizia, Lucia Arata, Nicola Luigi Bragazzi, Alessio Signori,
Paolo Landa, Angela Bechini, and Sara Boccalini. Published with license by Taylor & Francis.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0/), which permits unre-
stricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. The moral rights of the named author(s) have been asserted.

2016, VOL. 12, NO. 4, 1080–1084
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/21645515.2015.1114196

of the principal stakeholders, including experts in IPD and its
prevention (DP, RG, PB, GI, DA, AB and SB), information
technology (IT) (an IT company contracted to develop the app)
and potential end-users (residents and technical staff of the
Department of Health Sciences, University of Genoa).
The content of the app was drafted by IPD experts and
reviewed by the whole research team. In order to make the app
more interactive and introduce some concepts of gamiﬁcation, it
was decided that a simple checker on single risk factors should be
adopted. Since the app was primarily intended for use in Italy, the
2012–2014 Italian National Vaccine Prevention Plan (NVPP)6

was used as a reference document for the identiﬁcation of risk fac-
tors. Additionally, other international guidelines were considered.7

The general adult population in Italy was set as the app tar-
get group.
Once reviewed, the content of the questionnaire was
checked for text readability by means of the GulpEase index
(ranging from 0 to 100; the higher the score, the better the read-
ability), which is speciﬁc to the Italian language; appropriate
text modiﬁcations were made if necessary. Following discussion
of several on-paper drafts of the app and of stakeholders’ com-
ments, an app prototype was created. This underwent both
expert- and user-based evaluation of its usability. The latter
was assessed through the performance of 10 tasks and mea-
sured in terms of technical effectiveness (task completion out-
come), and a relative user-efﬁciency score (average time taken
to complete a task by end-users divided by the time taken by
the app expert) was assigned, as reported by O’Malley et al.8

Google Analytics was used to quantify online data trafﬁc and
to determine users’ characteristics and interaction with the app
and the website. Users were aware of which data were collected
and how these would be used (an extensive explanation of these
issues was provided in the mandatory section on privacy policy).
Crude Google hits of the term “IPD” and its various syno-
nyms and spellings yielded approximately 9,000 results, with-
out taking duplicate web pages into account; this was well
below the number of enquiries regarding other infectious dis-
eases with lower incidence rates. The observed gap between the
pool of information on IPD and its burden indicated the pres-
ence of information disparities5 and is in line with the ﬁndings
of previous research.3

The idea of incorporating a risk checker into the app was
approved by all team members. The checker was populated
with the following risk factors, identiﬁed through the NVPP:
chronic cardiac, pulmonary (excluding asthma), renal and liver
diseases, alcoholism, diabetes, hereditary hemoglobinopathies,
asplenia, primary and secondary immuno-deﬁciencies, includ-
ing iatrogenic ones, HIV/AIDS, hematological and non-hema-
tological malignancies, and presence of a cochlear implant.
Additionally, as the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
recommend7 immunization with 23-valent pneumococcal vac-
cine for adult smokers and asthmatics, these 2 risk factors (cur-
rent smoking and presence of asthma) were also included. In
sum, the ﬁnal version of the questionnaire consisted of 16
items; most of these were yes/no questions. One of the polar
questions about cancer had an extension (in the case of afﬁrma-
tive response) concerning the type of malignancy, classiﬁed
according to a 4-option item (leukemia, lymphoma, multiple
myeloma and “any other type of cancer”). Another item, on

alcohol consumption, had an easily manageable scrollbar indi-
cating the mean number of drinks consumed per week. Prelim-
inary linguistic analysis of the checker raised several concerns
and revealed a suboptimal readability level; several language
modiﬁcations were therefore made in order to facilitate com-
prehension. In particular, highly technical terms and loanwords
were avoided as much as possible and more difﬁcult terms
(such as drink, asplenia or cochlear implant) were deﬁned. To
prevent self-diagnosis, most questions were worded in the third
person (e.g., “Has your doctor ever told you…?” rather than
“Do you suffer from…?”). The ﬁnal version of the questionnaire
displayed good readability properties, the GulpEase index being
61.0, which means it would be easily understood by subjects
with a middle-school education.
The overall risk of contracting IPD was categorized as low
(healthy adults), medium (healthy elderly and immuno-competent
subjects of any age with any chronic condition) and high
[immuno-compromised (including any type of cancer, disorders of
the blood forming organs, primary and secondary immuno-deﬁ-
ciencies) subjects of any age].9 In order to facilitate comprehension,
the ﬁnal result was displayed on a graded scale ranging from yellow
(low risk) to red (high risk). Risks concerning single conditions
were also reported as supplementary information, which could be
consulted. Possible combinations of single risk factors were not
considered, owing to the lack of data. In sum, the ﬁnal result was
qualitative (risk category) rather than quantitative since no predic-
tion formulas were applied. Once the checker had been completed,
users were given the option of sending the results of the risk evalua-
tion to their GPs via email.
Background referenced information on pneumococcus, IPD
and risk factors was limited to essential information that IPD
experts believed end-users needed to know. The text was edited
several times following comments made during the workshops.
Consecutive reviews allowed us to identify and address sev-
eral criticalities of the app prototype in terms of its usability.
Navigation was improved by enlarging the main icons and sim-
plifying the hierarchical structure of the menu, which was
reduced to 2 navigation levels; necessary shortcuts were pro-
vided. Coherence of the gesture commands was ensured and
easily intelligible symbols were assigned to all buttons. Click-
sensitive areas were made more distinguishable by improving
color contrast combinations; when a button was clicked, its
background color changed. If erroneous data were entered or if
data were missing, the user was immediately alerted by an error
message. Once the above criticalities had been addressed, the
second prototype was formally tested by both experts and
potential end-users (N D 8, age 25–48 years). The computa-
tional algorithms were tested in order to detect any bugs. Tech-
nical
effectiveness
and
relative
efﬁciency
were
judged
acceptable: all tasks were accomplished by all testers, with a
mean relative user-efﬁciency score of 2.1 per task. Question-
naire completion time ranged from 2.5 to 4.5 min. A short video
tutorial on the functioning of the app was also provided. During
the last meeting, it was decided that the app should be available
in the main app stores (Apple Store, Google Play and Windows
Store) and that a sister website with the same functionalities
should be created, in order to ensure maximum coverage.
The app “Pneumo Rischio” and the website www.pneumori
schio.it have been publicly available to the adult population in

1081

a registration- and price-free modality since February 2015.
The app’s mandatory privacy policy complies with all aspects
of local laws and recommendations. Approximately 7 months
(207 days) after being launched, “Pneumo Rischio” (both app
and website) had, on average, 20.9 new users/day and 1.3 ses-
sions/new user (cumulative number). Most of these were web-
site users (N D 3,994), while single downloads of the app
accounted for 340. Notably, on average, mobile users engaged
in more sessions (1.5 sessions/new user) than website users (1.3
sessions/new user); this difference was statistically signiﬁcant
(p < .01).

Figure 1A shows 2 time-series indicating the daily number
of new users and sessions undertaken with regard to both the
app and the website. As expected, the mean number of both
parameters was signiﬁcantly higher on working days than at
weekends [new users: 23.5 vs 14.9, t D 2.45, p D .015; ses-
sions: 31.3 vs 18.5, t D 3.46, p <.001]. This partially explains
the saw-tooth pattern observed in both time-series. When
the time-series of new users and sessions were further subdi-
vided in terms of app and website use (Fig. 1B), only modest,
though still statistically signiﬁcant (p  .001), correlation

coefﬁcients were recorded between app and website new
users (r D .27) and between app and website sessions (r D
.26). This could indicate different proﬁles of “Pneumo
Rischio” users.
Demographic data were gathered from approximately
800 users and reported in Table 1. Female users prevailed
signiﬁcantly (z D 8.70, p < .001) over males. Most ses-
sions were undertaken by 45–54- and 25–34-year-olds,

Figure 1. Time-series of daily number of new users and sessions of both app and website (A) and separate number of app and website new users and sessions (B).

Table 1. Distribution of user sessions, by sex and age.

Parameter
Level
%

Sex
Male
34.7
Female
65.3
Age-class, years
18–24
5.6
25–34
29.5
35–44
21.7
45–54
30.1
55–64
8.7
65
4.4

Notes: N D 809 N D 793

1082
D. PANATTO ET AL.

while
the
18–24
and
over-65
age-classes
were
under-
represented.
As shown in Figure 2, the header menu of the homepage fea-
tures 3 key elements: “learn about the disease,” “check your

risk” and “inform a friend.” As expected, the option “check
your risk” was the most popular ﬁrst choice (53.4%), while the
sections “learn about the disease” and “inform a friend” were
ﬁrst-clicked less frequently (36.9% and 9.8%, respectively). The

Figure 2. “Pneumo Rischio” home page.

1083

drop-out rate from the checker was low (12.7%), while 53.7% of
users who successfully ﬁnished the risk evaluation went on nav-
igating the app.
The “Pneumo Rischio” website appears within the ﬁrst 30
Google search results of queries regarding “pneumococcus,”
“IPD” and synonyms. To ensure a higher “ﬁndability,” a
banner with a direct link to “Pneumo Rischio” was posted
on the corresponding page of the partner website www.vacci
narsi.org, which is the largest top-ranked vaccination-related
HONcode (Health on the Internet)-certiﬁed site in Italy.
The ﬁrst in-ﬁeld results suggest that “Pneumo Rischio” is a
promising tool for increasing the population’s awareness of
IPD and its prevention through a user-friendly risk checker.
Moreover, it is well known3,10-13 that scant awareness and per-
ception of the personal risk of contracting a vaccine-prevent-
able disease are associated with low levels of immunization and
intention to be immunized in the future. For instance, in their
study on factors inﬂuencing pneumococcal vaccination levels,
Schneeberg et al.11 found that, in comparison with unvacci-
nated people, a signiﬁcantly higher proportion of vaccinated
subjects
acknowledged
that
they
were
at
high
risk
of
pneumonia.
It is also encouraging that most of our users visited the informa-
tion section “learn about the disease,” and many people used the
app/website more than once. Moreover, we believe that “Pneumo
Rischio” has the potential to improve the relatively low awareness
of IPD among healthcare professionals, which may hold down vac-
cination levels among their patients.3 For this purpose, “Pneumo
Rischio” is now being promoted among Italian GPs and presented
at conferences and congresses; we hope that health professionals
will subsequently recommend the app and website to their patients
as a high-quality resource.
Our future work will focus on evaluating user satisfaction,
identifying social marketing strategies to increase community
exposure (especially among males and the elderly) and proxies
of app effectiveness, as well the feasibility of internationalizing
the app. Moreover, since in our usability study only few partici-
pants, which cannot be considered representative of the target
population, were involved, “Pneumo Rischio” will be tested for
both usability and perceived usefulness in a larger sample of
users.

Abbreviations

GP
general practitioner
HONcode
Health on the Internet code
IPD
invasive pneumococcal disease
IT
information technology
NVPP
National Vaccine Prevention Plan

Disclosure of potential conﬂicts of interest

No potential conﬂicts of interest were disclosed.