Original Investigation | Obstetrics and Gynecology
Experiences With Prenatal Care Delivery Reported by Black Patients
With Low Income and by Health Care Workers in the US
A Qualitative Study

Alex Friedman Peahl, MD, MSc; Michelle H. Moniz, MD, MSc; Michele Heisler, MD, MPA; Aalap Doshi, MS; Gwendolyn Daniels, DNP, MSN; Martina Caldwell, MD, MSc;
Vanessa K. Dalton, MD, MPH; Ana De Roo, MD, MSc; Mary Byrnes, PhD

Abstract

IMPORTANCE Black pregnant people with low income face inequities in health care access and

outcomes in the US, yet their voices have been largely absent from redesigning prenatal care.

OBJECTIVE To examine patients’ and health care workers’ experiences with prenatal care delivery

in a largely low-income Black population to inform care innovations to improve care coordination,

access, quality, and outcomes.

DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS For this qualitative study, human-centered design–

informed interviews were conducted at prenatal care clinics with 19 low-income Black patients who

were currently pregnant or up to 1 year post partum and 19 health care workers (eg, physicians,

nurses, and community health workers) in Detroit, Michigan, between October 14, 2019, and

February 7, 2020. Questions focused on 2 human-centered design phases: observation

(understanding problems from the end user’s perspective) and ideation (generating novel potential

solutions). Questions targeted participants’ experiences with the 3 goals of prenatal care: medical

care, anticipatory guidance, and social support. An eclectic analytic strategy, including inductive

thematic analysis and matrix coding, was used to identify promising strategies for prenatal care

redesign.

MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES Preferences for prenatal care redesign.

RESULTS Nineteen Black patients (mean [SD] age, 28.4 [5.9] years; 19 [100%] female; and 17

[89.5%] with public insurance) and 17 of 19 health care workers (mean [SD] age, 47.9 [15.7] years; 15

female [88.2%]; and 13 [76.5%] Black) completed the surveys. A range of health care workers were

included (eg, physicians, doulas, and social workers). Although all affirmed the 3 prenatal care goals,

participants reported failures and potential solutions for each area of prenatal care delivery. Themes

also emerged in 2 cross-cutting areas: practitioners and care infrastructure. Participants reported

that, ideally, care structure would enable strong ongoing relationships between patients and

practitioners. Practitioners would coordinate all prenatal services, not just medical care. Finally, care

would be tailored to individual patients by using care navigators, flexible models, and colocation of

services to reduce barriers.

CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE In this qualitative study of low-income, Black pregnant people in

Detroit, Michigan, and the health care workers who care for them, prenatal care delivery failed to

meet many patients’ needs. Participants reported that an ideal care delivery model would include

comprehensive, integrated services across the health care system, expanding beyond medical care

to also include patients’ social needs and preferences.

Key Points

Question How could prenatal care be

redesigned to improve access, quality,

and experience for Black pregnant

people with low income who face

significant inequities in prenatal care

delivery and outcomes?

Findings In this qualitative study,

patients and health care workers

confirmed prenatal care delivery did not

meet patients’ needs or preferences.

Participants’ ideal prenatal care model

would be anchored by a supportive

practitioner in collaboration with a

community-based team using

integrated, flexible care delivery to meet

patients’ diverse needs.

Meaning These findings suggest that

prenatal care redesign can inspire new

care models to address persistent

inequities in prenatal care delivery and

outcomes.

+ Supplemental content

Author affiliations and article information are
listed at the end of this article.

Open Access. This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the CC-BY License.

1/13

Introduction

Maternity care in the US is marred by significant health inequities, with Black and low-income people

2 to 5 times more likely to die in childbirth or experience severe maternal morbidity than their White

counterparts.1,2 Prenatal care is an important upstream target to reduce maternal deaths and

morbidity, yet prior work3,4 has demonstrated that Black people—particularly those with low

socioeconomic status living in urban areas—face significant barriers to high-quality care, including

lack of transportation, financial constraints, structural racism, and explicit discrimination. Existing

prenatal care delivery structures that require frequent in-person contacts in clinical settings can

exacerbate these barriers.5-10 Thus, prenatal care in its current form may actually create unjust

barriers for those who stand to benefit the most from receiving this important health service.

Although Black and low-income individuals face significant care inequities, their voices have

been largely absent from prenatal care delivery research. Thus, clinicians and health care leaders lack

important information to redesign prenatal care in line with these populations’ views. Human-

centered design (HCD), a method for redesigning processes from the end user’s perspective, has

successfully generated new prenatal care models tailored for both patients and health care workers

(HCWs).11-14 Human-centered design could be an effective strategy for reimagining prenatal care for

the specific needs of low-income and Black patients15; however, to date, HCD work has been

conducted with largely White, highly educated, high-income populations in well-resourced academic

care settings.11

This study was conducted in Detroit, Michigan, which has a long history of health disparities and

racial injustice, with significantly higher rates of maternal and infant morbidity and mortality than the

US average.16-18 Our objective was to explore patients’ and HCWs’ experiences with current prenatal

care delivery using HCD to identify methods of improving care for low-income, Black pregnant

people. This report is part of a larger project to optimize prenatal care for pregnant people in the

safety net by improving prenatal care access, patient experience, and clinical outcomes.

Methods

In this qualitative study, we used HCD-informed interviews to center patients’ and HCWs’ voices in

redesigning prenatal care. We completed the first 2 HCD phases: observation (understanding the

problem from the end user’s perspective) and ideation (generating novel potential solutions)19

(eTable 1 in the Supplement). We addressed all 3 goals of prenatal care: medical care (routine prenatal

visits to screen for and manage comorbidities and pregnancy complications), anticipatory guidance

(education about pregnancy, childbirth, the postpartum period, and parenting), and social support

(nonmedical factors that impact patients’ ability to access and engage with the health system,

including material resources [eg, housing and transportation] and social support [eg, relationships,

community, and emotional support]).8 eTable 2 in the Supplement details the interview domains.

This study was deemed not regulated by the University of Michigan Institutional Review Board as a

quality improvement activity to evaluate existing prenatal care services and develop new programs.

Written informed consent was obtained from all participants. This qualitative study followed the

Consolidated Criteria for Reporting Qualitative Research (COREQ) reporting guideline.

We offered semistructured interviews with 19 low-income, Black, pregnant and postpartum

patients and the 19 HCWs who care for them, including obstetrician-gynecologists, midwives, nurses,

nutritionists, community health workers, and doulas. Interviews were conducted from October 14,

2019, to February 7, 2020. We designed an HCD-informed interview script in collaboration with

experts in HCD, qualitative methodology, and prenatal care. For the observation phase, we used

journey mapping, in which participants describe their (or their clients’) prenatal care experience from

pregnancy discovery through delivery.19 Previous studies demonstrated that this approach can

elucidate opportunities during pregnancy in which more, less, or different care would have been

preferred.13,20,21 For ideation, we asked participants to imagine their ideal prenatal care experience.

JAMA Network Open | Obstetrics and Gynecology

2/13

We developed a survey for key participant demographic characteristics (eg, race and ethnicity),

all of which were self-reported by the participant. Patient-specific fields included pregnancy and

prenatal care information (eg, parity and practitioner). The HCW information included professional

characteristics (eg, years in practice). All items were derived from prior surveys conducted in this

population.22,23 We reviewed preliminary materials with 2 Detroit community HCWs to ensure

questions were clear, acceptable, and comprehensive.

With our community partners, we identified 2 clinics that provide prenatal care to

predominantly Black, low-income pregnant people in Detroit. We conducted 2 exploratory

90-minute focus groups (n = 14) to gain preliminary insights on interview domains and ensure the

acceptability of questions. Participants received a $40 gift card as compensation. After focus groups,

additional prompts were added to the interview guide. Focus group data were not included in the

final analysis.

For interviews, we used snowball sampling—a methodologic approach in which existing

participants identify future participants to recruit as information-rich key informants.24 Before the

interviews, participants were screened by telephone for eligibility: age older than 18 years, English

speaking, and a confirmed pregnancy at any gestational age or up to 1 year post partum. All HCWs (ie,

anyone who provides services for pregnant people) at the study sites were eligible.25 We conducted

38 interviews to reach information power—the point at which sufficient qualitative data have been

collected to rigorously answer the research question.26 On the basis of prior literature,5,27 the nature

of our research question, the specificity of the recruited sample, and the planned depth of

interviews, we estimated that between 15 and 20 interviews per group (patients and HCWs) would

be required to answer the research question. Interviews were held at local clinics and timed with

prenatal care or HCW breaks. Participants completed the survey before their 60- to 90-minute

interview and received a $40 gift card as compensation.

Interviews were recorded, transcribed verbatim, reviewed for accuracy, and managed with

qualitative coding software (MaxQDA, version 2020.0.0; VERBI GmbH). We used an eclectic analytic

strategy that included inductive thematic and matrix analysis28: 2 authors (A.F.P. and M.B.) initially

reviewed the data and open-coded 3 transcripts for patterns, concepts, and key ideas. Next, we built,

tested, and iteratively refined the codebook based on initial categories. Three authors (A.F.P, M.B.,

and A.D.R.) independently applied main codes and subcodes to transcripts. Finally, we compared

coding decisions and refined our codebook. We then built a matrix of the 3 prenatal care goals and 2

HCD concepts: (1) observation (“How is prenatal care failing to meet those goals?”) and (2) ideation

(“How would prenatal care be delivered in an ideal setting?”). Representative quotes were combined

in tables to identify emerging themes and findings. In February 2021, we completed 4 member-

checking interviews (2 patients and 2 HCWs) to confirm that findings accurately represented

participants’ experiences. No substantial changes were recommended.

Results

Nineteen Black patients (mean [SD] age, 28.4 [5.9] years; 19 [100%] female) and 17 of the 19 HCWs

(mean [SD] age, 47.9 [15.7] years; 15 female [88.2%]; and 13 [76.5%] Black, 1 [5.9%] Latinx, 3 [17.6%]

White, and 1 [5.9%] of 2 races) completed the surveys. Most patients had public insurance (17 of

19 [89.5%]), were multiparous (17 of 19 [89.5%]), and saw an obstetrician-gynecologist during

pregnancy (17 of 19 [89.5%]). Most HCWs cared for patients with public insurance (13 of 17 [76.5%])

(Table 1 and Table 2).

Interviews revealed important insights about the failures of current prenatal care delivery and

potential solutions. Participants also identified 2 cross-cutting care areas for intervention:

practitioners and prenatal care infrastructure (Table 3). We explore the following 5 aspects of

prenatal care in the context of prenatal care goals, failures, and ideal care: medical care, anticipatory

guidance, social support, practitioners, and care infrastructure.

JAMA Network Open | Obstetrics and Gynecology

3/13

Table 1. Characteristics of 19 Participating Patients

Characteristic
Patients, No. (%)
Age, mean (SD), y
28.4 (5.9)

Race and ethnicity

Black or African American
19 (100)

White
0

Latinx
1 (5.0)

Insurance

Public (Medicaid)
17 (89.5)

Commercial
2 (10.5)

Educational level

Some high school, no diploma
1 (5.3)

High school graduate, diploma or equivalent
8 (42.1)

Some college, no degree
6 (31.6)

Trade, technical, or vocational school
2 (10.5)

Associate’s degree
1 (5.3)

Bachelor’s degree
1 (5.3)

Advanced degree (master’s, professional,
or doctorate)
0

Employment

Employed for wages
3 (15.8)

Self-employed
1 (5.3)

Out of work
8 (42.1)

Unable to work
6 (31.6)

Homemaker
0

Student
1 (5.3)

Military
0

Retired
0

Relationship status

Single
8 (42.1)

In a relationship
8 (42.1)

Married
2 (10.5)

Separated or divorced
1 (5.3)

Gravidity, median (IQR)
4 (2-5)

Parity, median (IQR)
2 (1-3)

Nulliparous patients
2 (10.5)

Chronic medical conditions

Diabetes
1 (5.3)

Hypertension
3 (15.8)

Asthma
3 (15.8)

Depression
3 (15.8)

Prenatal care practitioner

Obstetrician-gynecologist
17 (89.5)

Midwife
1 (5.3)

Both midwife and obstetrician gynecologist
1 (5.3)

Did you participate in group prenatal care?

Yes
3 (15.8)

No
16 (84.2)

How satisfied were you with your prenatal care?

Very satisfied
9 (47.4)

Satisfied
9 (47.4)

Dissatisfied
1 (5.3)

Very dissatisfied
0

How often do you have trouble understanding written
materials about pregnancy?

Sometimes
6 (31.6)

Never
13 (68.4)

JAMA Network Open | Obstetrics and Gynecology

4/13

Defining Goals of Prenatal Care
Patients and HCWs affirmed the 3 goals of prenatal care identified by the American College of

Obstetricians and Gynecologists (Box; eTable 3 in the Supplement). Medical care goals included

optimizing the pregnant patient’s and infant’s health and providing reassurance that the pregnancy

was healthy. Anticipatory guidance was deemed important for preparing patients for pregnancy,

birth, and parenting. Patients and HCWs believed all patients, regardless of educational level or

parity, could benefit from information in pregnancy, although patients with less experience may

benefit most. Finally, participants identified material and social support as crucial for facilitating

prenatal care engagement.

Table 2. Characteristics of 17 Participating Health Care Workers (HCWs)

Characteristic
HCWs, No. (%)

Age, mean (SD), y
47.9 (15.7)

Sex

Female
15 (88.2)

Male
2 (11.8)

Race and ethnicity

Black or African American
13 (76.5)

White
3 (17.6)

Latinx
1 (5.9)

≥2 Races
1 (5.9)

Clinical position

Obstetrician gynecologist
2 (11.8)

Emergency medicine physician
1 (5.9)

Midwife
1 (5.9)

Nurse
1 (5.9)

Community health worker
3 (17.6)

Doula or childbirth educator
3 (17.6)

Social worker
1 (5.9)

Nutritionist
3 (17.6)

Women, infants, and children customer service
representative
1 (5.9)

Breastfeeding specialist
1 (5.9)

Lactation consultant
1 (5.9)

Dental hygienist
1 (5.9)

Duration in practice, y

<1
1 (5.9)

1-5
8 (47.1)

5-10
2 (11.8)

>10
6 (35.3)

Main client insurance type

Public (Medicaid)
13 (76.5)

Commercial
4 (23.5)

Satisfaction with current prenatal care model

Very satisfied
1 (5.9)

Satisfied
9 (52.9)

Dissatisfied
6 (35.3)

Very dissatisfied
1 (5.9)

JAMA Network Open | Obstetrics and Gynecology

5/13

Failures of Current Prenatal Care Delivery
Patients and HCWs reported that prenatal care often failed to address the 3 prenatal care goals

(Table 3; eTable 4 in the Supplement). For medical care, participants believed routine prenatal visits

often did not provide meaningful health benefits.

One client told me ‘I was pregnant before, I don’t have to go every time. And they don’t be doing

anything anyway’…. she felt that her experience wasn’t worth it. (HCW 8)

Many patients similarly did not feel reassured by routine prenatal visits that simply informed them

that the pregnancy was “getting further and further” (patient 11, multiparous, 23 weeks’ gestation).

Therefore, patients and HCWs reported that prenatal visits were low value for some patients,

particularly those who faced significant barriers to care, such as inadequate transportation. Of

interest, the same prenatal care service had different meanings for patients relative to their social

Table 3. Failures and Ideal Future of Prenatal Care to Improve the Pregnancy Experience and Outcomes
as Identified by Participants

JAMA Network Open | Obstetrics and Gynecology

6/13

needs: whereas 1 patient reported reassurance from hearing the fetal heartbeat, another who faced

homelessness found this less valuable:

She’s [the doctor] just going to check the heartbeat and it’s going to be like 10 minutes. No, I’m

not going to waste my gas. Back then, I was surviving. (patient 6, multiparous, post partum)

For some pregnant patients, particularly those who are “surviving,” it may not be worth expending

resources simply to be told they are getting “further and further.”

Patients and HCWs also identified gaps in anticipatory guidance, including lack of high-quality,

easily accessible resources for routine pregnancy information. Often, HCWs lacked time to provide

anticipatory guidance, whereas many patients were hesitant to ask their care team questions:

When you ask a lot of questions and then it looks like you don’t know what you’re talking

about…you don’t want to look like you don’t know about your own body. (patient 24,

multiparous, 20 weeks’ gestation)

As a result, patients often sought information online or through friends and family. Although these

resources were more accessible, HCWs believed these resources frequently conveyed incorrect

information. Participants were thus sometimes trapped in a cycle of misinformation, without tools to

systematically address educational needs.

Patients and HCWs identified several gaps in support for material needs, including inconsistent

screening, insufficient resources, and a complex process for accessing available services. One

reflected, “It will take you all day to find an actual good resource” (patient 12, multiparous, 20 weeks’

gestation).

Social support was also often described as inadequate. Many patients reflected on the limited

support they received from their partners: “My friend is more supportive than my boyfriend” (patient

10, multiparous, 26 weeks’ gestation). Similarly, HCWs recognized that current prenatal care delivery

did not routinely provide patients with needed support in a variety of forms—emotional and physical

support as well as comfort—that could be better addressed through prenatal care.

Patients and HCWs identified problems with current patient-professional relationships. Short

appointments with different practitioners, particularly in academic clinics, frequently made it difficult

to establish meaningful relationships: “I think a lot of times people just don’t feel like they know who

they are talking to…” (HCW 5). Having to share their personal information repeatedly with new

people made some patients feel their practitioner did not care about them. Likewise, HCWs

described barriers to developing meaningful relationships with patients:

They need to strip the administrative blah, blah, blah, out of prenatal care…because [if] you’re

not under the gun to turn over patients every few minutes…you could answer more questions.

(HCW 17)

Finally, participants believed many practitioners do not routinely and systematically address

nonmedical needs despite the tripartite goals of prenatal care.

They [providers] may not even know kind of what the family or the mother may need or want…

I don’t think it’s enough just to have the provider come in and do their thing. (HCW 5)

This HCW acknowledged that practitioners may not be aware of or trained to manage nonmedical

needs, but there “needs to be more support” in place.

Patients and HCWs identified structural issues with prenatal care delivery. Decentralized

resources made fulfilling medical and nonmedical needs challenging. In addition, many patients

reported difficulty balancing other obligations, such as work and childcare, with prenatal services.

Box. Goals of Prenatal Care Outlined
by the American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists and Confirmed
by Participants

Medical Care

Optimize health

Provide reassurance

Anticipatory Guidance

Provide education on pregnancy, birth,
the postpartum period, and parenting

Psychosocial Support

Identify material needs and provide
resources

Provide social support

JAMA Network Open | Obstetrics and Gynecology

7/13

Finally, participants reflected that prenatal care failed to account for patients’ individual needs.

As one HCW described, highlighting the importance of individualizing care:

They [providers] shouldn’t have to always be just a clinic mode, and this is exactly how we do it,

this is our cookie cutter. (HCW 11)

Ideal Prenatal Care Delivery
Although patients and HCWs identified flaws in the prenatal care system, they shared a vision for

redesigning it (Table 3; eTable 5 in the Supplement). Specifically for medical care, HCWs hoped

patients could enter pregnancy healthy, without “any chronic illnesses that goes along with it” (HCW

4). They also envisioned a system of risk-based medical care adjusted to patients’ needs. One HCW

suggested, “if it’s not high risk, it shouldn’t be treated as high risk” (HCW 7), reflecting a plan for

escalation and de-escalation of care. Finally, participants recognized the importance of having mental

health resources “automatically” available for all patients (HCW 2).

Patients and HCWs identified 3 key solutions for improving anticipatory guidance in pregnancy.

Many suggested organized curricula that systematically covers information in a “trimester-specific”

fashion (HCW 18). Participants envisioned comprehensive topics, including mental health and

parenting, emphasizing that materials should be clear, understandable, and in a “user-friendly

format” (HCW 3). Last, many described a critical need for a safe space to ask questions:

You’ve got a suicide hotline, why can’t you have a pregnancy hotline… Some people aren’t able

to say what it is that they need, what it is that they want and answers that they want to get.

(patient 3, multiparous, post partum)

This perspective suggests that patients may fear being judged for asking questions in routine clinical

settings, necessitating an anonymous place to seek information.

Patients and HCWs agreed that an ideal pregnancy would include basic material needs (eg,

food, housing, and a safe environment) and reliable health care coverage so patients would “not have

to worry about the insurance” (HCW 4). Many HCWs thought ideal social support in pregnancy would

involve a community approach. One shared,

I think the perfect pregnancy experience would be a time for excitement, a time for support—

like rallying the whole village around, I guess. (HCW 5)

Health care workers described this support built into routine care through models such as group

prenatal care, in addition to the informal support many already provided.

Patients and HCWs believed the ideal practitioner would develop strong relationships with

patients. One patient described this relationship as “…her [the doctor] just being supportive, asking

plenty of questions… not being rushed” (patient 5, multiparous, post partum). Patients believed the

practitioner should genuinely care about them, “because if the doctor don’t care about your body,

how are you supposed to know what’s going on?” (patient 12, multiparous, 20 weeks’ gestation). To

this patient, the physician’s medical knowledge was not a replacement for genuinely caring about the

patient and her “body.”

In addition, in patients’ and HCWs’ ideal model, practitioners would be the center of all aspects

of prenatal care:

They [providers] have to be all things…Actually addressing all concerns…And if it’s something

they cannot address, they need to make sure that they’re putting their patient with the

appropriate person to be able to address it. (HCW 7)

JAMA Network Open | Obstetrics and Gynecology

8/13

Building on this idea, participants stated that an ideal system would include better coordination

between the primary practitioner and other team members, including doulas or subspecialists for

high-risk pregnancies.

Finally, 2 themes emerged around ideal prenatal care delivery structure: (1) tailored care and (2)

modifications to eliminate barriers. Participants emphasized the importance of tailoring services to

patients’ needs and preferences, identified from the beginning of pregnancy:

Care should always be personalized…I think that moms would feel like they are more involved

in their care and maybe would be more likely to come to appointments if they feel like, oh, I have

set out this path for myself so I will show up. (HCW 2)

Patients and HCWs suggested 3 modifications to care delivery to overcome barriers: care navigators,

flexible prenatal care models, and colocation of services. Participants envisioned a robust network

of care navigators, such as community HCWs or doulas, who could help patients accomplish health

care tasks and feel supported. They also identified flexible prenatal care models (eg, telemedicine,

group care, and community-based clinics) and expanded hours, availability of childcare services, and

colocation of medical and nonmedical services as avenues for reducing access barriers. One HCW’s

vision of ideal prenatal care demonstrated this best:

It’s already in my head: a housing program that you make sure that they are stabilized…then

they’re attached to other resources like, a one-stop shop. The Ob/Gyn [obstetrician-

gynecologist] and the MIHP [Maternal Infant Health Program], which includes the social worker,

registered dietitian, then they would need a resource center to make sure that they’re going to

be cared for…that person is going to be able to have a chance. (HCW 15)

In summary, participants’ vision of the ideal prenatal care structure was an integrated, holistic

approach to pregnancy care—designed for patients by patients, with adequate support to meet

all needs.

Discussion

In this HCD-informed qualitative study, low-income Black patients and HCWs reported that the goals

of prenatal care are not consistently met through the existing prenatal care delivery system,

particularly for patients facing significant adverse social and structural determinants of health. The

current medicalized care structure further precludes realization of these goals by perpetuating a

standard, siloed approach to care delivery. Participants’ ideal prenatal care model, in contrast, was

centered on an engaged, supportive practitioner anchored in a community-based team, with an

integrated, flexible structure of care delivery capable of meeting patients’ diverse needs during and

beyond pregnancy.

Recent efforts, including the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s Hear Her campaign,

have elevated patients’ voices as a critical part of recognizing pregnancy complications and

preventing maternal morbidity and mortality.29 Our HCD work similarly incorporates patients’ voices

into the development of a new prenatal care system to facilitate safety, support, and satisfaction

during and after pregnancy.

Other studies of prenatal care emphasize the need for more flexible care models, with

telemedicine contacts, increased education, and improved social support.11,22,30 Our study expands

these findings to a largely low-income Black population that has faced significant maternity care

inequities in both access and outcomes.16-18

Many barriers preclude realization of the ideal prenatal care model. We lack standard screening

tools to define people’s diverse medical, anticipatory guidance, and social needs and desire for

assistance. Even once needs are identified, we lack guidance on how to partner with patients to

JAMA Network Open | Obstetrics and Gynecology

9/13

develop tailored care plans. Although participants identified the practitioner as the ideal hub for

comprehensive prenatal care planning, these individuals often lack training in nonmedical domains.

Team-based care approaches, such as those used in pediatrics and internal medicine, can facilitate

comprehensive patient care while preventing burnout.31-34 Uptake of care models that improve

accessibility, including telemedicine and group care, are limited by payer coverage and logistical

support, such as broadband internet, clinic space, and access to high-quality home monitoring

devices, such as blood pressure cuffs.9,35,36 Policy changes, including payment reform, maintenance

of telemedicine policies enacted during the COVID-19 public health crisis, and greater investment in

social and structural determinants of health, are needed to ensure people who may benefit most

from flexible models of care can access them.

For the next steps of the HCD process, we will select the most promising ideas generated

through this initial work to develop and study interventions with key community stakeholders.

Through rapid prototyping, user feedback, iteration, and implementation, we will develop and refine

interventions designed for pregnant people and those who care for them.

Many of the gaps in care delivery highlighted in this study, including the need for individualized

care plans and better integration of social and structural determinants of health, became rapidly

apparent during the COVID-19 public health crisis, when social distancing and economic hardship

exacerbated existing disparities in maternity care access and outcomes. A new national prenatal care

recommendation, the Plan for Appropriate Tailored Healthcare (PATH) in pregnancy based on

experience during the COVID-19 pandemic, emerging evidence, expert opinion, and patient input,

seeks to improve prenatal care delivery using a more flexible, comprehensive approach.37,38

Recommendations include screening for medical, social, and structural determinants from the

beginning of pregnancy; designing individualized prenatal care plans; and ensuring patients are

connected with community and health system resources. New prenatal care delivery

recommendations are an important step toward a more patient-centered approach to prenatal care—

designed for patients with patients’ input.

Limitations
Although our study provides important insights on prenatal care delivery, we acknowledge its

limitations. First, our sample is limited to patients who were engaged in prenatal care, receiving care

at safety net clinics, and seen in an urban setting; therefore, our findings may not generalize to those

unable to access routine outpatient services, receiving prenatal care in other practice settings, or

living in rural locations. Second, interviews were conducted by a White obstetrician-gynecologist

from a neighboring city; however, we took multiple steps to ensure participants’ comfort, including

establishing rapport with local community leaders, beginning interviews with handoffs from trusted

patients and HCWs whenever possible, and including research assistants from the community in

interviews. The depth and intimacy of the voices captured in these interviews reflect the willingness

of our participants to share their most personal experiences to help improve prenatal care delivery

for future patients.

Conclusions

In this qualitative study of low-income, Black pregnant people in Detroit, Michigan, and the HCWs

who care for them, prenatal care delivery failed to meet the goals and preferences of marginalized

populations. Future work is needed to translate the ideal prenatal care model described by

participants into reality. We look forward to codesigning new, flexible, tailored prenatal care

interventions that focus on whole patients in the context of their lives, preferences, and

communities.

JAMA Network Open | Obstetrics and Gynecology

10/13

ARTICLE INFORMATION
Accepted for Publication: August 25, 2022.

Published: October 24, 2022. doi:10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2022.38161

Open Access: This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the CC-BY License. © 2022 Peahl AF
et al. JAMA Network Open.

Michigan, 2800 Plymouth Rd, Bldg 14, Ann Arbor, MI 48109 (alexfrie@med.umich.edu).

Author Affiliations: Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor (Peahl, Moniz,
Dalton); Institute for Healthcare Policy and Innovation, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor (Peahl, Moniz, Heisler,
Doshi, Dalton, De Roo); Program on Women’s Healthcare Effectiveness Research, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor (Peahl, Moniz, Dalton); Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor (Heisler);
Michigan Institute for Clinical and Health Research, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor (Doshi); Institute for
Population Health, Detroit, Michigan (Daniels); Department of Emergency Medicine, Henry Ford Health System,
Detroit, Michigan (Caldwell); Department of Surgery, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor (De Roo, Byrnes); Center
for Healthcare Outcomes and Policy, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor (De Roo, Byrnes).

integrity of the data and the accuracy of the data analysis.

Concept and design: Peahl, Moniz, Heisler, Doshi, Caldwell, Byrnes.

Acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data: Peahl, Moniz, Doshi, Daniels, Caldwell, Dalton, De Roo, Byrnes.

Drafting of the manuscript: Peahl, Doshi.

Critical revision of the manuscript for important intellectual content: Peahl, Moniz, Heisler, Daniels, Caldwell, Dalton,
De Roo, Byrnes.

Obtained funding: Peahl.

Administrative, technical, or material support: Peahl, Doshi, Daniels, Caldwell.

Supervision: Peahl, Moniz, Heisler, Dalton, Byrnes.

during the conduct of the study and serving as a consultant for Maven Clinic outside the submitted work. Dr Moniz
reported receiving grants from Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, funds from Blue Cross Blue Shield of
Michigan for a statewide quality improvement work, and funds from the Michigan Department of Health and
Human Services Contract for statewide effort to meet social needs and improve inequities among Medicaid
patients during the conduct of the study. Dr Dalton reported serving on the advisory board for Bind, serving as an
expert witness for Merck, coleading a course for the Society of Family Planning, and receiving grants funding from
the National Institutes of Health and the Arnold Foundation. No other disclosures were reported.

Funding/Support: This work was supported by a grant from the Blue Cross Blue Shield Foundation of Michigan.
Dr Moniz is supported by grant K08 HS025465 from the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. Dr Heisler is
supported by grant P30 DK092926 from the National Institutes of Health.

Role of the Funder/Sponsor: The funding sources had no role in the design and conduct of the study; collection,
management, analysis, and interpretation of the data; preparation, review, or approval of the manuscript; and
decision to submit the manuscript for publication.

Additional Contributions: We would like to acknowledge University of Michigan undergraduate students Kayla
Wilson and Lexy June for their contributions to the project. They were compensated through course credit. We
would also like to acknowledge Sarah Block, BGS, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of
Michigan, for her contributions to the submission of this manuscript. Ms Block is an employee of the University of
Michigan and did not receive additional compensation.