Original Paper

A Text Messaging Intervention to Support Latinx Family Caregivers
of Individuals With Dementia (CuidaTEXT): Development and
Usability Study

Jaime Perales-Puchalt1, MPH, PhD; Mariola Acosta-Rullán1, MSc; Mariana Ramírez-Mantilla2, MSW; Paul
Espinoza-Kissell1, BSc; Eric Vidoni1, PhD; Michelle Niedens1, MSW; Edward Ellerbeck2, MD; Ladson Hinton3, MD;
Linda Loera4, MA; A Susana Ramírez5, PhD; Esther Lara3, MSW; Amber Watts6, PhD; Kristine Williams7, RN, PhD,
FNP-BC, FGSA, FAAN; Jason Resendez8, BA; Jeffrey Burns1, MD

1Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center, School of Medicine, University of Kansas Medical Center, Fairway, KS, United States
2Department of Population Health, School of Medicine, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS, United States
3Alzheimer's Disease Research Center, University of California, Davis, Sacramento, CA, United States
4Alzheimer’s Association, Southland Chapter, Los Angeles, CA, United States
5Department of Public Health, University of California, Merced, Merced, CA, United States
6Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center, Department of Psychology, University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS, United States
7Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center, School of Nursing, University of Kansas Medical Center, Fairway, KS, United States
8UsAgainstAlzheimer’s, Washington, DC, United States

Jaime Perales-Puchalt, MPH, PhD
Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center
School of Medicine
University of Kansas Medical Center
4350 Shawnee Mission Parkway
Fairway, KS, 66205
United States
Phone: 1 913 588 3716

Abstract

Background: Latinx family caregivers of individuals with dementia face many barriers to caregiver support access. Interventions
to alleviate these barriers are urgently needed.
Objective: This study aimed to describe the development of CuidaTEXT, a tailored SMS text messaging intervention to support
Latinx family caregivers of individuals with dementia.
Methods: CuidaTEXT is informed by the stress process framework and social cognitive theory. We developed and refined
CuidaTEXT using a mixed methods approach that included thematic analysis and descriptive statistics. We followed 6 user-centered
design stages, namely, the selection of design principles, software vendor collaboration, evidence-based foundation, caregiver
and research and clinical advisory board guidance, sketching and prototyping, and usability testing of the prototype of CuidaTEXT
among 5 Latinx caregivers.
Results: CuidaTEXT is a bilingual 6-month-long SMS text messaging–based intervention tailored to caregiver needs that includes
1-3 daily automatic messages (n=244) about logistics, dementia education, self-care, social support, end of life, care of the person
with dementia, behavioral symptoms, and problem-solving strategies; 783 keyword-driven text messages for further help with
the aforementioned topics; live chat interaction with a coach for further help; and a 19-page reference booklet summarizing the
purpose and functions of the intervention. The 5 Latinx caregivers who used the prototype of CuidaTEXT scored an average of
97 out of 100 on the System Usability Scale.
Conclusions: CuidaTEXT’s prototype demonstrated high usability among Latinx caregivers. CuidaTEXT’s feasibility is ready
to be tested.

JMIR Aging 2022 | vol. 5 | iss. 2 | e35625 | p. 1

(JMIR Aging 2022;5(2):e35625) doi: 10.2196/35625

KEYWORDS
Latinx individuals; mHealth; dementia; caregiving

Introduction

Background

Family caregiving for individuals with dementia has a serious
emotional, physical, and financial toll [1-8]. Most individuals
with dementia live at home and are cared for by their relatives
[9]. As the US health care system focuses mainly on acute care,
relatives provide >80% of the long-term care for individuals
with dementia [4,5]. For these reasons, caregiver support is a
key component of the National Alzheimer’s Project Act [10].

Most family caregiver interventions have been designed for
non-Latinx White individuals, and the results might not
generalize to other groups because of linguistic, cultural, and
contextual reasons [11-13]. The number of Latinx individuals
with dementia is projected to increase from 379,000 in 2012 to
3.5 million by 2060, more than any other group [14]. Latinx
individuals are more likely to become family caregivers than
non-Latinx White individuals [15]. Latinx individuals also
provide more intense and longer caregiving and experience
higher levels of caregiver depression and burden [8,15-21].
However, despite their high interest in participating in caregiver
support interventions [22], Latinx caregivers of individuals with
dementia are less likely to use caregiver support services [23,24].
This disparity is partly due to Latinx caregivers’more frequently
experienced barriers related to transportation, financial,
language, and cultural aspects compared with non-Latinx White
caregivers [23,24]. Therefore, the need for targeted caregiver
support interventions among Latinx individuals is crucial. This
need is in line with the National Institute on Aging’s call to
address health disparities in aging research [25].

SMS text messaging offers distinct advantages over websites
and apps for delivering interventions [26-28]. Although nearly
all Latinx individuals engage in SMS text messaging, Latinx
individuals’ low use of websites and apps could perpetuate
disparities in access to caregiving support [29]. Caregiver
interventions for Latinx individuals need to capitalize on SMS
text messaging, as SMS text messaging interventions (1) are
effective in treating or preventing other health conditions such
as tobacco addiction or diabetes; (2) can be used anywhere at
any time; (3) are more cost-effective than other delivery systems;
(4) can be personalized to caregivers’ preferences and
characteristics including language, culture, and needs; (5) are
highly scalable among Latinx individuals, as most own a cell
phone with SMS texting capabilities, more than other groups;
and (6) have been specifically shown to engage Latinx
individuals [30-35].

Objectives

To address Latinx individuals’disparities in access to caregiving
support, we developed CuidaTEXT (a Spanish play on words
for self-care and texting). To our knowledge, this is the first
SMS text messaging intervention for caregiver support of
individuals with dementia among Latinx individuals or any

other ethnic group. Only one other SMS text messaging
intervention exists in the context of dementia [36]. However,
that intervention was designed to increase dementia literacy
among non-Latinx Black users and is not geared toward Latinx
individuals or caregivers specifically. The aim of this study was
to describe the development of CuidaTEXT, a tailored SMS text
messaging intervention to support Latinx family caregivers of
individuals with dementia. This development corresponds to
Stage 1a of the National Institutes of Health Stage Model for
Behavioral Intervention Development (intervention generation)
[37]. This intervention will later be feasibility-tested (Stage 1b)
among Latinx family caregivers of 20 individuals with dementia
(ClinicalTrials.gov NCT04316104).

Methods

Overview

This was a mixed methods project guided by user-centered
design principles [38]. The basis for user-centered design is that
gathering and incorporating feedback from users into product
design will lead to a more usable and acceptable product. Mixed
methods are required, given the lack of literature on SMS text
messaging interventions for Latinx family caregivers of
individuals with dementia and the strengths of a combined
qualitative and quantitative approach [39]. We followed 6
user-centered design stages informed by previous research used
to develop successful behavioral intervention software [40].
The user-centered design stages are described in the next
sections.

Ethics Approval

All study procedures were approved by the institutional review
board of the University of Kansas Medical Center
(STUDY00144478). All participants provided written informed
consent.

Stage 1: Selection of Design Principles

A total of 2 design principles were specified. First, we selected
the social cognitive theory as the main behavior change principle
[41]. This principle has been successfully used in previous SMS
text messaging interventions [30]. The social cognitive theory
informs the identification of barriers to desired behaviors, setting
of realistic goals, encouragement of gradual practice to achieve
performance accomplishments of healthy behaviors (eg,
relaxation techniques or exercising), integration of testimonials
and videos to promote vicarious learning, integration of praise
to elicit social persuasion, and education to increase dementia
knowledge. Second, we chose the stress process framework
[42] to guide the development of messages to encourage coping
and social support behaviors (mediators), which are aimed at
improving role strains (eg, perceived income adequacy and
family interaction), intrapsychic strains (eg, mastery,
self-esteem, and loss of self), and, ultimately, outcomes (eg,
caregiver depression, affect, and self-perceived health).

JMIR Aging 2022 | vol. 5 | iss. 2 | e35625 | p. 2

Stage 2: Vendor Collaboration for Text Messaging
Design and Delivery

This stage aimed to materialize the vision and design
specifications of CuidaTEXT. We developed a checklist of
necessary features to identify potential vendors, including
message personalization, 2-way SMS text messaging,
scheduling, conditional branching logic for SMS text message
responses, information tracking, technical support, and cost.
We identified 3 vendors based on our previous experiences and
a basic internet search. The 3 identified vendors met all the
features, and we selected the one with the most affordable cost.
Their services also included configuration, account setup, initial
onboarding, training guides and videos, access to the vendor
system, mobile number support, and bug fixes during the
intervention. We contracted with them early in the project to
avoid delays (eg, developing the scope of work, registering as
a vendor, contracts, and software programming).

Stage 3: Evidence-Based Foundation

This stage aimed to identify core content categories based on
previous successful behavioral interventions. We searched
specifically for general caregiver support interventions
considered evidence-based informed by the Administration for
Community Living [43], PubMed literature results using the
Medical Subject Headings terms Caregivers, Dementia, and
Hispanic Americans, and recommendations on behavioral
interventions from the research team. Content categories
included dementia education, problem-solving skills training,
social network support, care management, and referral to
community resources [1,26,27,44-58].

Stage 4: Advisory Board Guidance

Advisory board guidance provided expert opinion to inform the
SMS text messaging intervention based on Latinx caregiver
needs [22,40,59,60]. We conducted 5 parallel advisory board
meetings with up to 6 Latinx caregivers and 16 clinicians and
researchers (health professionals), each lasting 60 minutes. We
used purposive sampling for the Latinx caregivers and quota
sampling for the health professionals (including at least one
person with expertise in psychiatry, social work, neurology,
dementia care interventions, Latinx research, SMS text
messaging intervention development, or behavioral health). We
conducted the caregiver advisory board sessions in Spanish and
the health professional group sessions in English. We held all
sessions via videoconference from December 2020 to May 2021
and recorded each to facilitate notetaking and analysis. The
process for each meeting was similar: the research team showed
the groups a step-by-step explanation of the components of the
study, asked specific questions pertinent to the phase of the
study, and then facilitated open discussion about the project.
The research team took detailed notes of all sessions, which
were used for further analysis. We organized the notes for
qualitative review using a pragmatic approach, a qualitative
description methodology, and thematic analysis methods
[61-63]. We coded the content of the notes using Microsoft
Word by identifying codes and themes within the text [64]. In
addition, 2 researchers (JPP and MAR) independently reviewed
the codes and resolved coding disagreements through discussion
and consensus.

Stage 5: Sketching and Prototyping

On the basis of the previous stages, 3 researchers (JPP, MAR,
and PEK) brainstormed a pool of potential SMS text messages
in English on a shared spreadsheet and later sorted the messages
by topic (initial draft keywords). We edited messages following
the Seven Principles of Communication: completeness,
concreteness, courtesy, correctness, clarity, consideration, and
conciseness [65]. This theory is popular in business
communications and has been used in patient reporting [66,67].
Bilingual, bicultural members of the research team translated
the messages into the primary Spanish dialects represented in
the United States (Mexican and Caribbean).

In addition to the SMS text message libraries, we developed a
reference booklet for participants that summarized the purpose
of the intervention and its functions. The booklet is not necessary
to use CuidaTEXT. However, the research team considered it
to be useful for those who want to learn about the intervention
faster or increase personal sense of agency. On the basis of our
previous development experience with the Latinx community
[22,30], we made the booklet available in both English and
Spanish and used lay language and a pictorial format. A total
of 7 research team members tested the SMS text messaging
prototype powered by the vendor on their own cell phones from
early June to August 2021 and provided feedback that was used
for message refinement iteratively, as suggested by the literature
[68,69]. We recorded the feedback via SMS text message
responses within the vendor platform and emails from the
research team to the vendor’s programmer. We organized the
data (SMS text messages and emails) for qualitative review
using a process identical to that described in Stage 4.

Stage 6: Usability Testing

Usability testing aimed to test a short prototype of the SMS text
messaging intervention and assessments among actual Latinx
caregivers. We used the vendor’s platform to preview the
behavior and opinions of diverse Latinx caregivers in a variety
of key scenarios (ie, reading specific messages, using keywords,
sending SMS text messages, opening links to websites and
videos, and downloading PDF files). The testing sessions were
conducted via videoconference in June 2021, lasted
approximately 90 minutes per person, and were conducted in
English and Spanish based on participant preferences. We took
detailed notes of the observations during the usability testing
sessions and participants’ comments at the end.

Sample and Assessment

We recruited 5 individuals, as suggested by software
development cost-benefit analyses [70]. In this framework, the
first participant discovers most flaws, and after the fifth user,
findings tend to repeat without learning much new. Participants
were recruited from 3 previous projects at the research center
using purposive sampling. Eligibility criteria included Spanish-
or English-speaking individuals who were aged 18 years or
older, identified as Latinx, reported providing care for a relative
with a clinical or research dementia diagnosis, and with an
Ascertain Dementia 8cognitive screening score ≥2, indicating
cognitive impairment [71,72]. Participants also had to report
owning a cell phone and being able to use it to read and send

JMIR Aging 2022 | vol. 5 | iss. 2 | e35625 | p. 3

SMS text messages. Participants received US $20 prepaid gift
cards for completing assessments. We used 3 usability
evaluation modalities. First, direct observation of task
completion (eg, texting keywords) with the intervention
prototype via monitoring of participants’ SMS text message
responses was conducted. Second, open-ended interviews of
user experience with the different tasks and suggested changes
to improve the intervention (see Multimedia Appendix 1 for a
sample) were conducted. Third, the caregiver participants
completed the System Usability Scale about their experience
with the prototype [73]. The System Usability Scale is a valid
and reliable 10-item, 5-point Likert scale. According to the
developers of the scale, scores >68 out of 100 indicate higher
levels of usability. We modified the design features iteratively
after each participant and provided the new version to the
following participant, as suggested by the literature [74]. After
2 consecutive participants reviewed and approved an SMS text
message, the following participant received an SMS text
message with different features. In addition to the usability
evaluation, we administered a survey to gather baseline
characteristics.

Data Analysis

We analyzed the qualitative data (detailed notes) from the
open-ended interviews using a process identical to that described
in Stage 4. We analyzed quantitative baseline characteristics
using central tendency estimates, frequencies, and percentages
on SPSS software (IBM Corp) [75].

Results

Overview

This section focuses on Stages 4 to 6 of the user-centered design
proposed in this project. First, we summarize the findings from
each stage. Second, we explain how these findings informed
the intervention development within each stage. Third, we
describe the final version of the intervention.

Findings From Advisory Board Guidance (Stage 4)

Table 1 shows the themes, subthemes, and descriptions of the
aspects to be considered in the development of CuidaTEXT,
according to the advisory boards. Both Latinx caregivers and
health professionals contributed to all the themes. Building on
the evidence-based foundation established in Stage 3, feedback
from this stage informed the sketching and prototyping of
CuidaTEXT. First, the advisory board emphasized that messages
should include specific content on logistics (eg, guidance on
CuidaTEXT’s functions and motivation messages), social

support, caregiver needs, care recipient needs, preparation for
the care recipient’s death, and reminders for physician visits or
medicines. This feedback informed the addition of the suggested
SMS text message content. Second, advisory board members
highlighted the importance of allowing the inclusion of >1
relative within the family to reduce burden and increase social
support. This feedback informed the decision to enroll >1
caregiver per individual with dementia in future studies. Third,
the advisory board suggested that the domains of SMS text
messages sent to caregivers should alternate often and be tailored
to the needs of caregivers. This feedback informed the inclusion
of high-priority message content at the beginning of the
intervention (eg, who to contact in case of elder abuse or suicidal
thoughts and removing weapons in the home) and the frequent
alternation of domains. This feedback also reinforced the need
to use 2-way SMS text messaging, as originally planned. Fourth,
the preferences of caregiver advisory board members varied
widely with respect to the number of messages per day
CuidaTEXT should send participants. A participant emphasized
that they would abandon the intervention if they received >1
message per day except at the beginning, which required more
messaging. Others wanted to receive 5 or more messages per
day. Eventually, a consensus was reached that CuidaTEXT
should tailor the number of messages to the preferences of
caregivers. This feedback informed the decision to send few
daily automatic messages per day to participants (generally 1).
Fifth, the advisory board emphasized the need to make keyword
names as simple and recognizable as possible and suggested
several edits in line with this idea. This feedback informed the
refinement of some keyword names. Sixth, the advisory board
suggested adding diverse information regarding COVID-19.
However, after some discussion, a consensus was met not to
develop automatic SMS text messages for CuidaTEXT, given
the rapid evolution of COVID-19 information. This feedback
informed the exclusion of COVID-19 automated information
into CuidaTEXT. Seventh, an advisory board member, guided
by her experience, highlighted the scarce existing resources for
caregivers with hearing issues and suggested that CuidaTEXT
was made as hearing impairment friendly as possible. This
feedback reinforced the idea of delivering the intervention via
SMS text messaging. This feedback also informed the use of
hearing impairment–inclusive messaging, including SMS text
messaging–based contact information of all shared resources
(eg, text telephone contact numbers) and video links with closed
caption subtitles. Eighth, the advisory board suggested several
CuidaTEXT reference booklet edits for simplification. This
feedback informed the refinement of the CuidaTEXT reference
booklet.

JMIR Aging 2022 | vol. 5 | iss. 2 | e35625 | p. 4

Table 1. Themes, subthemes, and descriptions of topics elicited during the advisory board sessions with Latinx caregivers and health professionals.

Description
Themes and subthemes

Messages should include specific content

Motivate participants to be in the program
Logistics

Address the whole family to be all on the same page; dementia stages and variation between individuals;
signs and symptoms; address stigma by normalizing dementia
Dementia education

Communication with the individual with dementia; include concrete examples (eg, allowing individuals
with dementia enough time to answer) and resources (eg, Alzheimer’s Association, health professionals,
services in Spanish, support groups, and legal assistance); communication with the health provider (eg,
expectations, what to report, encouraging clinical diagnosis, and requesting interpreters); improve family
communication (eg, understanding family roles and find strengths, knowing importance of family support,
and disclosing the diagnosis to the family); and develop active listening skills (eg, reflecting and nonverbal
language)

Social support

Cope with depression, anxiety, and stress (eg, relaxation); choose one’s battles; use sense of humor; find
positive aspects of caregiving; address loneliness; cope with loneliness; capitalize on spirituality; and
maintain a healthy lifestyle

Caregiver needs

Address behavioral symptoms as specifically as possible; address aggressive behavior (eg, understanding
the disease causing it, distraction techniques, and communication when the person is aggressive); address
anxious behavior (distraction techniques and prevention); help the individual with dementia; address
daily care of the individual with dementia, including healthy eating, dressing, hygiene, and doing fulfilling
activities

Care recipient needs

Information about what to expect at the end of the life of the individual with dementia; grieving strategies
and tips
Preparation for the care recipients’
death

Set notifications to remind caregivers of medications or physician visits
Appointments for the physician or
medicine

More than 1 family member should be allowed to participate, to share responsibilities, avoid burdening
a caregiver by having to educate the rest, promote collective understanding about what the individual
with dementia is experiencing, and reduce the isolation of the caregiving process

Need to integrate other family members

Alternate content often (eg, educational, caregiver tips, and resources) and tailor content to caregivers’
needs
Messages should follow a certain order

Limit mandatory message frequency to 1 per day (in general) and tailor frequency and timing to caregivers’
preferences
Messages should have a certain dose

Reliable education about caring during COVID-19, including what to do if infected, risks, vaccines, and
vaccine locations and resources for those experiencing technological divide. As changes in COVID-19
evolve quickly, it was decided not to automate messages and send only ad hoc information as needed

How to integrate COVID-19 into Cuida-
TEXT

Use simple and recognizable keyword names if possible; allow platform recognition of alternative
spellings and typos; and edit specific keywords: STRESS vs RELAX, GRIEF vs ENDOFLIFE or LOSS,
BANO vs ORINAR, DUELO vs FINDEVIDA, PACIENTE vs SERQUERIDO

Some keyword names need editing

Given that SMS text messages are visual, this intervention can be optimized for people with hearing
impairment
CuidaTEXT could benefit people with
hearing impairment

Shorten booklet and include fewer and more realistic examples by including a matrix of the different
keyword messages
Reference booklet needs editing

Findings From Sketching and Prototyping (Stage 5)

Table 2 shows the themes, subthemes, and descriptions of
aspects considered in the development of CuidaTEXT based on
the feedback from SMS text messages from the team during the
testing of the prototype and suggestions provided by the
vendor’s programmer. These aspects led to several solutions.
First, we allowed the platform to recognize common misspelling
or alternative spellings for keywords (eg, for the keyword
Behavior, the platform should also accept Behaviour, Behaviors,
Behaviours, and Behavour). Second, we edited words to
eliminate misspellings or replace words that required high

literacy levels or specialized knowledge (eg, glutes vs rear).
Third, we used a vendor-owned link shortener to save SMS text
message characters, as using a third-party link shortener could
lead to phone carriers identifying messages as spam and
subsequently blocking them. Fourth, we added code to embed
the participant’s first name in SMS text messages to personalize
them. Fifth, we adjusted the time of delivery of each daily
automatic SMS text message to account for participants’ time
zone. Sixth, we requested that the vendor allow keyword
libraries to loop back to the first SMS text message after
reaching the last one on the list.

JMIR Aging 2022 | vol. 5 | iss. 2 | e35625 | p. 5

Table 2. Themes, subthemes, and descriptions of topics elicited during the sketching and prototyping stage, gathered via SMS text message responses
from the team and correspondence with the SMS text messaging vendor.

Description
Themes and subthemes

Testing actions

Ensuring the platform responded with an automatic SMS text message instantly upon sending a specific
keyword
Testing keyword responses

Ensuring the platform received SMS text messages other than keywords, intended for the coach, such as
“thank you!”
Testing live chat

Ensuring alternative spellings and misspellings of keywords are recognized by the platform as such
Testing alternative spellings of key-
words

Ensuring links to websites directed to the right place and downloaded PDF files
Testing links and PDF downloads

Ensuring reminders for medications or physician appointments were sent at the specified date and time
Testing SMS text message re-
minders

Ensuring no cross-project contamination and other features (eg, nonbusiness hours response and START
keyword to enroll)
Testing other logistics

Concerns

Alerting the presence of misspellings in the SMS text message sent by the platform or suggesting editing
the wording
Messages need editing

The link shortener the team had used would be identified as spam by the cell phone carrier and blocked
Need to use a different link shorten-
er

The team wanted a function that automatically embedded the first name at the beginning of some SMS text
messages
Need to embed first names in mes-
sages

The team wondered how messages could be sent at specific times depending on participants’ time zone
Need to tailor timing to time zone

Keywords stopped sending after they reached the bottom of the library
Need keyword libraries to loop

The response on sending a message out of business hours was not set correctly
Need to edit out of business hours
timing

The team wondered if links could be embedded within words that would open upon clicking on them
Preference to embed links within
words

Findings From Usability Testing (Stage 6)

Of the 5 participating caregivers in the usability testing, 4 (80%)
were women. The mean age was 44.6 (SD 6.8; range 33-50)
years. All participants were insured, and their mean level of
education was 15.6 (SD 2.2; range 12-18) years. All 5
participants identified as Latinx, 40% (2/5) as Native American,
20% (1/5) as White, and 40% (2/5) as >1 race. All participants
were born outside of the United States, including Mexico (1/5,
20%), Central America (2/5, 40%), and South America (2/5,
40%). All but one participant completed the intervention and
assessments in Spanish, and their self-perceived level of spoken
English was medium (2/5, 40%), high (1/5, 20%), and very high
(2/5, 40%). Participants were daughters (3/5, 60%), a son (1/5,
20%), and a granddaughter (1/5, 20%) of an individual with
dementia. Their average care recipient’s age was 77.0 (SD 5.1;
range 72-83) years.

In general, participants completed the surveys and texting tasks
without any major issues (eg, reading specific messages, using
keywords, sending SMS text messages, opening links to
websites and videos, and downloading PDF files). Observations
of participants’ reactions during the usability testing and
comments at the end of the testing revealed some minor
concerns and generally positive feedback (Table 3). We
addressed the concerns in various ways. First, we replaced
expressions that were hard to understand (eg, 24/7 for Spanish

speakers with at any time). Second, we added context to several
SMS text messages to improve understanding. For example,
we explained that a caregiver forum is a web platform to share
experiences with other caregivers, that the content of a PDF file
of a Latin American healthy recipe book alternated pages in
English and Spanish, the function of specific keywords, the
keyword options using simple graphics, that keywords can be
sent more than once for additional messages, and that websites
and other resources had a Spanish-language option. Third, we
tailored the response to the keyword STOP (discontinuing the
intervention). We also tailored the notification CuidaTEXT
automatically sends out when a participant texts outside of
business hours by including both languages within the same
message because the platform did not allow separate messages
in English and Spanish.

Participants shared mostly positive feedback at the end of the
interview, including the following. First, satisfaction with the
intervention in terms of general content, logistics, and simplicity
was high. Comments included the following: “I think the
program is great,” “I love the information and the testimonials,”
“The messages made me feel like I’m not alone and put things
into perspective,” and “The messages are simple, and the
gratitude-theme messages helped.” Second, participants
expressed their gratitude to the CuidaTEXT team for developing
the intervention. Comments included the following: “Thank
you for creating this type of program!” Third, they expressed

JMIR Aging 2022 | vol. 5 | iss. 2 | e35625 | p. 6

their need and that of the community to use this intervention.
Comments included the following: “I hope we can use it soon
because we need it” and “I think it’s going to be very helpful
for caregivers emotionally and personally.” The mean System

Usability Scale score was 97 and ranged from 90 to 100, which
is above the standard cutoff of 68. These scores indicate that
the intervention’s usability holds promise.

Table 3. Themes, subthemes, and descriptions of topics elicited during the pilot test with 5 Latinx caregiver participants via observation or comments.

Description
Themes and subthemes

Participants’ concerns

Expressions such as 24/7 or the + sign for more were hard to understand, especially for Spanish-speaking
Latinx individuals
Expressions are hard to understand

Spanish-speaking participants had issues pronouncing the original name CuidaTXT and suggested Cui-
daTEXT
CuidaTXT is hard to read in Spanish

Some SMS text messages required additional context or an explanation to be understood, for example,
for the word forum
Context is needed for understanding

In one instance, responding YES or NO to a specific question was not followed by a preconfigured response
Branching did not work

The response on discontinuing the program or sending a message out of business hours was only in English
Need to edit language of functions

A participant suggested adding nutrition as a healthy lifestyle action for caregivers
Need for caregiver lifestyle messages

Other comments from participants

Satisfaction with the intervention in general, content, logistics, and simplicity
Satisfaction with the intervention

Expressions of gratitude for developing the intervention
Gratitude for the intervention

Highlighting the need for this intervention among Latinx individuals and themselves
Highlighting need for this intervention

Final Product

Figure 1 summarizes the final CuidaTEXT product, including
an example of the 3 types of SMS text messaging interaction
modalities (daily automatic, keyword-driven, and live chat
messages) and the reference booklet. The final version of
CuidaTEXT includes 244 English- and 244 Spanish-language
messages within the daily automatic SMS text message library.
These messages will be automatically sent to all participants,
starting with approximately 3 messages per day for the first 2
weeks, 2 per day for the following 2 weeks, and 1 per day for
the remainder of the intervention. This daily automatic SMS
text message library includes logistics messages that greet the
participant on starting and completing the intervention, explain

the intervention functions (eg, reminding participants of the
keywords they can use for help with specific topics), and
reinforce participants for being in the intervention after 2 weeks
initially and monthly. The remainder of the daily automatic
library includes the messages that the research team and advisory
board considered the core from each domain. These domains
include messages for (1) dementia education, (2) caregiver
self-care messages, (3) support to and from others, (4) education
about the dying and grief processes, (5) generic problem-solving
strategies for behavioral symptoms, (6) specific strategies to
help with the daily care of individuals with dementia, and (7)
specific strategies to help address or cope with the behavioral
symptoms of individuals with dementia.

JMIR Aging 2022 | vol. 5 | iss. 2 | e35625 | p. 7

Figure 1. Final CuidaTEXT product: SMS text messaging interaction modalities and booklet.

CuidaTEXT
also contains messages for 2 types of
keyword-driven messages, the content keywords and menu
keywords. Content keywords automatically send tips, resources,
or other types of content in response to SMS text messages that
include a specific keyword (eg, STRESS and RESOURCES).
These keywords reflect the same domains as the daily automatic
SMS text message library, except that their content is not
considered core but rather an in-depth expansion for those who
need further support with those domains. Menu keywords simply
remind the participant which content keywords are in that
category. For example, texting the menu keyword CAREGIVER
will drive an automatic response reminding participants that
content keywords within that domain include STRESS,
WELLBEING, and LIFESYLE. Table 4 shows the function and
an example of each content keyword, the menu keyword they
belong to, and the number of messages in each content keyword
library.

Any SMS text message other than keywords sent by participants
will be received as a live chat by a bilingual and culturally
proficient coach trained in dementia care. The coach will be
available during business hours and will assist participants in
whatever their need is (eg, additional information about a
caregiver grant and programming 3-way calls with a clinic).
The coach will have a bachelor’s degree or higher in a
behavioral health-related area, will be trained in dementia care,
and will be given a list of general contacts to find local resources
(eg, Alzheimer’s Association hotline and Eldercare Locator).
The final version of the CuidaTEXT reference booklet includes
19 pages with nine chapters: (1) What Is Dementia, (2) Signs
and Symptoms of Dementia, (3) Why Focus on Latino
Caregivers, (4) CuidaTEXT (Automatic Messages), (5) Assistant,
(6) Notifications, (7) Keywords, (8) Materials, and (9) Contact
Information.

JMIR Aging 2022 | vol. 5 | iss. 2 | e35625 | p. 8

Table 4. Keywords and their function and size of each keyword library in number of messages (n).

Messages, n
Function of content keyword
Menu keyword (English and Span-
ish)
Content keyword (English and Spanish)

54
Basic dementia information: types, stages, and impact
None
EDUCATION and EDUCACION

33
Strategies to cope with stress, such as relaxation
CAREGIVER and CUIDADOR
STRESS and CALMA

30
Strategies and tips to improve well-being, such as
gratitude and cognitive restructuring
CAREGIVER and CUIDADOR
WELLBEING and BIENESTAR

21
Tips to maintain a healthy lifestyle, such as exercising
CAREGIVER and CUIDADOR
LIFESTYLE and SALUDABLE

19
Tips to improve family communication
SUPPORT and APOYO
FAMILY and FAMILIA

15
Tips to improve communication with health providers
SUPPORT and APOYO
DOCTOR and MEDICO

37
Tips to improve communication with the individual
with dementia
SUPPORT and APOYO
PATIENT and PACIENTE

17
Tips to communicate with children about dementia
SUPPORT and APOYO
CHILDREN and NINOS

33
Strategies to improve listening skills
SUPPORT and APOYO
LISTENING and ESCUCHA

26
Contact information of resources such as support
groups, legal and financial assistance, or food delivery
SUPPORT and APOYO
RESOURCES and RECURSOS

19
General strategies to solve challenging behaviors
None
SOLVE and SOLUCION

30
Education on end-of-life care and tips for grieving
None
GRIEF and DUELO

52
Tips to think of fun activities and adjust them to the
abilities of individual with dementia
CARE and CUIDADO
ACTIVITITES and ACTIVIDADES

36
Tips to make eating easier and healthier for the indi-
vidual with dementia
CARE and CUIDADO
EATING and COMER

18
Tips to help the individual with dementia get dressed
and groomed
CARE and CUIDADO
DRESSING and VESTIR

24
Tips to help the individual with dementia take a bath
or shower
CARE and CUIDADO
BATHING and DUCHA

24
Tips to manage the incontinence or constipation of the
individual with dementia
CARE and CUIDADO
TOILET and BANO

27
Tips to improve medication adherence
CARE and CUIDADO
MEDICATIONS and MEDICAMENTO

50
Tips to keep the home safe
CARE and CUIDADO
HOME and CASA

22
Tips to detect when it is no longer safe for the individ-
ual with dementia to drive and how to manage it
CARE and CUIDADO
DRIVE and CONDUCIR

31
Tips to cope with manage the aggressive behavior of
the individual with dementia
BEHAVIOR and CONDUCTA
ANGER and ENFADO

33
Tips to cope with manage the anxious behavior of the
individuals with dementia
BEHAVIOR and CONDUCTA
NERVOUS and NERVIOS

19
Tips to cope with manage the depressed mood of the
individual with dementia
BEHAVIOR and CONDUCTA
DEPRESSION and TRISTE

22
Tips to cope with manage the psychotic symptoms of
the individual with dementia
BEHAVIOR and CONDUCTA
DELUSIONS and DELIRIOS

20
Tips to cope with manage the repetitive behaviors of
the individual with dementia
BEHAVIOR and CONDUCTA
REPEAT and REPETIR

18
Tips to improve the sleep quality of the individual with
dementia
BEHAVIOR and CONDUCTA
SLEEP and DORMIR

23
Tips to cope with manage the wandering behavior of
the individual with dementia
BEHAVIOR and CONDUCTA
WANDER and DEAMBULAR

18
Tips to cope with manage the inappropriate sexual
behaviors of the individual with dementia
BEHAVIOR and CONDUCTA
INAPPROPRIATE and INAPROPIADO

12
Tips to cope with manage the hoarding behavior of
the individual with dementia
BEHAVIOR and CONDUCTA
HOARDING and ACUMULAR

JMIR Aging 2022 | vol. 5 | iss. 2 | e35625 | p. 9

Discussion

Principal Findings

This study aimed to describe the development of CuidaTEXT,
an SMS text messaging intervention, to support Latinx family
caregivers of individuals with dementia. We followed
user-centered design principles to ensure the intervention’s
tailoring and usability among Latinx caregivers of individuals
with dementia. After a series of user-centered design stages,
CuidaTEXT’s prototype showed a very high usability score,
indicating great promise for the intervention’s feasibility and
acceptability.

Comparison With Previous Work

To our knowledge, this is the first SMS text messaging
intervention for caregiver support of individuals with dementia
among Latinx individuals and any other ethnic group. Very few
evidence-based and culturally tailored caregiver support
interventions have been developed for Latinx individuals. These
interventions include fotonovelas, webnovelas, support groups,
care 
management, 
and 
psychoeducational 
programs
[28,45,56,57,76]. The modality of all these interventions has
been individual or group face-to-face, computer-based,
telephone-based, or mail-based. CuidaTEXT has the potential
to address implementation gaps in these interventions by (1)
increased accessibility compared with face-to-face or web-based
interventions; (2) improved acceptability compared with
phone-based interventions; (3) tailoring the content to the needs
of caregivers rather than using rigid curricula; (4) addressing
stigma by privately sending SMS text messages to the
caregivers’ cell phone; and (5) reduced demand on the health
care workforce to deliver the intervention, therefore improving
fidelity and facilitating future scale-up of the intervention.
Although CuidaTEXT was developed for Latinx individuals,
similar interventions may be beneficial for other ethnic groups,
especially those in rural areas, given the nearly universal cell
phone ownership of most populations in the United States [31].

The advisory board suggested SMS text message content related
to dementia education, social support, care, caregiver needs,
community resources, and appointment reminders. These
domains are most frequently included in multidomain caregiver
support interventions, which have been shown to be more
efficacious than single-domain interventions [1,26]. As
mentioned in a recent federally commissioned report, of all
interventions to improve caregiver well-being, multicomponent
interventions use the most targeted components, and they
possibly address at least one critical need across a wide range
of individual caregiver needs, thus improving outcomes for
caregiver and individuals with dementia [77].

The advisory board encouraged the inclusion of >1 family
member per individual with dementia. This idea is in line with
the fact that caregiving tasks and decision-making among Latinx
individuals are more likely to be shared by multiple relatives
of the individuals with dementia [78,79]. In fact, interventions
rarely include other family members, which is likely a reflection
of centering interventions on non-Latinx White caregivers
[77,80]. According to our advisory board, the potential benefits

of including more >1 family member may include improving
caregiving quality and reducing caregiver burden.

Limitations

This study has several limitations. First, most participants in
the usability testing stage identified as the adult children of
individuals with dementia, were women, were relatively highly
educated, were medically insured, and had at least a medium
level of English proficiency. This sample may have placed a
higher focus of the refinement of the intervention on these
groups than on men, spousal caregivers, and those with lower
educational attainment, who lack of medical insurance, with
limited English proficiency, or who may have uniquely different
needs. However, most caregivers are women, and individuals
from many of these other groups were represented in other
stages of the development of CuidaTEXT (eg, advisory board).
Second, the eligibility to participate in the caregiver advisory
board sessions and the usability testing was based on self-report
of the care recipient’s dementia status. In addition, we excluded
individuals who could not read and send SMS text messages.
Although the size of this group is minimal [31], future efforts
could include this group by developing training to those without
texting experience. Third, CuidaTEXT does not consider
caregivers’ baseline characteristics to tailor the automated
content of SMS text messages and does not tailor the timing at
which SMS text messages are sent, as suggested by some
advisory board participants. We consider that including
keyword-driven messages addresses many of the same concerns
and reduces the reliance on a baseline assessment. Any need
beyond those addressed by the keyword-driven messages can
also be addressed via live chat with a coach. Fourth, this study
assessed the usability of the CuidaTEXT prototype. Although
this prototype included the most relevant aspects of CuidaTEXT,
future studies need to assess the usability of the entire
intervention.

Implications and Future Directions

This study has implications for public health, clinical practice,
and research. Regarding the public health implications,
CuidaTEXT or similar interventions have high potential for
implementation, given their ubiquitous accessibility and reliance
on technology rather than on human labor. Experts in dementia
caregiver interventions highlight the importance of designing
interventions with implementation in mind from the beginning
of the intervention for its future success [81]. The user-centered
design used to develop this intervention will increase the chances
of this intervention being usable, acceptable, feasible, and
effective in the future. Regarding clinical practice, usability
testing participants described the prototype as something that
was needed by them and the Latinx community. If CuidaTEXT
proves to be effective in future studies, this intervention could
be easily implemented in clinics and community organizations,
by having the caregivers send an SMS text message to enroll
or by having staff enter their phone numbers and names on a
website. The SMS text messaging modality may be combined
with other modalities to enhance its effectiveness. For example,
coaches or social workers could, in addition to interacting via
live chat SMS text messages, conduct ad hoc visits or calls with
the caregiver. Other findings from this study might also be

JMIR Aging 2022 | vol. 5 | iss. 2 | e35625 | p. 10

useful to clinicians, including the need to consider shared
caregiver roles within Latinx families and other preferences.
The findings reported in this manuscript may also inform future
research. Future SMS text messaging studies (whether they are
dementia-related or not) might decide to address the content or
logistics of their interventions based on the feedback we received
from the advisory board sessions or usability testing feedback.
Caregiver studies might want to test the efficacy of the same
caregiver support intervention to only the primary caregiver
versus multiple caregivers within the same family. Future studies
will test the feasibility and acceptability of CuidaTEXT among
a diverse sample of Latinx caregivers, including variations in
regional, linguistic, age, socioeconomic status, relationship to
the individual with dementia, hearing functioning, and other
important characteristics. This diverse representation will allow
further intervention refinement, informed by qualitative analysis
of SMS text messaging interactions and open-ended questions
about their experiences using CuidaTEXT. If the future

feasibility study is successful, we will conduct a fully powered
randomized controlled trial to assess its efficacy.

Conclusions

This study describes the development of CuidaTEXT, the first
tailored SMS text messaging intervention specifically designed
to support family caregivers of individuals with dementia in the
Latinx community. The prototype of CuidaTEXT has shown
very high usability, addresses Latinx caregiver needs, and has
the potential for widespread implementation. The findings from
several stages of the user-centered design provide useful
information to guide the development and refinement of
caregiver support interventions for Latinx individuals and other
groups. This information contributes to efforts to address
dementia disparities among Latinx individuals and gaps in the
implementation of caregiver support interventions for this
sizable population. We will soon test the feasibility and
acceptability of this promising intervention (CuidaTEXT) in a
1-arm trial among Latinx family caregivers of 20 individuals
with dementia (ClinicalTrials.gov NCT04316104).