https://doi.org/10.1177/1932296818804802

Journal of Diabetes Science and Technology
2018, Vol. 12(6) 1132­–1142
© 2018 Diabetes Technology Society

Article reuse guidelines: 
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
DOI: 10.1177/1932296818804802
journals.sagepub.com/home/dst

Symposium/Special Issue

The rapidly evolving technological landscape has resulted in 
a significant expansion of the use of wireless technology and 
complex, securely connected digital platforms in medical 
devices. Smartphone devices and mobile applications are 
highly usable and can remove friction from many daily tasks, 
for example, by providing clear and intuitive driving direc-
tions, allowing the deposit and withdrawal of funds, and 
granting ubiquitous access to information, thus simplifying 
life. Similarly, people with diabetes can benefit significantly 
from smartphone devices with applications designed to assist 
them with the numerous and complex daily management 
needs, including blood glucose (BG) monitoring, carbohy-
drate-counting, bolusing for meals, setting reminders and 
alerts, and adjusting insulin delivery settings, allowing for 

optimal management and potential avoidance of health com-
plications. These technologies can also provide seamless 
wireless connectivity and cloud infrastructure for both 
patients and health care providers to access data to further 
optimize treatment. To ensure patient safety, usability, and 
effectiveness with these devices, a rigorous development 
process that incorporates the science of user experience (UX) 
is critical.

804802 DSTXXX10.1177/1932296818804802Journal of Diabetes Science and TechnologyPillalamarri et al
meeting-report2018

1Insulet Corporation, Billerica, MA, USA

Aiman Abdel-Malek, PhD, Insulet Corporation, 600 Technology Park Dr, 
Billerica, MA 01821, USA. 

Novel Bluetooth-Enabled Tubeless 
Insulin Pump: A User Experience Design 
Approach for a Connected Digital 
Diabetes Management Platform

Sandhya S. Pillalamarri, BS, MHCI, ALM1,  
Lauren M. Huyett, PhD1, and Aiman Abdel-Malek, PhD1

Abstract
Background: Medical device technology is evolving at a rapid pace, with increasing patient expectations to use modern 
technologies for diabetes management. With the significant expansion of the use of wireless technology and complex, 
securely connected digital platforms in medical devices, end user needs and behaviors have become essential areas of focus.

Methods: This article provides a detailed description of the user-centered design approach implemented in developing the 
Omnipod DASH™ Insulin Management System (Insulet Corp., Billerica, MA) Bluetooth®-enabled locked-down Android 
device handheld controller (Personal Diabetes Manager, PDM). Key methodologies used in the PDM design are described, 
including how the science of user experience (UX) was integrated into new agile product development. UX methods 
employed included heuristic evaluations of insulin pumps, iterative formative usability testing, information architecture 
studies, in-home ethnographic visits, participatory design activities, and interviews.

Results: Over 343 users participated in UX research and testing. Key design choices informed by UX research included 
updating the layout of critical data on the PDM home page, providing access to requested contextual information while 
a bolus is in progress, and creating an easy-to-understand visual of a 24-hour basal program. Task completion rates for 
comprehending information on the PDM home page were 87% or greater. The System Usability Scale result for the design 
prior to limited market release was 84.4 ± 13.4 (out of 100; n = 37).

Conclusions: The UX process described in this article can serve as a blueprint for medical device manufacturers seeking 
to enhance product development. Adopting UX research methodologies will help ensure that new diabetes devices are safe, 
easy-to-use, and meet the needs of users.

Keywords
connected devices, diabetes, insulin pump, internet of things, Omnipod, patch pump, product design, product development, 
tubeless pump, user experience, user research

1133

Smartphone devices equipped with modern touchscreen 
capabilities, wireless communication radios, and powerful 
processing powers present a platform that can be adapted to 
create a safe, secure, and user-friendly handheld controller 
for an insulin pump. However, the adaptation of a consumer 
off-the-shelf smartphone for use in a safety-critical con-
nected medical device requires the introduction of key com-
petencies that have not traditionally been a part of medical 
device development. In addition to the fundamental require-
ments for mobile software, wireless communications, and 
cybersecurity, expertise in user-centered design is critically 
important. In this article we describe the key elements 
required to create a simple-to-use medical device that lever-
ages smartphone technology, using the remote handheld con-
troller of a recently FDA cleared novel Bluetooth®-enabled 
tubeless insulin management system1,2 as an example. This 
article presents a blueprint for the medical device industry to 
design products based on smartphone technology that are not 
only safe and effective, but also easy-to-use.

Methods

User Experience in Medical Device Development

Usability and Patient Safety.  Increased awareness of the fre-
quency and magnitude of medical errors has underscored the 
importance of considering a medical device’s usability as an 

integral part of its design. Medical device use-related errors 
can lead to patient injury and even death.3,4 The risk of a use-
related error is increased by a poorly designed device with a 
complicated and difficult UI, which may present problems 
even for trained users.3,5,6 The importance of product usabil-
ity has been recognized by the FDA, which has added spe-
cific usability requirements to its Good Manufacturing 
Practice regulations and published guidelines for interface 
design and usability testing.7-11 Accordingly, a critical area 
of focus for medical device manufacturers is the develop-
ment of products that are designed to balance the end user 
experience, evaluated against use-risks identified through 
human factors (HF) analysis and testing.3,10,12

Novel Bluetooth-Enabled Tubeless Insulin Management System.  The 
Omnipod DASH™ Insulin Management System (Insulet Cor-
poration, Billerica, MA) comprises two components: the tube-
less insulin pump (Pod) and a wireless remote handheld 
controller, the Personal Diabetes Manager (PDM) (Figure 1). 
The system is described in detail elsewhere.1,2 Briefly, the PDM 
is a touchscreen, locked-down Android device that is used to 
remotely control insulin delivery and periodically monitor Pod 
status. The PDM device establishes secure, bidirectional, wire-
less communication with both the Bluetooth-enabled Pod and 
the CONTOUR® NEXT One BG meter (Ascensia Diabetes 
Care, Basel, Switzerland). The PDM can also communicate 
wirelessly with the user’s mobile phone and the Insulet Cloud, 

Figure 1.  Omnipod DASH™ Personal Diabetes Manager (PDM), Pod, and integrated data communication systems. The PDM 
communicates with the Pod and the CONTOUR® NEXT ONE Blood Glucose meter through Bluetooth® wireless technology. The 
PDM uploads data to the secure Insulet Cloud via Wi-Fi, which can then be viewed on a personal cell phone using the Omnipod 
VIEW™ mobile application. The PDM can also communicate through Bluetooth wireless technology to the Omnipod DISPLAY™ 
mobile application installed on a personal cell phone. The Omnipod DISPLAY mobile application can then automatically upload data 
to the Insulet Cloud using Wi-Fi or cellular data. Data uploaded to the Insulet Cloud will automatically merge with the Glooko® data 
management system to allow integrated data management. Reprinted with permission.2

1134	

enabling applications including Omnipod DISPLAY™ and 
Omnipod VIEW™, which will allow users and caregivers, 
respectively, to view a user’s PDM data on their mobile phones 
(Figure 1).
The genesis of this newly FDA cleared insulin manage-
ment system was extensive voice-of-user research and input 
regarding patient needs to transition to pump therapy from 
multiple daily injections (MDI). To ensure innovative prod-
uct design and usability and optimize the holistic experience 
of end users, the UX process was included in each phase of 
the product development lifecycle. The UIs for the PDM and 
its related suite of mobile applications were developed con-
sidering all edge case scenarios and conditions required for a 
multilayer connected device system for insulin delivery.

Process Overview.  At its core, UX is about building systems 
that are highly usable, safe, and effective while exceeding 
user expectations, which is achieved by incorporating the 
voice of the end user throughout all stages of development. 
The UX process involves four primary phases: user 
research, conceptualizing, designing, and testing.13 The 
user research phase is paramount as it enables the product 
development team to unearth and understand unmet user 
needs, thereby identifying the current state of the user 
journey and pinpointing breakdowns and pain points. The 
opportunities and insights discovered during user research 
drive user-centered design innovation. The conceptualiz-
ing phase involves synthesizing identified user needs into 
documented user and system requirements, which helps 
the team visualize solutions. Target user groups are identi-
fied, researched, and analyzed with cluster mapping and 
pattern analysis to create archetype user personas that rep-
resent a summary of the types of end users who might 
directly or indirectly influence and experience the end 
product.14-17 The design phase includes brainstorming, 
white boarding, conceptualizing, and sketching ideas. 
These ideas are then converted to low-fidelity and high-
fidelity screens, which are prototyped rapidly. In the test-
ing phase, robust prototypes that simulate the commercial 
product are evaluated by potential users recruited and 
screened for eligibility based on the aforementioned user 
research persona mapping and market segmentation analy-
sis. The four phases are iterated until all requirements are 
satisfied and success criteria are met.

Team Roles and Responsibilities.  While the UX process employs 
proven scientific methodologies,10,13,18,19 it takes a carefully 
planned team structure, along with cross-functional collabora-
tion, to successfully support this process. For the PDM UI 
development, core competencies were established around UX 
research, interaction design, visual design, prototyping, and 
technical writing. The user research and interaction design 
teams focused on information architecture, while the technical 
writing team executed on content strategy and analysis of 
user’s language within the UI. Working together with the 

clinical, commercial, training, and software engineering 
groups, these core UX disciplines delivered on final UX flows, 
assets, and graphical UI specifications.

User Experience Methodologies for New Device 
Development

The following UX methodologies and techniques were 
applied in conjunction with the agile product development 
lifecycle of the PDM (Figure 2).13,20,21 The overarching 
goal was to understand the user journey, frame the users’ 
motivations and needs in each step of the journey, and 
create design solutions that are appropriate for each. 
Representative users within each identified user group were 
interviewed to create relatable persona snapshots highlight-
ing demographics, behaviors, diabetes management chal-
lenges, product success factors, needs and attitudes, and 
tolerance toward key features such as BG meters, technol-
ogy, and connectivity.14-17 The UX team then visualized the 
device ecosystem by evaluating the value proposition 
against that of industry standards to understand best prac-
tices, determine what worked well among those standards, 
and identify opportunities to innovate.

Quantitative and Qualitative Measurement.  The UX team estab-
lished key performance indicators (KPIs) such as time on task, 
number of steps and taps to perform tasks, and ease-of-use 
measures such as System Usability Scale (SUS) scoring.19,22-24 
The KPIs were then measured throughout device development 
and analyzed at each phase to compare the scores to direct user 
quotes and task completion success, allowing for continuous 
improvement at each phase.

Heuristic Evaluation.  In a heuristic evaluation, a team of 
expert UX professionals examines various aspects of the UI 
design and assesses them against a set of design principles 
(heuristics) to help identify areas of concern and opportuni-
ties for innovation. The UX team conducted a heuristic eval-
uation of the PDM UI at the beginning of the development 
cycle and cataloged findings when comparing the system 
against ten sets of established UX heuristics: visibility of 
system status, match between system and the real world, user 
control and freedom, consistency and standards, error pre-
vention, recognition rather than recall, flexibility and effi-
ciency of use, aesthetic and minimalist design, help users 
recognize, diagnose and recover from errors, and, finally, 
help and documentation.25-28

User Research.  A challenge in developing a connected digital 
platform for diabetes treatment is ensuring its usability 
across a wide user spectrum with varying needs. How does 
one design an innovative device that works as well for a 
2-year-old child as it does for a 78-year-old adult? User 
research is therefore arguably the most important phase when 
building complex systems, as it provides information about

1135

the users, their behavior, goals, motivations, and needs. This 
can be accomplished through focus group and participatory 
design sessions, in-home visits, and 1-1 user interviews.10,17,29 
User research for the PDM included hundreds of hours spent 
with users understanding how they currently use insulin 
pumps and unearthing MDI users’ concerns and workflows.

Information Architecture.  Information architecture studies 
enable the creation of a system content taxonomy that is 
intuitive and matches user expectations.19,30,31 In card sort 
studies, users are asked to organize cards containing pieces 
of UI content such as headings, sub-menus, terms, and spe-
cific information into categories based on where they 
would expect to find the content, and to label each cate-
gory with a name of their choice.31 Tree test studies involve 
the testing and analysis of the various pathways users 
attempt to find information and successfully complete cer-
tain tasks within the UI.19,30 Results from iterative card sort 
and tree test studies were analyzed to update the PDM UI 
content structure.

Rapid Prototyping and Iterative Usability Testing.  Lean UX research 
techniques21,32 such as lightning labs were employed during the 
early stage of PDM development, before employing iterative 

usability testing within each sprint (a time period of fixed dura-
tion with effort focused on specific functionalities of the prod-
uct). Lightning labs are a custom-developed process involving 
an intensive week of design iteration during which a cross-
functional team works collaboratively on a design challenge 
and iterates ideas with users. Rapid prototyping allowed for 
steady input of insights throughout the development process. 
Tools such as InVision, Android Studio, and Framer were uti-
lized to code prototypes in xCode and Javascript to develop 
lean and robust prototypes used for both usability and HF 
testing.

Human Factors Evaluation.  For medical devices, the HF pro-
cess is used to first minimize use-related hazards and risks 
(formative testing), and then confirm that these efforts were 
successful and users can use the device safely and effectively 
(summative testing).9,10,33,34 The UX team worked closely 
with the HF team to ensure that identified use risks were 
mitigated and tested with formative and summative HF eval-
uation studies. Robust prototypes built by the UX team were 
tested during formative HF evaluations. The final device 
programming and summative protocols were adjusted 
according to findings until all use risks were handled within 
the UI in a safe and effective manner.

Figure 2.  User experience (UX) process implemented and refined for the development of a novel Bluetooth®-enabled tubeless 
insulin management system. The customer requirements specifications (CRS) and product requirements specifications (PRS) naturally 
help the team create task flows and analysis that is then used to build the use-error risk assessment. These all serve as initial input 
to the UX team and help drive focused wireframe generation and conceptualization of features, flow and functionality. The UX team 
simultaneously conducts user research to help inform these requirements and weave those insights gathered into the concepts. The 
team also continuously tests the concepts while developing moderator guides (that test the use-risk-identified portions of the user 
interface [UI]), creating highly robust prototypes, and conducting usability testing, card sorts, tree test studies, and others. The UX team 
finalizes approved designs into detailed annotated UX flows, graphical requirement specifications (GRS), style guides and responsive 
specifications, among other deliverables. The feedback loop continues as UX performs quality assurance tests on software release builds 
and logs issue tickets for the development team and ensures final successful implementation of the UI specifications.

1136	

Results and Discussion

User Experience Methodologies Applied

User Research, Conceptualizing, Design, and Testing.  The PDM 
was developed with frequent input from participants repre-
senting a broad variety of potential user groups, including: 
tubed and tubeless insulin pump users, MDI users, expectant 
mothers with gestational diabetes requiring insulin, caregiv-
ers, nurses, and other identified user groups of various demo-
graphics such as age, socioeconomic factors, and location.
The UX team conducted heuristic evaluations of the 
Omnipod® Insulin Management System (Insulet Corporation, 
Billerica, MA) and other commercially available insulin pumps, 
identifying over 55 opportunities for innovation. Iterative UX 
formative usability testing was conducted, with a total of 8 
rounds completed. In addition, 6 in-home ethnographic visits 
were conducted to observe and understand the needs of insulin 
pump users with type 1 diabetes (T1D). Three rounds of partici-
patory design sessions were held including a total of 69 partici-
pants. The team conducted 1-1 interviews of over 25 people 
living with diabetes to help build the persona groups. Examples 
of the personas and their associated goals and diabetes manage-
ment challenges are shown in Table 1. In total, over 343 users 
participated in UX development of the system.
Results from one participatory design session are shown 
in Figure 3. Participants were provided with background 
information and task-based walkthroughs of diabetes man-
agement scenarios, and were asked to write down features, 
functionalities, and pain points that would affect product 
usage. These notes were placed on the wall for discussion, 
mapped and grouped together by theme, and the top func-
tionality changes and enhancements were determined by 
majority vote, thus enabling prominent user needs and wants 
to emerge (Figure 3A). The participants were provided sten-
cils of the exact size of the PDM form factor and art supplies 

and were asked to pictorially design the interface that would 
meet their needs per scenario (Figure 3B). Elements from the 
user-designed interfaces (Figure 3B), such as the prominent 
display of insulin on board (IOB) on the PDM lock screen, 
the status bar containing insulin reservoir and battery life 
information, and the prominent bolus button and display of 
last bolus and last BG on the PDM home page, can be seen in 
the final UIs in Figure 4. These and other activities were 
repeated several times throughout the PDM development 
with design changes made iteratively until a cohesive and 
complete flow was finalized to meet user needs. Commonly 
requested features and themes identified, and how these were 
addressed in the final design, are summarized in Table 2.
To gain a better understanding of real-life situations in 
which the device would be used, the team created mood 
boards and storyboards to capture the user journey for the 
identified personas. For example, the team analyzed the 
series of events that occurs when a young teen living with 
T1D (Table 1, Darren persona) experiences a Pod failure 
during class (Figure S1, Supplementary Data). From this 
exercise, the overall theme identified was that this user per-
sona would prefer for the alarm to notify him privately 
before sounding an audible alarm, allowing him to manage 
the situation without drawing unwanted attention to himself. 
This need, which was echoed by users in participatory 
design sessions, was addressed in the final design (Table 2, 
“Alarms and notifications”). Creating a detailed breakdown 
of the task analysis by outlining required steps, information, 
and actions to give oneself a bolus, for example, helped the 
UX team and the software engineering team understand the 
information flow.

Information Architecture Studies.  There were 4 rounds of infor-
mation architecture studies, with an average of 83 partici-
pants per round, where users were asked to provide feedback 

Table 1.  Examples of Personas and Their Associated Goals and Diabetes Management Challenges.

Persona
Goals
Diabetes management challenges

Tom—Basic pump user
52 years old, HVAC technician, MDI user 
for 29 years with T1D who recently 
switched to the Omnipod® System

•  Keep A1c low to forestall health 
problems
•  Stay healthy to watch his 
granddaughter grow up

•  Discreetly and easily manage diabetes 
while driving for work
•  Manage lows when doing physical work
•  Afraid to try temporary basal feature his 
doctor recommended

Darren—Driving teen
17 years old, student, sports-loving 
teenager trying to balance managing 
T1D with fitting in with peers

•  Earn soccer scholarship for college
•  Fit in with friends
•  Keep mother from questioning him 
about his BG highs and lows

•  Controlling BG with hormone changes
•  Dosing insulin during a soccer match, 
particularly adrenaline highs to third 
quarter crashes

Maureen—Mother of an 11-year-old 
child with diabetes
42 years old, paralegal, single mother 
balancing work and caring for her 
daughter’s T1D

•  Manage her daughter’s BG
•  Teach her daughter to carb count
•  Give daughter the freedom to be 
a “normal” kid without excessive 
monitoring

•  Tracking daughter’s BG while she is at 
school and directing her or the school 
nurse for treatment
•  Unexpected and unexplained BG highs, 
with concerns about CGM accuracy
•  Getting up to check/treat BG overnight

Abridged excerpts from three example personas developed based on user research.

1137

Figure 3.  Example images from a participatory design session with insulin pump users and caregivers for the development of a 
novel Bluetooth®-enabled tubeless insulin management system. (A) Participants were given background information and task-based 
walkthroughs of scenarios, and were asked to write down features, functionalities, and pain points that would affect device usage. These 
notes were placed on the wall for discussions and the top functionality changes and enhancements were voted and grouped together. 
(B) The participants were provided stencils of the exact PDM form factor and art supplies and were asked to design the PDM interface 
that would meet their needs per scenario. Elements from the user-designed interfaces, such as the prominent display of insulin on board 
(IOB) on the lock screen, the status bar containing insulin reservoir and battery life, and the prominent bolus button and display of last 
bolus and last blood glucose (BG) on the home page, are shown in the final designs in Figure 4.

1138	

on how well information flowed within prototype versions of 
the PDM UI. This was done through card sort studies con-
ducted for the overall menu tree structure (60 cards), with 
studies also conducted on sub-menus for the food library and 
settings. Users were asked to sort content cards into catego-
ries, or explain where they would expect to find specific con-
tent and why.
In one example (Figure 5) participants were asked where 
they would go to change the background theme image for the 
PDM lock screen. During the early development phases, the 

information architecture was confusing to users, with a fail-
ure rate of 85% to find the lock screen image. Iterated card 
sort and tree test studies provided necessary guidance and 
data to structure the navigation and flow of information 
within the UI, ensuring desired information could be found 
by the user quickly and with low risk of failures.

Developing the User Interface.  Working closely with the soft-
ware engineering team within an agile engineering process, 
use case and scenario mapping helped organize a prioritized 

Figure 4.  Examples of the PDM home page (A) and lock screen (B) interface designs at various points during the development process. 
The progression of feedback from end users on early concepts tested through iterative usability testing and other user research 
methods led to the final design, which has been thoroughly vetted with end user feedback.

1139

list of UX features and tasks to be completed into multiple 
feature sets that allowed time for the full process of UX to 
occur within each focused development period. User input 
and testing helped refine the style guide, form and input 
fields, graphs, scroll wheels, and other interactive and visual 
UI elements.
Upon completion of UX research and testing, the team 
developed detailed UX flow diagrams along with final 
graphical UI specifications for the final PDM evaluated and 
submitted to the FDA. The same process was repeated for the 
suite of associated mobile applications.

Implications to the Final Design

Information learned from the iterative UX research process 
was used to inform key PDM design choices. Table 2 pres-
ents examples of commonly requested features, and how 
these were addressed in the final design. Additional design 
choices based on user feedback are described below.
The PDM home page design was iterated until users were 
satisfied with the layout of critical data and the visual design 
delighted them (Figure 4A). The dark background was 
changed to light for the final version, as users expressed 

difficulties with the dark background. A notification icon, 
with a badge indicating the number of new notifications, was 
added to provide a clear and consolidated indication of any 
alerts or alarms throughout the system. An easy-to-under-
stand visual representation was created for a 24-hour basal 
program and for a change in basal rates for a temporary basal 
rate increase or decrease (Figure 6A). The basal rate graph 
appears in the “Basal” tab of the home page and when creat-
ing or editing basal programs, activating temporary basal 
rates, and creating temporary basal presets. Task completion 
rates for comprehending information on the home page 
(including the “Dashboard,” “Basal,” and “Pod Info,” tabs) 
were 87% or greater (a typical target is 70%). User satisfac-
tion with the home page concepts was captured by “The top 
3 words you would use to describe this page,” shown by the 
word cloud in Figure 6B, which provides a concise visual 
depiction of the users’ impressions of the system based on 
frequency of word use.
Simplicity in the display of information was a main goal 
in the design development of the PDM UI. One key change 
from earlier concepts of the PDM lock screen (Figure 4B) 
was the simplification of information displayed. Earlier 
concepts displayed information on several data points and 

Table 2.  Examples of System Features and Functionality Incorporated Into Omnipod DASH™ Based on User Research and Feedback.

System
User-requested feature
Implemented in Omnipod DASH™

PDM
Personalization of PDM lock screen
Personal lock screen background images and customized message such 
as name and phone number
Display amount of insulin in 
reservoir at all times
Exact amount of insulin in reservoir displayed after the Pod reaches 
<50 U due to hardware properties
Display essential information during 
bolus delivery
IOB amount, last recorded BG, and delivery progress bar displayed 
during bolus delivery
PDM functionality on personal 
smartphone
The Omnipod DISPLAY™ App mirrors the PDM user interface, 
allowing PDM data to be viewed on personal smartphone
Food database for bolus calculator
Embedded food library with over 80,000 branded and unbranded 
products, which integrates directly with the bolus calculator
Intuitive user interface
Efficiency, usability, and ease of use were development priorities
Small PDM
The PDM has a small, light-weight form factor comparable to a typical 
iPhone SE device
Alarms and 
notifications
Adjustable PDM volume
Volume is adjustable with hard keys on the sides of the PDM. Vibration 
setting is an option. Hazard alarm tones override volume settings to 
meet safety requirements.
Escalating alerts and notifications
Certain alarms provide early notifications prior to a hazard alarm. If 
alarm action is not performed, a hazard alarm occurs and the PDM 
will vibrate and tone.
Ability to snooze alarms with one 
touch
Alarms and notifications are easily visible on the lock screen. Additional 
actions are needed to silence an alarm.
BG/CGM
Wireless integration with Dexcom 
CGM for trend display
The Omnipod DISPLAY App’s iOS Widget allows CGM data to be 
viewed on the same screen as Omnipod DASH data on the user’s 
personal smartphone
Wirelessly integrate with fingerstick 
BG meter
The PDM receives BG measurements from interoperable BG meter 
through Bluetooth® wireless technology
Smartphone 
companion app
App for caregiver to track patient 
data
The development of the Omnipod VIEW™ app addresses this need

Abridged list of requested features identified during user research and testing and addressed in the final PDM or associated suite of mobile applications.

1140	

metrics including notifications, last BG, last bolus, and cur-
rent basal rate, all with equal weight. The final version dis-
plays the IOB prominently, as this was the information 
users were most interested to see at a glance, with reservoir 
insulin and PDM battery life visible in the status bar. 
Personalization of the lock screen was added, including an 
image and a customized message that may be used for name 
and contact phone number.
The number of button presses/taps was optimized for 
commonly performed tasks, such as programming a meal 
bolus with manual entry of a carbohydrate amount and set-
ting a temporary basal rate decrease. Access was provided to 
requested contextual information (IOB, last bolus) while a 
bolus is in progress (Table 2).
The design was evaluated prior to the limited market 
release. The mean SUS22-24 score was 84.4 ± 13.4 (out of 
100; n = 37).

Human Factors Results

The HF validation test was a simulated-use study structured 
to mimic actual use, utilized an equivalent to production 
version of the system, and was designed to be sufficiently 
sensitive to capture use related problems, if any existed. 
Participants were representative of actual users. Task-based 
scenarios focused on the highest priority tasks associated 
with insulin delivery and represented those that a user would 
complete during typical everyday use (examples include 
activating a new Pod, delivering a bolus using the food 
library, and responding to critical alarms). All use-related 
issues that occurred during testing were evaluated through 
root cause analysis to determine the failure mode, root cause 
of the failure, consequence of the failure, and mitigations 
that exist to reduce the frequency of occurrence and risk 
associated with the failure.

Figure 5.  Information architecture studies were a critical component of the system development. Iterative testing and improvement 
was required to ensure successful completion of critical tasks. This figure shows a depiction of a card sort testing analysis of the early 
menu structure. Participants were asked where they would go to change the background theme image for the PDM lock screen. During 
the early development phases, the information architecture was confusing to users as indicated by the red color showing failure to find 
the lock screen image. Tests such as these provided necessary guidance and data to help structure the navigation and flow of information 
within the system.

1141

The results of the validation test demonstrated that the 
insulin management system was safe and effective for the 
intended users, uses, and use environments. Any additional 
modifications to the UI related to the safety critical tasks 
(including the device, training, and labeling) would not fur-
ther reduce risk, were not possible, or were not practical, and 
the remaining residual use-related risks are outweighed by the 
benefits derived from use of the device. Moreover, a process 
has been established for PDM software updates to be com-
pleted by the user as required, with usability and HF testing 
being completed prior to implementing this functionality.

Conclusion

A rigorous UX research and design process is foundational to 
the development of diabetes medical devices to ensure safety, 
effectiveness, and ease of use and reduce the daily burden of 
managing diabetes. The development of the Omnipod DASH 
PDM included UX design and research in each step of the 
product development lifecycle. The UX process developed for 

this system can serve as a blueprint for other diabetes device 
manufacturers seeking to improve usability of their devices.

Abbreviations

App, mobile application; BG, blood glucose; CGM, continuous 
glucose monitor; HF, human factors; HVAC, heating, ventilation, 
and air conditioning; IOB, insulin on board; KPI, key performance 
indicator; MDI, multiple daily injections; PDM, Personal Diabetes 
Manager; SUS, System Usability Scale; T1D, type 1 diabetes; UI, 
user interface; UX, user experience.