Promoting Sustainability through Virtual Reality: A 

Case Study of Climate Change Understanding with 

College Students 

 

Monica Posluszny  
Human Centered Design & Engineering 

University of Washington 

Seattle, WA, USA 

Geon Soo Park  
Digital Tech. Center 

SK Holdings C&C 
Seongnam-si, Gyeonggi-do, Republic of Korea 

Irini Spyridakis 
Human Centered Design & Engineering 

University of Washington 

Seattle, WA, USA 

Sarina Katznelson 
Human Centered Design & Engineering 

University of Washington 

Seattle, WA, USA 

Sam O’Brien 

Attain LLC  
Tacoma, WA, USA  

Abstract—The primary objective of this case study was to use 
a user centered design (UCD) process to create a virtual reality 
(VR) educational experience that could instill empathy and 
encourage behavior change concerning climate change in an 
American city. We developed a VR prototype concerning flooding 
caused by climate change in Miami. Guided by the UCD process 
that takes into account the users’ context and needs, our methods 
consisted of a literature review, participatory design, semi-
structured interviews, a focus group, an affinity diagram of the 
interview and focus group results, ideation, storyboarding, and 
prototyping. We used information from the literature and from 
participants concerning what they believed would impact their 
thinking regarding climate change and incorporated those 
perspectives into our VR prototype. We sought to demonstrate the 
value of incorporating user feedback into the design of a VR 
experience. Throughout the process, we addressed many of the 
United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals, ranging from 
climate action and quality education to resilient, safe, and 
inclusive cities and communities, addressing some of the world’s 
grand sustainability challenges. 

Keywords—climate change, education, sustainability, virtual 
reality (VR), user centered design, technology, social impact 

I. INTRODUCTION 
This paper presents an exploratory case study in which we 
applied the user centered design (UCD) process to create a 
virtual reality (VR) educational experience concerning the 
effects of climate change in an American city. We employed 
persuasive user experience (UX) concepts to design a VR 
experience that could instill empathy and encourage behavior 
change. Our goal was to use a participatory design approach to 
explore VR as an approach to sustainability education.  

Climate change refers to natural and human causes for 
warming and its effect it on the planet, as well as related long-
term changes in weather patterns regionally and globally. Many 
regions of the world are experiencing warming that is higher 
than the global average, with warming higher over the land area 
than over oceans. Up to 40% of humans live in areas that 
experienced warming of greater than 1.5 degrees C in one season 
above pre-industrial times by 2015 [1]. If the VR experience we 
designed shows how life could look on American soil 50 years 
into the future, then it is possible that it could spark a behavioral 
change that might reduce climate change. 

To address the issue of climate change, we conducted a case 
study that used Virtual Reality (VR) as a tool that could create 
empathy, build awareness, and incite behavior change 
concerning climate change. VR has been on the rise in recent 
years, showing drastic improvements in the quality of immersive 
experiences possible on devices. VR has proved to be a powerful 
empathy-building tool [2]. VR has made it possible for 
participants to personally experience stories of people from 
across the globe. Recognizing VR’s enormous potential has 
revealed the importance of making this resource accessible to 
students who could use it in creative ways to share stories that 
need to be heard.  

Designing successful VR experiences draws on expertise 
across many disciplines both technical and artistic. For example, 
STEAM (Science, Technology, Engineering, Arts, and 
Mathematics) education incorporates the arts into traditional 
STEM fields, promoting an interdisciplinary approach to 
problem-solving and opening up pathways to diverse learning 
styles. Encouraging and including diverse thinking and 
embracing an interdisciplinary approach to problems is key to 
coming up with creative solutions. 

978-1-7281-7388-7/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE

2020 IEEE Global Humanitarian Technology Conference (GHTC) | 978-1-7281-7388-7/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/GHTC46280.2020.9342907

Miami, Florida, was chosen as the setting for this project as 
research has shown that climate change is already impacting this 
city [3]. Many Americans have remained largely unaware that 
the issues that did not seem to affect them have already reached 
their shores. To decide on an effective story and design for our 
VR project, we conducted an extensive literature review; held 
semi-structured interviews with professors who teach about 
sustainability and also college students; led a focus group; and 
engaged in many design activities.  

The primary objective of this case study was to use 
information gathered from the literature and from users, given 
the user centered design (UCD) process, that would facilitate the 
design and creation of a VR experience about the effects of 
climate change in an American city. The purpose of the story 
being told in VR was to influence Americans to spark change, 
which is why the concept strives to incorporate persuasive 
design, which is a design based on psychological and social 
theories with the purpose of influencing human behavior, in this 
case to prevent climate change. We addressed many of the 
United Nations’ Development Goals, ranging from climate 
action and quality education to resilient, safe, and inclusive 
cities and communities, addressing some of the world’s grand 
sustainability challenges. 

This paper briefly reviews relevant literature, presents our 
methods, describes results and discussion, and ends with 
conclusions and a discussion of future work. 

II.  RELEVANT LITERATURE 

We briefly examined relevant literature on climate change; 
empathy, prosocial behavior, and VR; VR and education; and 
storytelling methods. 

A. Climate Change 

According to the Sierra Club’s Dave Tilford, the U.S. has a 
very small percent of the world’s population (5%) yet it uses 
close to 30% of the world’s paper, 25% of the world’s oil, 23% 
of its coal, 27% of its aluminum, and 19% of its copper [4]. 
There are differing views of what Americans know and do about 
climate change. Many believe that Americans are not very aware 
of the significant impact their country has on climate change. 
Understanding of climate change is quite low with the general 
public, college students, and even college students in STEM 
disciplines [5], [6], [7], [8], [9], [10]. However, Semenza et al., 
after surveying 1,202 Portland and Houston residents, found that 
a majority had “heightened concern about climate change but 
there were “number of cognitive, behavioral, and structural 
obstacles to voluntary mitigation” [11]. In other words, even 
those with awareness did not necessarily carry through with 
behavior change. 

B. Empathy, Prosocial Behavior, and VR 

Many have maintained that VR can promote empathy and 
support prosocial behavior [12], [13]. Herrera et al. assessed the 
value of using VR to build long-term empathy in two 8-week 
studies with >560 participants, ranging in age from 15-88 years 
old [14]. Some participants had an immersive VR experience 
concerning the homeless and some had a more traditional task 
such as reading about the homeless. The VR participants were 
more likely to have long lasting positive attitudes about the 

homeless and were more likely to sign a petition supporting 
affordable housing than participants who read the narratives. 
Schutte and Stilinović investigated whether VR can increase 
empathy and engagement [1]. They assigned participants to 
view a documentary of a young girl living in a refugee camp 
either in a VR format or a 2-D format. Participants in the VR 
condition had greater engagement and empathy for the refugee 
girl vs. participants in the control condition. In a 2015 VR film 
about a Syrian refugee camp, participants live a day in the life 
of a 12-year-old child living in a Syrian refugee camp since 
2013. Initial evidence has shown that VR is twice as effective in 
fund-raising [15]. B.G. Fogg asserts that for a person to affect 
behavior, the person must simultaneously “(1) be sufficiently 
motivated, (2) have the ability to perform the behavior, and (3) 
be triggered to perform the behavior,” aka motivation, ability, 
and prompt [16]. 

C. VR and Education 

VR is increasingly used in training and education given its 
ability to motivate users and stimulate learning and 
comprehension activity [17], [18], [19], [20]. Spaces that are 
difficult to access in the real world provide rich material for VR 
exploration and include sites of danger, physically inaccessible 
sites, or experiences that involve an element of time travel [21]. 

VR provides unique immersive user experiences in 
education environments by creating a sense of presence and co-
presence, and through the construction of identity. These user 
experiences provide a range of features that can aid in learning. 
The following five features can result in learning outcomes and 
benefits: (1) experiential learning, (2) collaborative learning, (3) 
contextual learning, (4) engagement, and (5) spatial knowledge 
representations [22]. While constructivism has been widely used 
as a theoretical framework for VR education, a more detailed 
pedagogical framework that encompasses the features above 
advocated by Mayes an Fowler consists of three learning stages: 
conceptualization, construction, and dialogue [23]. Each stage 
touches on conceptual, task, or social forms of immersion. These 
stages vary in levels of abstraction and task ability with 
conceptual immersion representing more abstract concepts in 
which learners engage in identifying and empathizing with 
concepts, task immersion representing more realism where 
learners need to make concepts more concrete, and dialogue 
depending on learners sufficiently understanding the content so 
as to be able to structure discussions and arguments. 

Identifying educational goals and the context of the learning 
environment is critical. Factors to consider include teacher 
dynamics (class size), group dynamics (collaboration, 
interdisciplinary and size), the degree of realism in various tasks, 
and the level of interactivity desired [23]. 

Art can play a dynamic role in creating realism. Jordan 
Potash addresses the important role of art therapy in driving 
social change and states that it is important to create visuals that 
increase viewers’ receptivity to the messages being portrayed so 
as to create empathy and impactful change [24]. 

D. Storytelling Methods 

We completed a competitive analysis of different 
storytelling methods with strong visual components to better 
understand various forms of conceptual, task, and dialogue 

immersion. Storytelling for sustainability creates affordances for 
users to build social capital and contribute to sustainability 
conversations by challenging assumptions, creating awareness, 
and becoming agents of social change. Fischer et al. [25], 
Pantelidis [26], and Mantovani [27] state that VR harnesses the 
power of the visual through new forms, offering a variety of 
learning styles and experiences to diverse learners. We drew 
visual inspiration from the Netflix documentary Chasing Coral, 
where the filmmaker kept the story engaging by illustrating the 
interdependence of the ocean’s various forms of life along with 
powerful cinematography [28]. Theater design was also 
examined and provides VR designers with a plethora of 
expertise to draw from for VR experiences. 

III. METHODS 

As a methodological framework, we employed a user 
centered design (UCD) process to create a VR experience over 
a 10-week time frame and conducted semi-structured interviews 
with professors and students, a focus group with students, an 
affinity diagram, ideation, storyboarding, and prototyping. We 
also reviewed relevant literature, some just discussed, and some 
discussed where relevant in this section. 

A. User Centered Design (UCD)Process  

We employed a UCD process, employing roles as 
participatory designers. The UCD process builds empathy for 
users and takes into account the users’ context and needs. The 
process also includes the users in the design process, allowing 
room for feedback and iterations along the way.  

As participatory designers in the UCD process, we worked 
in a research group of four undergraduate students comprised of 
three American students and one international student with 
guidance from our professor in order to explore possible 
approaches for our VR research and experience. Over the course 
of a 10-week quarter, we met twice weekly. Towards the end of 
the project, we scheduled more group sessions with the goal of 
completing the prototype. Before beginning the project, we 
created a plan that divided up how we planned to execute the 
project. The first two weeks were dedicated to research, the third 
and fourth week to ideation and storyboarding, and the final 
weeks focused on learning and creating the final prototype in 
Blender and Unity. Blender and Unity have large learning 
curves, which is why we decided to leave the most time for the 
prototype. 

The research was the most important part as it set the 
foundation for creating an effective, immersive experience. In 
participatory design “members of the wider community...are 
also recognized as legitimate stakeholders with the ability to 
impact the project” [29], [30], [31]. Aside from the main design 
team, college students and sustainability professors also took on 
the role of participatory designers. Their input on what impacts 
them, specific climate knowledge, knowledge on what needs to 
be done to address climate change was important for making 
sure that the VR experience would make a difference regarding 
perspectives on climate change.  

The entire team was interested in virtual reality design, but 
team members approached the project with varied interests in 
different parts of the VR design process. Two of our members 
had more of an interest in the artistic side of the VR design 

process, which led to the focus on exploring 3D art in Blender. 
The other two members wanted to learn the more technical side 
and focused on using Unity to put together the prototype. 

B. Semi-Structured Interviews and Focus Group 

To decide on an effective story that would move users to care 
about climate change, the case study began with research. This 
process incorporated semi-structured interviews with two 
professors who teach sustainability classes, five college-age 
students, and one focus group with four students. Interview 
questions with the sustainability professors focused on what has 
proven to be effective in sparking action with regards to climate 
change. Additionally, questions explored how to inform the 
public about climate change. The remaining interviews focused 
on probing students on their current climate change knowledge, 
personal impact, and what engages people in different stories, 
whether that be movies, books, etc. 

C. Affinity Diagram 

From the semi-structured interviews and the focus group, we 
analyzed qualitative data on people’s general thoughts on 
climate change and virtual reality and used an affinity diagram 
to organize some of the essential topics that we found from our 
research. We clustered that analysis into a table displayed in the 
results section. 

D. Ideation 

After analyzing the research, the next steps were 
scriptwriting, story write-ups, and sketching using divergent and 
convergent design sessions. To begin the ideation sessions, 
every team member engaged in an individual free-write of the 
entire experience from start to finish, based on tips in Casey 
Fictum’s book VR UX [32]. In addition to the general storyline, 
the brainstorms included lighting, interactions, sound, and color 
ideas for different scenes. Following the completion of 
individual 
brainstorming, 
the 
team 
came 
together 
collaboratively to develop an immersive storyline and script. 

E. Storyboarding 

After the ideation process, we created a storyboard, complete 
with details regarding how a scene should look and added the 
triggers that lead the user to the next scene. Vincent McCurley’s 
VR 360 storyboarding sheets were a valuable resource during 
ideation and storyboarding phases [33]. The main challenge was 
to maintain a balance between letting users explore the world a 
bit but also have a clear indication of what they should do to get 
to the next scene.  

F. Prototyping 

Due to time constraints, after storyboarding, our goal was to 
create the initial prototype using Unity, a game engine, and 
Blender, a modeling tool. However, it was necessary to first 
learn the tools. Two team members focused on learning Unity 
and figuring out the set-up while two team members learned 
how to use Blender following online tutorials. Another reason 
for jumping straight into creating the experience was to have 
time to navigate any roadblocks in the digital creation process. 
One challenge here was finding 3D models with a consistent art 
style. 

IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 

To facilitate a more complete understanding and 
interpretation of the results and their implementation into the VR 
experience that we developed, we combined results and 
discussion. 

A. Participatory Design, Semi-Structured Interviews, and 

Focus Group 
Our participatory design, interviews, and focus group 
yielded results that show that VR could help foster empathy 
concerning the effects of climate change. Participants expressed 
that they wanted to help, but did not know how. In addition, they 
revealed that seeing the effects of a city close to their home had 
a larger impact, and that the direct impact can then be showcased 
through immersion into the VR experience. 

Our participants expressed the positive impact that imagery 
has on them in inciting empathy. One college student participant 
stated that images of sea turtles entangled in plastic made her 
want to help them: “What gets me is the sea turtles, with the little 
coke plastic things [around their necks]...if you’re [going to] 
throw them away at least cut them up.” However, we also found 
that even though the images and stories of climate change elicit 
strong reactions from participants. They can often turn a blind 
eye because of the oversaturation of such ideas without the 
means to individually provide assistance. When asked what 
stands out about climate change, one participant stated, “Well to 
be honest it doesn’t really shock me anymore, I just read stuff 
online I’m like ‘oh’.”  

Although participants may possess some motivation, they 
stated they often do not have the ability or a prompt to actually 
produce a behavior in combating climate change (see Table I for 
more details). To balance imagery but not overwhelm 
participants with it as well, we made sure to end our experience 
on a positive note with a call to action about what you can do 
today to make a difference. After having participants experience 
what the future could look like, they realized it was a dream and 
they headed over to a climate change rally (see Fig. 3c). 

We wanted to leverage participants’ feelings about imagery 
through our VR design. Our findings further solidified the idea 
that VR could be a great empathy-building tool. Participants 
made statements such as “[VR] is a technology that allows for 
in-depth experiences” and “I think VR is a good learning tool 
for experiences. It's very immersive...you can capture something 
like my experience with the climate change rally.” VR would 
allow people to see places being impacted without having to 
travel to them. To address the lack of ability or a prompt, we 
provided a “How You Can Help” screen at the conclusion of the 
VR experience including relevant resources for the user to take 
further action. 

When asked what had a large impact on participants 
regarding climate change, many participants replied that the 
largest impact occurred when the effects could be seen close to 
their home or a place they frequent. For example, a college 
student participant stated that she read an article about climate 
change in a city because she “had a personal connection to it,” 
and felt more impacted by it since she had such “vivid 
memories” about the town. Since our study focused on students 
in America, we chose Miami to depict effects of climate change, 

especially because so many Americans are unaware of the 
surprising effects like water level rise and acidification. 
However, when adapting the idea of using VR for empathy 
about climate change to different countries around the world, it 
would be beneficial to depict the effects of a city in a relevant 
country. 

B. Affinity Diagram 

Using an affinity diagram, we clustered the results from the 
semi-structured interviews and focus groups concerning climate 
change and virtual reality into the groups seen in Table 1. To 
create the table below, we took the qualitative answers from the 
interviews and focus groups and typed them on digital post-it 
notes in Lucidchart and arranged and rearranged the post-it notes 
many times until the groupings that appear in Table 1 surfaced. 
We grouped the nine groups into three subcategories regarding 
college students’ feelings toward climate change, effective 
storyboard ideas, and all participants’ feelings about VR. As the 
content of the Table I shows, people want to help but have little 
understanding. As mentioned earlier, they are concerned about 
resources and believe stories would be helpful and VR could be 
helpful if content hit close to home. However participants 
cautioned that VR can cause motion sickness.  

TABLE I.  
AFFINITY DIAGRAM TABLE OF SEMI-STRUCTURED 
INTERVIEW AND FOCUS GROUP RESULTS 

 

C. Ideation 

While climate change is a worldwide issue, the results from 
the interviews showed that for the user group (American 
college-age students), an experience showing an American city 
being affected by climate change would be more effective in 
showing that climate is a pressing issue that needs to be 
addressed. Miami was the city of choice for the VR experience 
for a few reasons. One is that Miami is a global hub. In 2017, 
“Miami ranked 30th on A.T. Kearney’s Global Cities Index, just 
behind Frankfurt and Dubai. With its enviable location, 
prominent international airport, and major port, Miami now 
serves as an economic and financial hub for Latin America and 
a gateway to Europe and the rest of the world” [34]. Miami is 
also already seeing impacts from climate change. The flooding 
in Miami since 2006 has increased mostly during high tide [3]. 
“The average rate of sea-level rise in Southeast Florida increased 
from 3 ± 2 mm/yr. prior to 2006 to 9 ± 4 mm/yr. after 2006” [3]. 

Unless action is taken to address climate change, Miami could 
see major damage in the near future while simultaneously 
impacting citizens from across the world. 

To further increase immersion in the story, our team turned 
to psychology principles to engage users in VR. Maslow’s 
hierarchy of needs maintains that all humans strive to climb the 
hierarchy from the basic needs of food, water, and shelter to 
esteem and self-actualization [35]. To achieve these needs 
requires a person to feel a great amount of control over their 
environment. To make a user experience the most aligned with 
user goals, designs should allow for user control. For this reason, 
our team decided to allow for control and interaction within our 
virtual world--the user can look and walk around, and pick up 
and examine objects in the scenes. Rather than depicting our 
story as a VR movie, this user agency allows for higher 
comfortability, immersion, and engagement with the story.  

In addition to focusing on what keeps users engaged in 
virtual reality, we sought to incorporate persuasive UX so as to 
persuade participants to care about climate change. We also 
sought to move the user into taking action against the effects of 
climate change. Following Fogg’s model [16] of motivation, 
ability and prompt, we designed the storyline to motivate the 
user, provide links to assist in the climate change issue to allow 
the user the ability to help, and prompt them at the end of the 
experience to follow through with resources provided. 

D. Storyboarding and Prototyping 

1) Storyboarding: Starting in Miami 
 Our storyboard starts out in Miami, Florida, along Ocean 
Drive, a fairly well-known area of art deco architecture usually 
bustling with people. The sun is setting, casting an eerie glow on 
the scene. The user finds themselves standing knee deep in water 
with an “Ocean Drive” street sign floating by and everything is 
completely abandoned (see Fig. 1).  

Fig. 1. Miami, Florida: Ocean Drive 

When creating a VR experience, it is important to allow the 
user freedom to explore but indicators, such as lighting, 
movement, or sound, help guide the user to continue the story. 
In this case, the user hears a splash and will see a fish swimming 
around their legs (see Fig. 1). A fish then swims into an open 
building (see Fig. 2a). When the user follows the fish, they will 
find themselves in an empty apartment building. Leftover 

furniture and photos are scattered around the flooded and 
abandoned apartment. A glass of water is sitting on top of the 
kitchen counter . Everything in the apartment is dark; only light 
from the window illuminates the glass (note the arrow in Fig. 
2a), indicating to the user to pick it up. When the user picks it 
up, they suddenly hear the voice of a fisherman, telling them the 
freshwater is contaminated and has been so for a long time (see 
Fig. 2b). The fisherman begins to describe how life used to be 
and what happened over time. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fig. 2. Example of Persuasive UI Pattern  

The persuasive concept of scarcity was implemented in 
Figure 2 with the glass of water to show how it can trigger a 
desire to act, given the less available we find something to be 
(free drinking water, in this instance), and therefore the more 
value we assign to it [16]. In the scenes in Figure 2, we wanted 
users to feel the lack of freshwater as it was contaminated by 
ocean acidification.  

In Figure 2b with the human guide expressing emotion 
throughout the VR experience, the fisherman shows emotional 
expressions as he describes what has happened in Miami in the 
last few decades. The goal was to see if this would help users 
empathize more. Human presence has a great effect on emotions 
and helps to place the user in someone else’s shoes. By using a 
human form and voice to communicate the effects of climate 
change throughout the scene, we hoped to further incite 
empathy. 

As is shown in Figures 3a-3c, the user wakes up and realizes the 
future has not yet occurred and still has a chance to act (Fig. 3a), 
picks up a poster about a climate change rally (Fig. 3b), and 
attends the rally where they learn what action they can take (Fig. 
3c). This user gets a chance to take behavioral action based on 
the VR script and become a change agent for sustainability. 
Figures 2 and 3 show users considering or taking action for 
climate action for safe and inclusive cities and communities, 
some of the United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals. 

 

Fig. 3. Persuasive UI, Social Proof 

2) Storyboarding: Leaning on the Arts 
During storyboarding, many opportunities arose to 
implement 3D and 2D art. The art opportunities within VR show 
potential for overlap in this area of study. Two difficulties 
Jordan Potash [24] brings up regarding the role of art driving 
social change is “how to make viewers receptive to the artist’s 
message and … [how] to sustain empathic feelings long enough 
to result in meaningful change.” This is where VR comes in with 
its power to literally put a participant in someone’s shoes. As 
mentioned earlier, empathy-building is a strength in VR and art 
additionally creates a bridge between different perspectives. 
Besides bringing social change, VR can additionally bring a 
personal story to life.  

During the creation process, multi-disciplinary skill sets 
were needed to complete the experience. This included but was 
not limited to 3D art, writing, coding, theatre design, 
sustainability experts, etc. The UCD process offers much 
opportunity for overlap within the arts, which is what reaches 
out and touches people when it comes to empathy. In the case of 
VR, 3D artists are needed to create the models needed for 
experience, theatre design can be incorporated with how models 
are arranged in a scene and lighting to set the mood, writing to 
create an engaging story, music for mood-setting, knowledge on 
lighting, psychology in regards to what tricks the brain into 
believing an immersive experience is real and more. VR proved 
to be an effective medium to be incorporated into STEAM 
education.  

The implementation of art during the creative process of 
making this VR project come to life was a major aspect of the 
project. The beginning of the project was done with relative ease 
as it involved pen, paper, and brainstorming between team 
members with different areas of expertise. In hindsight, the 
storyboard and script could have been iterated and tested more 
before attempting to translate it into a 3D space as the 3D 
creation process was time consuming. 

3) Storyboarding: Realistic vs. Cartoon VR Scenes 
This project was set to be in a fairly realistic scene as the 
goal was to show users what their “home” could look like in 
future decades. It seemed intuitive that having a more realistic 
scene would impact users and help imagine how America could 
look into the future. However, a sense of immersion is created 
in different ways. For example, having hands on experience and 
making sure to match real-life hand movements creates 
immersion [36]. There is also the question of when making VR 
experiences “realistic,” creators risk entering “uncanny” valley 
[36]. This occurs when “observer comfort increases as a 
character becomes more human-like up until a certain point at 
which observers start to feel uncomfortable with the almost, but 
not quite, human character.” If the fisherman in the story looked 
almost human but not quite, this posed a risk of making 
participants of the experience uncomfortable. The question here 
is, since entering “uncanny” valley is a risk, does the project 
need to be realistic to get the climate change message across? 
Will users still be impacted if the story is less visually realistic? 
Further testing would be needed to answer these questions. 
Additionally, if the experience is less realistic, much more free 
3D models are available online for use on sites such as Google 
Poly (which would be easier to use within a STEAM classroom). 

4) Storyboarding: Collaborative Development Team 
Many prototyping ideas and suggestions are online, one of 
which was being able to act out VR scenes with teammates. This 
approach can be a fun way to prototype and test ideas in a 
classroom with no tools needed, just creativity from all 
participants. In terms of story creation, brainstorming, and 
research, there was considerable space for collaboration. Work 
could be divided among team members to be combined later in 
the process. In this process, there was a space for diverse 
thinking depending on the expertise of each team member 
during ideation. Collaboration became difficult when it came to 
different skill levels. Additionally, lowering barriers to this 
technology will lead to more diverse thinking when creating 
experiences. Diverse thinking leads to more creative solutions. 

5) Prototyping: Constraints in VR Development 
As we developed the prototype, some constraints stemmed 
from high learning curves for programs, limited VR headset 
availability, and time constraints on our group as we conducted 
this project over an academic quarter. The main tools used for 
bringing the story to life were Unity and Blender. This project 
and research were done over the course of a 10-week quarter and 
the last few weeks were spent learning Unity and Blender and 
this learning curve competed with completing the prototype. 3D 
models can be found online; however, many of them need to be 
paid for and the models that are free do not necessarily all have 
the same style.  

When building a scene, it is important for everything to be 
consistent; otherwise, you could break immersion. Figure 4 
shows an example of applying skills learned from Andrew 
Price’s Blender Beginner series on YouTube to create a more 
realistic Betsy Ross hotel, one of the businesses on Ocean Drive. 

Fig. 4. Betsy Ross Model Work in Progress in Blender 

One constraint we encountered in this type of VR 
development concerned the availability of VR headsets. One 
team member owned a headset and was able to put together an 
initial prototype. The rest of the team relied on equipment 
rentals; however, there was a wait time and the rentals lasted 
only one week. There was a time restriction on having enough 
time to consistently test and prototype within Unity. One 
drawback in universities is that VR headsets are not always 
readily available. However, Google Cardboard or phone VR 
headsets can be a good alternative in starting out designing for 
VR. There are trade-offs: higher end headsets such as Oculus 
offer more immersive experiences but for a much smaller 
audience since there has not been widespread adoption. Google 
Cardboard or any other VR sets use a phone that leads to less 
immersion and less interaction, immersion and less interaction, 
but has a much wider audience and the tool is much more 
accessible for use within a classroom [32].  

If VR headsets had been more readily available at the time 
of this project, some additional tools that would have potentially 
benefited the project are Microsoft Maquette, Google Blocks, 
and Tilt Brush. These tools have been created for quick 
prototyping directly in VR. These tools, had they been available, 
would likely have shortened the time it took for our team to 
assemble the initial story. 

V. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 

The purpose of our research was to use the UCD process to 
inform the creation of a persuasive VR experience for 
educational purposes on sustainability and climate change, 
specifically. We wanted to understand what makes a story 
engaging both within and outside VR. We also wanted to 
understand what participants knew about climate change and 
what affected their climate change behaviors in the past so that 
we could create a more persuasive VR experience in which users 
would feel motivated or empowered to take action within a VR 
experience related to climate change. Throughout the process, 
we addressed many of the United Nations’ Sustainable 
Development Goals, from climate action and quality education 
to resilient, safe, and inclusive cities and communities, 
addressing some of the world’s grand sustainability challenges. 

Our user centered design (UCD) approach that included 
participatory design, interviews, a focus group, an affinity 
diagram, and ideation, leading to storyboarding and prototyping, 
proved successful in creating an initial VR prototype of the 

impact of climate change in Miami. The design decisions 
implemented in the storyboard and prototype were based on 
participants’ statements concerning a desire to help but not 
knowing how to help. Further, the choice of Miami for the VR 
experience with the incorporation of a considerable amount of 
art was based on participants stating that seeing the effects of a 
city close to their home would have a larger impact and that the 
use of imagery could have a positive impact on them in inciting 
empathy. Participants expressed having some motivation, but 
stated they often do not have the ability or prompt to actually 
produce a behavior of combating climate change. This view 
resulted in the incorporation of a prompt into the storyboard.  

The next step in our research would be to assess whether the 
completed VR experience would inspire action or behavior 
change concerning climate change. The goal for our project was 
to use the UCD process to lead to the design of the VR prototype. 
Other steps would be to user test the prototype, iterate on the 
prototype, and also test its effectiveness. The testing should have 
a focus on whether the implementation of persuasive UX made 
a difference in the user reactions to the storyline. 

Participatory design implications from our exploratory 
research show that co-designing a sustainable STEAM project 
can be achieved in 10 weeks, harnessing various skill sets from 
different participants with limited resources. While our team 
would ideally have liked access to more VR headsets, the most 
accessible tool would have been to use phones and google 
cardboard. While prototypes will not necessarily be the most 
immersive, there would still be benefits for students from a 
collaborative research and design process perspective. However, 
if higher-end headsets are available, there are tools available for 
quick prototyping directly in VR. Even if the end goal of the 
experience is for it to be more realistic, the prototyping is still 
effective for planning out the layout of the scene, adjusting 
lighting, and so on. For much of the initial design process, pen 
and paper can be used, so most STEAM curriculums can create 
VR projects from the research phase through the storyboard 
phase. Additionally, before jumping into creating the experience 
in programs such as Unity and Blender, rough prototypes can be 
created using 2D images, sketches, or photographs stitched 
together in flat UI prototyping programs such as Marvel. 

Our UCD process for developing a VR experience can be 
transferred to any sustainability story one wishes to address such 
as stories from underserved or underrepresented communities. 
VR can help bring in a lens to create empathy so as to better 
understand the social and economic impacts of such stories. 
Creators of a VR experience can exercise their creativity, social 
capital, and use of technical and artistic skills to effect social 
change.