Chapter 35
Assistive Devices for One-Handed People
Using Desktop Manufacturing Methods

Khyati Priya and Pankaj Upadhyay

Abstract Introduction In this paper, we present the process, outcome, and learning
from a project for developing assistive products using desktop manufacturing
methods (which includes additive manufacturing/3D printing, laser cutting, CNC
machining). The project focused on people with disability leading to the restricted
use of one hand, e.g., one-hand amputees, hemiplegics, and people with congenital
anomalies. Six assistive devices were developed for the above user group which are
as follows: shoelace tying device, lace tying device, modiﬁed scale, dupatta-pinning
device, button hook, and toothbrush holder. Methodology The development of all the
devicesfollowedatypicaluser-centricdesignprocesswhichstartedwithempathizing
with the users and conducting an interview with them, shortlisting areas for inter-
vention, ideating and conceptualizing, iterative prototyping, testing with people who
were asked to use only one limb while trying out the device, and ﬁnally receiving
feedback from the intended users of the products. Feedback and Results Feedback
on the devices was taken remotely. Three participants with disability in one upper
limb were asked to rate each of the selected prototype on six different parameters
such as the perceived ease of use, efﬁciency of problem solving, and intuitive design
on a Likert scale, and comment upon them. Conclusion and Discussion We discuss
the strengths and weaknesses of the inclusive design process we followed, the advan-
tages of desktop manufacturing methods, and how they can be exploited in designing
and production of customized assistive devices. Finally, we discuss the implications
and future scope of the project.

K. Priya (B) · P. Upadhyay
Department of Design, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, Guwahati, India

P. Upadhyay

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2021
A. Chakrabarti et al. (eds.), Design for Tomorrow–Volume 3,
Smart Innovation, Systems and Technologies 223,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-16-0084-5_35

439

440

35.1
Introduction

As per World Health Organization, disabilities is a broad term comprising impair-
ments, activity limitations, and participation restrictions. In addition, disability is not
just a health problem but a complex phenomenon reﬂecting the interaction between
features of a person’s body and features of the society in which he or she lives [1].
Thus, to some extent, disability, in addition to being a physical limitation, is also a
result of not so well designed products and environments.
Universal design can be deﬁned as the design of buildings, products, and envi-
ronments to make them accessible to all people regardless of age, disability, or other
factors [2]. However, most designs around us are not universal in nature which causes
them to be inaccessible to certain groups of people who face disadvantage while using
them or are unable to use them at all. Though it is always preferable to have universal
designs, it is not always possible to integrate all accessibility features into one design.
The result is that certain groups of people such as those with permanent or temporary
disabilities and elderly population are incapable of performing certain tasks.
One such group of people is one-handed people. Most of the devices that we use
daily, devices as simple as a shampoo bottle and complex ones like bicycle, require
usage of, and intricate coordination between two hands. Thus, people suffering
from disabilities leading to restricted usage of one hand (one-hand amputees, hemi-
plegics, or those born with congenital defects) face a great deal of difﬁculty in
performing many such activities. A lot of these people, therefore, are dependent on
their caregivers even for performing simple tasks such as cutting nails or tying hair.
In this paper, we discuss how we used the desktop manufacturing techniques (CNC
machining, laser cutting, and 3D printing) for producing assistive devices, criteria
for selecting and shortlisting designs, remote feedback received on the designs, and
why desktop manufacturing method can be useful.

35.2
Research

35.2.1
Background Study

A literature review of products developed for people with upper limb disabilities
reveals the existence of a lot of prosthetics and orthoses manufactured using the
method of 3D printing [3–7]. Additive manufacturing technology offers the advan-
tage of producing low cost customized devices. Furthermore, devices with complex
geometrical structure can be printed with ease, and the print can be lightweight [4].
For production of these assistive devices, one of the methodologies followed was
acquisition of anatomical data of intended user by the method of 3D scanning, 3D
modeling and printing, and the evaluation of product [3]. While these devices work
well to solve the intended problem, for example, providing support for rehabilitation

35
Assistive Devices for One-Handed People Using …
441

[6], they often fail to help the physically disabled perform day-to-day life activities
with greater ease.
Some assistive devices helping the physically challenged perform day-to-day
life activities are commercially available. OneHandCanDo cutting board consists
of straps to hold vegetables in place while they are being cut [8]. Clip different is
an electrically operated device to chip ﬁnger nails automatically [9]. Bra buddy is
a device meant to help women put on their bras using a single hand [10]. Button
hook [11] and myself belts [12] are devices to help people put on buttons and belts
one-handedly.
The drawbacks of these products are their high costs and limited availability.
Although these products are available for online purchase, most of them are not
available globally (i.e., they are available for sale and shipping in only certain areas,
e.g., North America). Moreover, the cost of all of these products is several times
more than that of a conventional product for abled people. One reason for high cost
may be their low scale of production.

35.2.2
Primary Research

Structured interviews were conducted with three adult one-hand amputees. Qualita-
tive questions were asked to the participants. The questions were focused on knowing
the activities they performed with ease and the ones they faced difﬁculties in, their
best and most frustrating times of the day, assistive devices they use and if it works
for them, and their method of performing various tasks.
The following table gives a few details about the volunteers who consented to
participate in either the interview, or consented to give feedback about the developed
devices, or did both (Table 35.1).
The interview revealed that they did face problems performing day-to-day life
activities. While the best time of their day included activities like reading, writing,
praying,havingcoffee,orplayinggames,themostfrustratingtimeofthedayincluded
washing hair, doing laundry, or putting on a lot of winter clothes. There are a few
activities in which participants always need help in, namely putting up necklaces,
squeezing oil from container, and rolling up sleeves. There are other activities which
participants ﬁnd difﬁcult—bagging groceries at store, doing dishes with one hand,

Table 35.1 Details of participants

442

putting up laces, putting up buttons or zippers located at back, cutting food using
fork and knife, using ketchup or shampoo sachets, curling hair, drying hair using a
hair blower, etc. There are yet other activities that participants avoid doing because
they ﬁnd it pretty much difﬁcult—like using shoes, or track pants with laces.
All participants have found some unique solutions to their problems: attaching
the drum stick to the stump (partial hand) for playing drums, using stump as a tool in
the kitchen (for juicing and mashing), using a small container for putting in shampoo
from bottle, etc.
All the participants stated that they had tried a prosthetic. P1 said that the weight
and numerous wires did not appeal to him. P2’s prosthetic does not work like she
needs it to, so she does not use it. P3 said that her prosthetic was not assistive at all—it
was cumbersome and slow. However, it was evident that the participants did have
some preference for certain products like pump bottle for shampoo and conditioners,
and automatic can openers.

35.3
Methodology

A total of six assistive devices was conceptualized and prototyped for people with
one functional hand. They are as follows: shoelace tying device, lace tying device,
modiﬁed scale, dupatta-pinning device, button hook, and toothbrush holder. The
process that was followed while developing these devices is detailed in the ﬂowchart
in Fig. 35.1. We went from designing a product for a very speciﬁc context to a more
generalized situation. All the prototypes that were developed were tried out by one
to three able-bodied persons who were asked to use only one hand while interacting
with the device. The successful prototypes were shortlisted for a feedback from the
actual users.
A total of eighteen prototypes tackling six different problems were manufactured.
Figure 35.2 shows the photographs of these prototypes. Some of the initial prototypes
were discarded because they worked in very speciﬁc contexts or did not work as
expected. For example, shoelace tying device prototype 1 worked only along with
a particular shoe; a few initial prototypes of scale failed. Some prototypes were
designed keeping a speciﬁc context in mind but were found suitable for usage in more
general situations also, e.g., button hook and dupatta-pinning device. Given below
is a brief description of the prototypes manufactured, comments on their design by
authors on basis of their limited trials on the able-bodied, and whether these designs
were shortlisted for the next stage of taking feedback from the targeted user group.
Table 35.2 shows the functional needs met by each device.
1. Shoelace tying device: A total of ﬁve prototypes was developed. Prototype
1 is slipped onto side collar of one shoe. A knot at the end of one lace, as shown,
holds it tightly in place. The prototype was discarded because prototype dimensions
were dependent upon the dimensions of a particular shoe such as its collar width
and diameter of laces. Moreover, unknotting the knot at one end of lace is difﬁcult
using one hand. The next four prototypes (2.1, 2.2, 2.3a, and 2.3b) have a clipping

35
Assistive Devices for One-Handed People Using …
443

Fig. 35.1 Methodology followed while designing the devices

structure because of which the product can be used along with multiple shoes having
different collar widths. A hook, a safety pin, and a buckle-like structure holds one
lace in place in the prototypes, respectively, while the one hand can be used to tie the
shoelaces. 2.3b is a slightly modiﬁed version of 2.3a to make the process of insertion
of laces into the device easier. These four prototypes were tried by one to two adult
able-bodied persons and they worked as intended. However, it was felt that prototype
2.2 may not be suitable for children.
2. Lace tying device: The design of this device is an extension of shoelace tying
device where the clip dimensions have been modiﬁed to suit its usage along with
clothes. Prototypes 1.1 and 1.2 were tried by one abled person. It was felt that the
lace might slide off the hook in prototype 1.2 if it is not attached to the device tightly.
3. Dupatta-pinning device: Only one prototype of this device was developed.
A magnet embedded inside the device holds the two pieces together when brought
close. The device was tried by two people and worked as expected.
4. Modiﬁed scale: As many as six prototypes of this device were developed.
Prototype 1 is scale holder meant to hold conventional scale in place. This was
discarded because device dimensions dependent upon dimensions of scale and it
failed in assisting in drawing a line at an angle. Prototype 2 consists of a knob
present in the scale that can be pulled, the scale be rotated at the required angle,
and the knob pushed down. The aim was to aid in drawing lines at an angle. Scale
3a is made up of a plastic clip attached to a scale. Scale 3a one was designed for
thin notebooks, and its usage along with thicker ones lead to a raised end. Hence, in
prototype 3b, a slightly modiﬁed version, the scale is bent at an angle to compensate

444

Fig. 35.2 Photographs/renders of prototypes developed. Abbreviations used: Std = shoelace tying
device; Ltd = lace tying device; Dpd = dupatta-pinning device; Bh = button hook; Ms = modiﬁed
scale; Th = toothbrush holder

35
Assistive Devices for One-Handed People Using …
445

Table 35.2 Functional decomposition of devices

for the raised end. When this was used by able-bodied persons, it was realized that
it might be a bit difﬁcult to clip the device to a notebook using one hand.
In prototype 4a, the wrist is kept on the curved surface with a little force to hold
the scale in place. However, forearm should be aligned to the scale for this one to
work; therefore, drawing horizontal lines difﬁcult. So, prototype 4b was developed
in which wrist can be placed anywhere on the semi-circular structure. Hence, lines
at angles can be drawn. None of the last three prototypes were not discarded as it
was felt that feedback from actual users of the device might be different.
5. Button hook: The device comprises a cut in the front, a hook in the middle, and
a handle at back. Trials of 1a led to design of 1b. Prototype 1b is a slightly modiﬁed
version of 1a with a shorter head and a skewed cut, changes to make the device work
a little better. 1b was selected for taking feedback from intended user group.
6. Toothbrush holder: Toothbrush holder 1 contains a plastic C-shaped structure
in the clip that acts like a spring in the printed clip, hence making it suitable for its
usage along with a range of table thicknesses. In toothbrush holder 2, a metal spring
holds the device in place. Trials of this device revealed that prototype 1 had a greater
adaptability with tables than prototype 2. However, none of the two prototypes were
discarded.
Out of the total eighteen developed prototypes, twelve were selected for taking
feedback.

35.4
Feedback and Results

Three participants gave feedback on the selected products remotely. For all the
shortlisted devices, six questions were asked which are given below. Furthermore,
participants were also given an option to comment on the device, if they wished to.

(Q1) I perceive that it is easy to learn to use the device.
(Q2) I think that it is easy and intuitive to use the device.
(Q3) The device is expected to be of use in accomplishing the desired task.
(Q4) I would prefer using this device over the devices/methods I have been using
till now.

446

Table 35.3 Results of feedback received from users

(Q5) I’d recommend this device to anyone who needs it.
(Q6) This device is likely to make me less dependent on other people.

Table 35.3 details the response received from P1, P4, and P5 for the six questions.
Foreachquestion,participantswereaskedtochooseoneofthegivenoptions:strongly
disagree (1); disagre e (2); neutral (3); agree (4); strongly agree (5); NA (0).
For the shoelace tying device, P1 said he thought using prototype 2.1 and 2.3b
was time consuming and he had doubts about how tightly the device would hold the
laces. He also said that it could be problematic operating safety pin using one hand
in prototype 2.2. As per P4, the ﬁrst two prototypes were complicated and difﬁcult
to use, but 2.3b was “aesthetically pleasing and easy to use.” However, P5 found all
the three prototypes to be useful and said that designs would be very helpful for her.
For lace tying device, P4 and P5 perceived that prototype 1.2 would be easier to
use than 1.1. P5 added that 1.1 looked fragile and thought that the safety pin was at
a risk of popping out.
P4 said she felt that the dupatta-pinning device was a very useful device and
tackled an indeed problematic situation. P5 felt the device was useful, but at the
same time was “quite big” to use along with dresses.
Scale 3b and 4a received mixed responses. Both P1 and P4 said they felt that
clipping 3b using one hand would be difﬁcult and using 4a, according to P1, would
require “the same amount of efforts as keeping hand directly on a conventional scale.”
P4 felt that 4b was a helpful design. However, as per P5, all the three designs “were
impressive and helpful.”
P4 thought that button hook was efﬁcient and added that it might help her put up
buttons on back with greater ease. P5 said that the device seemed “a bit hard and
confusing” to use.

35
Assistive Devices for One-Handed People Using …
447

While P1 said that toothbrush holder 1 seemed easier to use than toothbrush holder
2, P4 and P5 perceived both the devices to be efﬁcient and useful.

35.5
Conclusion

Though user testing of the devices was not done, we can still conclude that a lot of
these devices would work because all of them were tried by able-bodied people who
used only one hand while interacting with the device, and at least one prototype of
each of the developed devices received positive feedback from intended users.
The devices which received the best and the worst feedbacks from target group are
dupatta-pinning device and scale 4a, respectively. For devices for which more than
oneprototypewasshortlisted,herearetheprototypeswhichreceivedbetterfeedbacks
than others: shoelace tying device 2.3b, lace tying device 1.2, scale 4b, and toothbrush
holder 1. Overall, dupatta-pinning device, toothbrush holder 1, toothbrush holder 2,
shoelace tying device 2.3b, and modiﬁed scale 4b received mostly positive reviews
and were perceived to be useful devices, while shoelace tying device 2.1, shoelace
tying device 2.2, modiﬁed scale 3b, modiﬁed scale 4a and button hook received
mixed feedback.
According to P1 and P5, ten of the twelve developed prototypes were likely
to make them less dependent on other people. As per P4, eight of them would do.
Furthermore, P1, P4, and P5 would prefer using eight, seven, and ten of the developed
devices, respectively, over other devices/methods they have been using till now.

35.6
Discussion

The authors present the process followed for the development of assistive devices.
A survey was conducted initially, followed by shortlisting areas for intervention,
conceptualizing, prototyping, user testing on abled people, selecting designs for
receiving feedback from intended user group, and ﬁnally receiving remote feedback
from one-handed people. From the feedback received, one may conclude that the
developed devices are assistive to the users and are likely to perform better than
the methods/devices they are using at present. A drawback of the methodology we
followed is that the feedback was based on the perception of users about the products
and not based on interacting with the devices physically. User-testing the products
with the actual users may yield different, and in fact, more reliable results.
All the devices were designed to be manufactured using desktop manufacturing
techniques which offer an advantage of creating customized products on a small scale
withagreatereaseascomparedtotraditionalmanufacturingmethods,abeneﬁthighly
suitable for inclusive design. In addition to the technical and economic feasibility,
they also save the costs incurred in the transportation of products and make the

448

devices available to any part of the world as the component ﬁles can be transferred
digitally, thus making the designs more accessible to a wider population.
While performing a background study, it was noted that very few products were
available in the speciﬁc area chosen for this project (assistive devices for one-handed
people using desktop manufacturing methods). Although only six products were
designed in this project, it is hoped that these products will inspire many more in the
ﬁeld, not just for the speciﬁc kind of disability that we have chosen, but for other
kinds of physical limitations as well. Design and evaluation of more, simple yet
useful assistive devices, is left as future work. There is a great scope for producing
customized and non-customized assistive devices using methods such as additive
manufacturing.