Original Paper

A Shared Decision-making Tool for Drug Interactions Between
Warfarin and Nonsteroidal Anti-inflammatory Drugs: Design and
Usability Study

Thomas J Reese1, PharmD, PhD; Guilherme Del Fiol2, MD, PhD; Keaton Morgan2, MD; Jason T Hurwitz3, PhD;
Kensaku Kawamoto2, MHS, MD, PhD; Ainhoa Gomez-Lumbreras2, MD, PhD; Mary L Brown3, PhD; Henrik Thiess4,
BSc; Sara R Vazquez2, PharmD; Scott D Nelson1, MS, PharmD; Richard Boyce5, PhD; Daniel Malone2, RPH, PhD

1Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, United States
2University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, United States
3University of Arizona, Tuscon, AZ, United States
4University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany
5Department of Biomedical Informatics, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburg, PA, United States

Thomas J Reese, PharmD, PhD
Vanderbilt University
2525 West End Avenue, Suite 1475
Nashville, TN, 37203
United States
Phone: 1 (615) 936 6867
Fax: 1 (615) 936 0102

Abstract

Background: Exposure to life-threatening drug-drug interactions (DDIs) occurs despite the widespread use of clinical decision
support. The DDI between warfarin and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs is common and potentially life-threatening. Patients
can play a substantial role in preventing harm from DDIs; however, the current model for DDI decision-making is clinician
centric.
Objective: This study aims to design and study the usability of DDInteract, a tool to support shared decision-making (SDM)
between a patient and provider for the DDI between warfarin and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.
Methods: We used an SDM framework and user-centered design methods to guide the design and usability of DDInteract—an
SDM electronic health record app to prevent harm from clinically significant DDIs. The design involved iterative prototypes,
qualitative feedback from stakeholders, and a heuristic evaluation. The usability evaluation included patients and clinicians.
Patients participated in a simulated SDM discussion using clinical vignettes. Clinicians were asked to complete eight tasks using
DDInteract and to assess the tool using a survey adapted from the System Usability Scale.
Results: The designed DDInteract prototype includes the following features: a patient-specific risk profile, dynamic risk icon
array, patient education section, and treatment decision tree. A total of 4 patients and 11 clinicians participated in the usability
study. After an SDM session where patients and clinicians review the tool concurrently, patients generally favored pain treatments
with less risk of gastrointestinal bleeding. Clinicians successfully completed the tasks with a mean of 144 (SD 74) seconds and
rated the usability of DDInteract as 4.32 (SD 0.52) of 5.
Conclusions: This study expands the use of SDM to DDIs. The next steps are to determine if DDInteract can improve shared
decision-making quality and to implement it across health systems using interoperable technology.

(JMIR Hum Factors 2021;8(4):e28618) doi: 10.2196/28618

KEYWORDS
shared decision-making; user-centered design; drug interaction; clinical decision support

JMIR Hum Factors 2021 | vol. 8 | iss. 4 | e28618 | p. 1

Introduction

Background

Drug-drug interactions (DDIs) are preventable adverse events
that are responsible for 5% to 14% of adverse drug reactions in
patients that are hospitalized [1,2], are a major risk factor for
hospitalization [3], and occur in up to 13% of older adult
ambulatory patients [4-6]. Exposure to life-threatening DDIs
occurs despite the widespread use of clinical decision support.
Alarmingly, up to 24% of patients on warfarin receive a
prescription for a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID),
which increases the risk of gastrointestinal bleeding up to
twofold [7,8].

Most electronic health records (EHRs) implement DDI clinical
decision support functionality with underlying logic provided
by drug knowledge base vendors, but DDI alerts continue to be
overridden at rates as high as 90% [9-11]. The current model
for DDI decision-making is highly clinician-centric in spite of
the fact that patients can play a substantial role in preventing
potential harm due to DDIs. Studies that have explored different
clinical decision support for DDIs [12,13] indicate that
interactive decision dashboards have the potential to foster
informed decision-making by patients [13]. These decision aids
allow patients and clinicians to deliberate together about the
advantages and disadvantages of different therapies and arrive
at decisions that are concordant with the best available evidence,
clinician knowledge, and patient preferences [14,15].

Accordingly, the overarching goal of this study is to incorporate
patient-centered shared decision-making (SDM) for addressing
DDIs, an advance from clinician-centric decision-making
models. SDM is a conversation where patients share their values
and preferences to choose a treatment that aligns with their goals
[16,17]. Electronic decision aids can support this conversation;
however, SDM is uncharted in the DDI domain [18].

Objectives

The purpose of this study was to design and evaluate the
usability of DDInteract, an SDM tool for the warfarin and
NSAID DDI.

Methods

Overview

The design and usability assessment of DDInteract was guided
by user-centered design principles and an SDM framework. The
user-centered process included iterative and overlapping steps
of prototyping (ie, low fidelity, stable, and high fidelity),
stakeholder feedback, and usability heuristics and testing
[19-24]. The SDM framework consists of five steps: (1) seek
your patient’s participation, (2) help your patient explore and
compare treatment options, (3) assess your patient’s values and
preferences, (4) reach a decision with your patient, and (5)
evaluate your patient’s decision [25]. Figure 1 depicts a
summary of the design and usability process. This study was
approved by the University of Utah Institutional Review Board.

Figure 1. Summary of the design and usability process for DDInteract. IPDAS: International Patient Decision Aid Standards Collaboration.

Design

The design team consisted of multidisciplinary experts in DDIs,
clinical decision support, patient and provider communication,
SDM, and pharmacotherapy outcomes. The process began with
an artifact appraisal of SDM tools, DDI alerts, and clinical
practice materials relevant to anticoagulants. Information from
this appraisal was used to sketch low-fidelity feature prototypes,
which were reviewed and discussed with the design team in
weekly meetings. Features and functionality deemed important
by the design team were retained for future iterations. Features
were linked to the SDM steps and checklist items from the
International Patient Decision Aid Standards Collaboration [26].
Once the design team coalesced on preliminary feature designs,
these were combined into an initial protype of the complete user
interface using Adobe XD (Adobe Inc).

Target users (ie, 2 physicians and 1 pharmacist) were
individually shown the initial complete user interface prototype
and asked to provide feedback on the usefulness, aesthetics,
proposed functionality, and content. Several iterations were
made in collaboration with these target users until no substantial
feedback was provided. At this point the prototype was

considered stable enough for a heuristic evaluation. The heuristic
evaluation was based on knowledge of Nielsen's 10 Usability
Heuristics for User Interface Design [27,28] and was performed
by two experts with training and experience in human-centered
design, psychology, and medical informatics. The goal of the
heuristic evaluation was to identify design flaws that could be
addressed prior to conducting resource-intensive testing. Specific
feedback regarding design that might impede users’goals were
noted and shared in a team meeting along with a discussion of
potential solutions for each flaw. Once the stable prototype was
modified to address findings from the heuristic evaluation, it
was considered high fidelity and ready for usability testing.

Usability

Usability assessments consisted of two parts: (1) patient
interviews with simulated clinic visits and (2) clinician task
performance assessments and usability surveys. DDInteract was
designed to be used by clinicians at the point of care. Since
patients would not use DDInteract without a clinician present,
we did not test task completion success and efficiency with
patients.

JMIR Hum Factors 2021 | vol. 8 | iss. 4 | e28618 | p. 2

Patients

Patient participants were recruited from the anticoagulation
service at the University of Utah. Participants were required to
be on warfarin for a chronic condition such as atrial fibrillation.
The perceived usability and usefulness of DDInteract was
assessed with participants individually through two simulated
clinical scenarios and a semistructured interview. Participants
were given two short clinical vignettes to read before the session
(Multimedia Appendix 1, Table S1). The decision associated
with each vignette was whether to start an NSAID for pain. The
vignettes were designed to test the range of responses based on
a patient’s risk (ie, high risk and low risk) of gastrointestinal
bleeding. In the high-risk vignette, the patient had multiple risk
factors for gastrointestinal bleeding including age older than 65
years, use of an antidepressant, and history of a gastrointestinal
bleeding. In the low-risk vignette, warfarin was the only risk
factor. Participants simulated SDM based on the clinical
vignettes with a provider (author KM). Following the clinical
scenarios, patients were asked questions pertaining to aspects
of DDInteract, the use of DDInteract for SDM, and the utility
of SDM for DDIs. The interviews were conducted online with

audio and screen recording. The audio was transcribed and
coded into general topics.

Clinicians

Physicians and pharmacists with anticoagulation therapy
experience were recruited by snowball sampling. The
overarching goal of the clinician usability assessment was to
obtain objective and subjective data on the use of DDInteract.
Participants were asked to complete a task performance
assessment and a perceived usefulness survey. Participant
characteristics were collected as part of the survey. Links to the
instructional video, task performance assessment, and survey
were emailed to participants. The instructional video was a brief
introduction to DDInteract. The task performance assessment
was web-based and recorded the participant’s screen. The survey
was based on the System Usability Scale and included a free-text
section for feedback [29,30]. Tasks consisted of eight key
navigation and functionality tasks (Table 1). Performance was
measured by task completion rates and the time to complete
each task. After a task was completed, the app reset to the home
screen. The time was measured from when the home screen was
displayed to when the task was completed.

Table 1. Clinician task prompts and actions performed that result in successful completion.

Success
Tasks

Navigating to and clicking on the drop-down arrow for “What is a gastrointestinal
(Stomach) bleed?”
1. Your patient has questions about what a gastrointestinal bleed is.
Please navigate to patient education about a gastrointestinal bleeding.

Navigating through the “What is a drug-drug interaction” drop-down and
clicking on the “NSAID” hyperlink
2. With previous patients, you have found it confusing for them to

understand the drug class NSAIDsa. Please find the picture of mul-
tiple NSAIDs to illustrate how not only ibuprofen is an NSAID.

In the patient Risk Profile section, the toggle for “On Selective Serotonin Reup-
take Inhibitor” was preconfigured in the on position. The successful action was
clicking the toggle off.

3. Your patient informed you that they stopped taking fluoxetine.
Please remove fluoxetine (Prozac) as a risk factor to show how their
risk has changed.

Navigating to the decision tree questions and clicking on the “Medication” button
4. Assume your patient would like to take a medication then click
the button to view medication options.

Navigating to the second question of the decision tree and clicking “Other
medications” then selecting “acetaminophen (Tylenol) 500mg” and “lidocaine
(Lidoderm) 5% patch”

5. Your patient has decided to try non-NSAID medication options.
Please select acetaminophen (Tylenol) and lidocaine (Lidoderm).

Navigating to the second question of the decision tree and clicking on “Oral
NSAID” then selecting “celecoxib”
6. Your patient believes NSAIDs help the most with pain but would
like to reduce their risk. Please select the oral NSAID option with
the least gastrointestinal bleed risk. Then select that a stomach acid
reducer is not needed.

Navigating to the second question of the decision tree and clicking on “Oral
NSAID” and selecting “meloxicam.” Then clicking on “Stomach acid reducer”
and selecting “esomeprazole.”

7. Your patient insists on taking medications only once per day.
Please select the oral NSAID option with the most risk and add es-
omeprazole (Nexium).

Navigating through the decision tree and clicking “Accept”
8. Please place any order in the queue for one of the treatment op-
tions.

aNSAID: nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug.

Results

Design

Although DDIs are a novel application for SDM, we did assess
several relevant electronic decision aids such as those used for
cardiovascular and diabetes management [31]. We compared a
variety of relevant decision aids to the SDM steps and the
International Patient Decision Aid Standards checklist [26].

Generally, decision aids lacked features to elicit patient values
and preferences. Additionally, decision aids varied on the
content provided to make treatment decisions including price,
effectiveness, and side effects of treatment [32].

Several features from relevant decision aids were adapted to
the DDI use case. Features included the icon array, personalized
risk, and ability to simulate risk based on patient factors and
treatments. Features and functionality evolved through multiple

JMIR Hum Factors 2021 | vol. 8 | iss. 4 | e28618 | p. 3

iterations. For example, icon arrays have shown promise in
communicating risk to patients and clinicians [33-35]. Figure
2 depicts how the icon array changed over two iterations. Icon
array features were based on findings from the literature and
expert feedback [36,37]. Once features such as the icon array
were acceptable from the design team’s perspective, they were
adapted and placed into the complete user interface (ie, stable
prototype). Figure 3 depicts the stable prototype used for the

heuristic evaluation. Overall, 2 major, 13 moderate, and 14
minor issues were identified. One of the two major issues was
associated with the number four in Figure 3. The evaluators
thought that users may not correctly interpret “Substitute” and
“Add” when selecting treatment options. In response, we
removed the order entry context, which will avoid a user from
referencing the warfarin or NSAID order in process.

Figure 2. Icon array evolution, from left to right, through two iterations. NSAID: nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug.

Figure 3. Stable prototype used for heuristic evaluation. Numbers refer to items described in the heuristic report. GI: gastrointestinal.

JMIR Hum Factors 2021 | vol. 8 | iss. 4 | e28618 | p. 4

The DDInteract prototype used for evaluating usability consisted
of four sections. The first section in the top left corner of Figure
4 is a patient-specific risk profile. Substantiated risk factors for
gastrointestinal bleeding are listed and stratified by risk and
supporting evidence. When patient-specific risk factors are
pulled from the EHR, the toggle is on (ie, blue). Toggles can
be manually changed to account for data not in the EHR or for
clinicians to test different scenarios such as adding an
antidepressant. The second section in the bottom left is a
dynamic risk icon array. The icon array changes with risk factors
and treatment options. Absolute numeric risk is provided along
the visualization. The third section on the bottom of Figure 4
provides patient education and supporting evidence. Succinct
and image-oriented patient education is provided for DDIs and

gastrointestinal bleeding. Since risk factors and estimates are
evidence based, information is provided on how these aspects
were derived. The fourth section is a decision tree with three
questions that help structure the conversation and support
treatment decision-making. The questions were created and
validated by clinicians with the aim to streamline the SDM
process in the context of patient care appointments. Question
attributes were designed to elicit patient values and preferences
associated with bleeding risk and pain treatment. Unobtrusive
nudges to reduce risk were used through prepopulated NSAID
dosing and default proton pump inhibitor (PPI) selection when
an NSAID is chosen. Finally, functionality for generating
documentation of the SDM discussion was provided.

Figure 4. Final DDInteract high-fidelity prototype used in the usability study along with feature description. NSAID: nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drug.

Usability

Patients

All 4 participants were aged 65-85 years and had taken warfarin
for more than 5 years. A provider (KM) and a facilitator (author
TJR) interviewed each patient for approximately 1 hour. For
the high-risk vignette (patient with multiple risk factors), all
participants chose a combination of nonmedication treatment
(eg, physical therapy) and acetaminophen. For the low-risk
scenario (patient with minimal risk factors), most participants
chose a short course of celecoxib or ibuprofen, with a PPI.

Although participant knowledge about the warfarin-NSAID
DDI varied, all participants appreciated the ability to see
DDInteract while the provider discussed risk and treatment
options. One participant stated:

If I wasn’t able to see the [treatment] options, I
wouldn’t know what to ask

Furthermore, participants felt empowered to participate in
making decisions that aligned with their preferences by referring
to the decision aid during discussion:

I personally don’t like taking medications and want
two avoid taking more. It looks like I can try other
ways to relieve my pain and I would prefer trying
those
Participants wanted to have access to the decision aid or a
printout, outside the encounter, to review what was discussed
and decided. One participant stated:

I usually forget what we [patient and provider] talk
about during the appointment, so I would go to my
After Visit Summary to review what we talked about.
Most participants believed SDM was novel and different from
past decision-making experiences with providers:

Doctors usually make decisions like these for me.

JMIR Hum Factors 2021 | vol. 8 | iss. 4 | e28618 | p. 5

Two patients were unaware that the NSAID class included more
than ibuprofen. Generally, participants valued SDM and using
DDInteract with the provider. Furthermore, participants
preferred to avoid additional medications and wanted to reduce
the risk of gastrointestinal bleeding as much as possible.

Clinicians

A total of 11 clinicians participated in the usability evaluation
(Table 2). Of the 11 participants, 3 stopped the task study after
the first task. Of those 3 participants, 2 were pulled to clinical

duties. The other participant failed to complete the second task
and chose to stop the study rather than skipping the task. Of the
8 participants who completed the study, all were successful on
each task. The mean time to complete eight tasks was 144 (SD
74) seconds. Table 3 delineates the task prompt and the mean
time for completion. Screen capture was used to determine how
participants navigated through the tool. A total of 11 participants
completed the usability and satisfaction survey, with an overall
mean rating of 4.32 (SD 0.52) of 5. Table 4 delineates mean
ratings for each survey item.

Table 2. Participant characteristics for the usability evaluation.

Self-assessed expe-
rience with war-
farin from 0 to
100, mean (range)

Participant clinical percent effort,
n
Participant years of experience, n
Specialty (n participants
in each group)
Participants,
n

>80
61-80
21-40
<21
>16
11-15
6-10
<5

67 (29-88)
2
3
2
0
1
2
2
2
Family medicine (4),
emergency/critical care
(2), hematology (1)

7
Physicians

93 (87-100)
2
1
0
1
2
2
0
0
Anticoagulation/ambula-
tory care (3), general (1)
4
Pharmacists

Table 3. Mean and SD for task time in seconds across usability participants (n=8).

Mean time in seconds (SD)
Tasks

39 (48)
1. Your patient has questions about what a gastrointestinal bleed is. Please navigate to patient education about a
gastrointestinal bleeding.

42 (34)
2. With previous patients, you have found it confusing for them to understand the drug class NSAIDsa. Please find
the picture of multiple NSAIDs to illustrate how not only ibuprofen is an NSAID.

2 (1)
3. Your patient informed you that they stopped taking fluoxetine. Please remove fluoxetine (Prozac) as a risk factor
to show how their risk has changed.

3 (4)
4. Assume your patient would like to take a medication then click the button to view medication options.

30 (48)
5. Your patient has decided to try non-NSAID medication options. Please select acetaminophen (Tylenol) and li-
docaine (Lidoderm).

32 (35)
6. Your patient believes NSAIDs help the most with pain but would like to reduce their risk. Please select the oral
NSAID option with the least gastrointestinal bleed risk. Then select that a stomach acid reducer is not needed.

13 (4)
7. Your patient insists on taking medications only once per day. Please select the oral NSAID option with the most
risk and add esomeprazole (Nexium).

15 (10)
8. Please place any order in the queue for one of the treatment options.

aNSAID: nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug.

JMIR Hum Factors 2021 | vol. 8 | iss. 4 | e28618 | p. 6

Table 4. Clinician usability survey items and responses (n=11). Responses were on a 1 to 5 Likert scale where 1 is strongly disagree and 5 is strongly
agree.

Mean (SD)
Survey items

4.36 (0.67)
I found the decision tool to be logical.

4.18 (0.75)
I found the decision tool to be efficient.

4.36 (0.67)
The decision tool was effective in the decision-making process.

4.27 (0.79)
The shared decision-making was valuable.

4.36 (0.67)
The decision tool was valuable.

4.27 (0.65)
I thought the decision tool was easy to use.

4.36 (0.81)
I enjoyed the experience.

4.36 (0.67)
I learned something new from this experience.

Clinician participants provided a variety of comments on the
purpose and usefulness of DDInteract after completing the
survey. Two participants thought the app would be helpful for
patient education:

I think half the time they [patients] just think we’re
[clinicians] being mean by telling them they shouldn’t
take their NSAIDs. And the visual for how that can
be mitigated is great. I actually think that the
educational section of the tool would be helpful when
we’re doing new educations for warfarin/DOACs
[direct oral anticoagulants] even if we’re not doing
a shared decision-making type thing.
Have you considered using this as a tool not just in
the clinical setting but in the medical education
setting?
Two participants had questions on where and when the app
would be used:

Is this an app that will be on the provider’s phone or
the intention is for the patient to download this app
and fill it out themselves? Or will this be a website
that is pulled up during an office visit where both
parties are present in the room?
I'm not completely clear on the exact clinical situation
in which this tool would be used and the point in the
workflow in which that would happen.
One participant thought the tool could be expanded with a
general guide on interpreting risk of gastrointestinal bleeding:

I know it is individualized, but I like how there are
some general guidelines with the HAS-BLED score.
It would be nice to have something similar. Also, at
what risk is a PPI strongly recommended.
Finally, participants thought the dynamic risk calculation would
be a feature they would return to the tool to use. The ability to
toggle between risk factors and treatment options helped to
quantify risk and explore different treatment options. Generally,
participants believed DDInteract was easy to use and would
support SDM.

Prototype Changes

Key changes were made in response to the patient interviews.
Changes included expanding nonmedication and non-NSAID
treatment options, adding functionality for selecting more than

one non-NSAID treatment (eg, physical therapy and
acetaminophen), and creating a printable handout and an after
visit summary that patients can access outside the encounter.
Based on the duration to complete certain tasks and how
clinicians navigated through DDInteract, we made feature
changes regarding tasks one and two (Table 3). The
modifications included enabling the user to see the entire app
without scrolling to the drop-down items for patient education
and automatically displaying the images.

Discussion

Principal Findings

This study designed and assessed the usability of a tool for SDM
with DDIs (Figure 4). Overall, it appears that SDM can be
enhanced by using a tool that displays risks of harm and
alternatives. The process of designing DDInteract was rigorous,
applying user-centered design principles through iterative
prototyping (Figure 2). Target users found DDInteract easy to
use and believed it could be useful for supporting SDM (Tables
3 and 4). Given that DDI clinical decision support has been
traditionally clinician centric, this study may contribute to a
major shift in the way certain medication alerts are developed
and used. Through the process designing and evaluating
DDInteract with clinicians and patients, lessons were learned
regarding patient decision-making and their understanding of
the warfarin-NSAID DDI. Furthermore, lessons were learned
from clinicians about when in the workflow DDI alerts are
addressed and implementing SDM in routine patient care.

Not all DDIs are amenable to SDM, and clinicians should use
their judgement before opening a discussion about certain DDIs.
Although patients appreciated discussing the warfarin-NSAID
DDI with the provider, only the low-risk scenario seemed to be
relevant. Certain high-risk DDIs should be avoided without
SDM. Additionally, although these patients had been on warfarin
for multiple years, knowledge about DDIs and treating pain
while taking warfarin was limited. This aligns with what others
have found on patient knowledge about anticoagulant therapy
[38,39]. Knowledge about which medications are NSAIDs and
symptoms of bleeding should not be assumed despite experience
with warfarin. Regardless of the decision to avoid an NSAID,
patient education about the DDI is needed. Finally, patients
mentioned that after previous provider encounters it was difficult
to recall information about treatment decisions. Consideration

JMIR Hum Factors 2021 | vol. 8 | iss. 4 | e28618 | p. 7

for allowing patients to reference the tool after an encounter
may help with comprehension and adhering to decisions;
however, DDInteract and other similar tools would need to be
adapted to and tested with patients to understand
decision-making without provider assistance.

Clinicians had questions about when and how DDInteract would
be used. Medication prescribing often occurs at the end of an
encounter without the patient. If DDInteract was triggered when
an NSAID is ordered, the patient might not be available for
discussion. Opportunities to use an SDM tool for DDIs earlier
in the workflow may be needed. For example, triggering
DDInteract for a patient who is having pain or starting warfarin
are additional use cases. Triggering on pain is especially relevant
for patients on warfarin due to frequent use of over-the-counter
NSAIDs. Although DDInteract was designed to mitigate risk
associated with DDIs, clinicians requested decision support for
other aspects of anticoagulant therapy, such as deciding to start
an anticoagulant or which anticoagulant to use. To achieve broad
uptake of SDM for DDIs, the scope of DDInteract may need to
be expanded to other decision-making and clinician workflow
opportunities.

Future Research

The next step is to conduct a formative evaluation of DDInteract
to understand how it impacts measures of decision-making,
satisfaction, and clinician workflow. To maximize dissemination
and enable integration with EHR systems, we have developed

an interoperable DDInteract app using emerging clinical decision
support standards including Clinical Quality Language, Clinical
Decision Support Hooks, and SMART on Fast Healthcare
Interoperability Resources (FHIR) [40]. A SMART on FHIR
prototype of DDInteract is available on Logica Sandbox, and
we have successfully implemented DDInteract in an EHR test
environment at the University of Utah. Further research is
needed to understand how SDM with DDIs can be integrated
with overarching decisions surrounding anticoagulant therapy.
Finally, research is needed to explore how decision aids in the
EHR can be adapted to clinical workflows to enable SDM in
routine patient care.

Conclusion

This study describes the design and usability testing of
DDInteract. The findings contribute to knowledge about
implementing SDM in routine patient care and expand the use
of SDM to DDIs. A multidisciplinary design team collaborated
with patients, clinicians, and health information technology
experts to design a tool that provides a patient-specific risk
calculation, elicits patient preferences, and guides both the
patient and clinician to a decision. The rigorous design process
resulted in a usable and potentially useful tool. Through the
design process and usability testing, key lessons were learned
from the patient and clinician perspectives. The next step is to
evaluate the utility of DDInteract in a clinical setting, and if
successful, to implement it across EHRs using interoperable
technology.

Conflicts of Interest

This study was funded by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (U18 PA-18-792 and R18HS026198). Outside of the
described work, KK reports honoraria, consulting, sponsored research, licensing, or codevelopment in the past 3 years with
McKesson InterQual, Hitachi, Pfizer, Premier, Klesis Healthcare, RTI International, Mayo Clinic, the University of Washington,
the University of California at San Francisco, MD Aware, and the US Office of the National Coordinator for Health IT (via ESAC
and Security Risk Solutions) in the area of health information technology. KK was also an unpaid board member of the nonprofit
Health Level Seven International health information technology standard development organization, he is an unpaid member of
the US Health Information Technology Advisory Committee, and he has helped develop a number of health information technology
tools outside of the described work, which may be commercialized to enable wider impact. None of these relationships have
direct relevance to the paper but are reported in the interest of full disclosure. Other authors have no competing interests to declare.

Multimedia Appendix 1

Clinic vignettes used for patient interviews.
[DOCX File , 14 KB-Multimedia Appendix 1]