Original Paper

Integrating Key User Characteristics in User-Centered Design of
Digital Support Systems for Seniors’Physical Activity Interventions
to Prevent Falls: Protocol for a Usability Study

Åsa Revenäs1,2, PhD; Ann-Christin Johansson2, PhD; Maria Ehn3, PhD

1Center for Clinical Research, Region Västmanland-Uppsala University, Hospital of Västmanland Västerås, Västerås, Sweden
2School of Health, Care and Social Welfare, Mälardalen University, Västerås, Sweden
3School of Innovation, Design and Engineering, Mälardalen University, Västerås, Sweden

Åsa Revenäs, PhD
Center for Clinical Research
Region Västmanland-Uppsala University
Hospital of Västmanland Västerås
Västerås Hospital, Entrance 29
Västerås, 72189
Sweden
Phone: 46 764959223

Abstract

Background: The goal of user-centered design (UCD) is to understand the users’ perspective and to use that knowledge to
shape more effective solutions. The UCD approach provides insight into users’ needs and requirements and thereby improves
the design of the developed services. However, involving users in the development process does not guarantee that feedback from
different subgroups of users will shape the development in ways that will make the solutions more useful for the entire target
user population.
Objective: The aim of this study was to describe a protocol for systematic analysis and prioritization of feedback from user
subgroups in the usability testing of a digital motivation support for fall-preventive physical activity (PA) interventions in seniors
(aged 65 years and older). This protocol can help researchers and developers to systematically exploit feedback from relevant
user subgroups in UCD.
Methods: 
Gender, PA level, and level of technology experience have been identified in the literature to influence users’
experience and use of digital support systems for fall-preventive PA interventions in seniors. These 3 key user characteristics
were dichotomized and used to define 8 (ie, 23) possible user subgroups. The presented method enables systematic tracking of
the user subgroups’contributions in iterative development. The method comprises (1) compilation of difficulties and deficiencies
in the digital applications identified in usability testing, (2) clustering of the identified difficulties and deficiencies, and (3)
prioritization of deficiencies to be rectified. Tracking user subgroup representation in the user feedback ensures that the development
process is prioritized according to the needs of different subgroups. Mainly qualitative data collection methods are used.
Results: A protocol was developed to ensure that feedback from users representing all possible variants of 3 selected key user
characteristics (gender, PA level, and level of technology experience) is considered in the iterative usability testing of a digital
support for seniors’ PA. The method was applied in iterative usability testing of two digital applications during spring/summer
2018. Results from the study on the users’ experiences and the iterative modification of the digital applications are expected to
be published during 2021.
Conclusions: Methods for systematic collection, analysis, and prioritization of feedback from user subgroups might be particularly
important in heterogenous user groups (eg, seniors). This study can contribute to identifying and improving the understanding
of potential differences between user subgroups of seniors in their use and experiences of digital support for fall-preventive PA
interventions. This knowledge may be relevant for developing digital support systems that are appropriate, useful, and attractive
to users and for enabling the design of digital support systems that target specific user subgroups (ie, tailoring of the support).
The protocol needs to be further used and investigated in order to validate its potential value.

JMIR Res Protoc 2020 | vol. 9 | iss. 12 | e20061 | p. 1

International Registered Report Identifier (IRRID): RR1-10.2196/20061

(JMIR Res Protoc 2020;9(12):e20061) doi: 10.2196/20061

KEYWORDS
eHealth; mobile health; internet-based interventions; physical activity; exercise; older adults; gender; user feedback; user
involvement; user-centered design

Introduction

Background

The goal of user-centered design (UCD) is to understand the
users’ perspective and to use that information to shape more
effective solutions [1]. UCD gains access to users’ needs and
requirements and thereby improves the solutions’ design and
increases their functionality, usability, and quality [2,3]. UCD
can reduce the users’ need for support, decrease development
costs, and increase user satisfaction and safety [4]. However,
involving users in the development process does not guarantee
that feedback from different subgroups of users will equally
shape the development in such a way that the developed solution
becomes useful for the entire user population for which it was
intended. This study describes a method that enables systematic
tracking of feedback from user subgroups in usability testing
of digital support for fall-preventive physical activity (PA) in
seniors (adults aged 65 years and older). The aim of the method
is to support the development of a digital support system that
is useful for different subgroups of users.

Digital Support for Improved Health in Seniors

Digital support systems—for example, mobile apps or
web-based services—have the potential to strengthen and
complement existing health care resources. There is evidence
indicating that digital support can be effective in somatic care
[5]. The internet is also an important source for acquiring
disease-specific knowledge in chronic care management [6]. In
2019, approximately one-fifth of the population in the European
Union was 65 years or older, and more than 5% of the
population was 80 years and older [7]. The proportion of
individuals aged 80 years and older is expected to more than
double within the next 80 years. Furthermore, approximately
80% of the population aged 80 years and older suffers from at
least one chronic condition [8]. Provision of digital support to
improve health in the growing population of seniors is therefore
increasingly important.

It is well established that PA has a positive impact on health
and well-being. For example, physically active people have
lower rates of lifestyle-related diseases (including coronary
diseases, high blood pressure, type 2 diabetes, colon and breast
cancer, and depression) and exhibit higher levels of functional
health and better cognitive function [9]. Despite this knowledge,
physical inactivity is an increasing global health burden [9].

Involvement of Seniors in the Development of Digital
Support Systems

User involvement in the development of digital support systems
is an evolving area. A review on development of fall-detection
systems concluded that seniors are never involved throughout
the whole development process and seldom involved in the
early and end stages of development [10]. The authors
emphasize that early user involvement, focusing on the users’
needs and preferences, is important for improving the seniors’
level of technology acceptance. There is a great variation
regarding which users are involved in UCD and how they are
involved. Moreover, reporting on the procedures used for the
selection and recruitment of users is often lacking [11].

Seniors’ interest in and use of the internet is associated with
sociodemographic factors including gender, age, and
socioeconomic status [12-15]. Moreover, seniors use the internet
for different purposes: while some use it solely for practical
things, such as financial purposes, searching for information,
and emailing, others use it for additional purposes, such as
gaming and social interaction [16]. In addition, seniors have
different needs and preferences for digital health care support,
partly driven by their own experiences with health care [13].
The described diversity in the older population challenges the
UCD because involving certain users does not entail that their
feedback will represent views of the entire target population.
There is a need to increase the understanding of user subgroups’
needs and contribution in UCD processes in order to involve
representatives of relevant stakeholders in the development.

Purpose of the Study

The aim of this study was to describe a protocol for systematic
analysis and prioritization of feedback from user subgroups in
the usability testing of digital support systems to motivate
fall-preventive PA in seniors. This protocol can help researchers
and developers to systematically exploit feedback from relevant
subgroups in UCD.

Methods

Overview of the UCD Process and Included Studies

This project is based on a UCD model [1] and the key principles
described by Gulliksen et al [17], including early user
involvement. An overview of the UCD process is presented in
Figure 1. The protocol described in this article is used in study
4 (Figure 1).

JMIR Res Protoc 2020 | vol. 9 | iss. 12 | e20061 | p. 2

Figure 1. Overview of the user-centered design and the 7 studies (where study 7 represents several future studies) of the development of digital support
for fall-preventive physical activity interventions in seniors. This protocol describes a method for systematic tracking of feedback from user subgroups
used in study 4. UX: user experience.

Identification of Key User Characteristics

Three key user characteristics have been identified in the
literature to influence seniors’ experience of fall prevention,
PA, and technology use: (1) gender, (2) PA level, and (3) level
of technology experience. Gender was selected because a
gender-based difference exists in PA behavior, falls incidence,
and consequences from falls; men and women have different
fall risk factors, both short- and long-term [18]. Compared to
men, women are more prone to falling, sustain more fall-related
injuries [19,20], and report fear of falling more frequently
[21,22]. Men and women also differ in their exercise habits and
reasons for exercise [23]: women are less likely than men to be
regularly physically active [24] and tend to prefer different types
of PA [25]. Gender has also been identified as crucial for
understanding technology use [26]. PA level and level of
technology experience were also selected because seniors with
lower PA levels and less experience with technology might
represent less engaged users of digital support services for PA.
The 3 key user characteristics are integrated in the collection
and analysis of user feedback.

Definition of User Subgroups From Possible
Combinations of Key User Characteristics

By dichotomizing the 3 key user characteristics, 8 (ie, 23)
possible user subgroups were defined. The participant’s PA
level and level of technology experience were classified as
“higher” or “lower,” respectively, according to the user’s
self-reported PA level and level of technology experience in
the questionnaire on user characteristics (Multimedia Appendix
1). Participants who reported spending at least 3 hours/week
performing moderate-intensity activities during a regular week
(questions 1 and 2, respectively, on PA level in Multimedia

Appendix 1) were classified as having a higher PA level, while
participants who reported spending less than 3 hours/week
performing moderate-intensity activities were classified as
having a lower PA level. The threshold was chosen based on
the PA guidelines for the adult population, which recommend
at least 150 minutes/week of moderate-intensity aerobic PA [9].
The cutoff for higher level of technology experience was set to
using a mobile phone and/or computer/tablet often for purposes
including calls, texting, emails, and surfing the internet, as
reported by participants (questions 3 and 4 on level of
technology experience in Multimedia Appendix 1). This cutoff
was chosen to ensure that participants had experience in surfing
the internet. The participant’s gender was classified as man or
woman according to the participant’s self-reported gender in
the questionnaire (Multimedia Appendix 1).

Examples of subgroups were men with a lower PA level and
higher level of technology experience and women with a higher
PA level and lower level of technology experience.

Coding of Individual Users According to User
Subgroups

The assignment of each participant to 1 of 8 subgroups was
identified by analysis of the questionnaire on participant
characteristics (Multimedia Appendix 1). Each participant’s
user subgroup was visualized on all templates for processing
and analysis of data generated by the specific participant.

Usability Test Procedure

During the iterative testing (Figure 1, study 4), the participants
tested and evaluated prototype versions of the digital support
(2 applications) in 4 test cycles. Each participant performed the
tests individually with a researcher. Qualitative and quantitative

JMIR Res Protoc 2020 | vol. 9 | iss. 12 | e20061 | p. 3

data on use and use experience were collected during and after
the test sessions.

Table 1 presents an overview of the methods for data collection,
processing, and analysis, and concretization of improvements

applied in each test cycle. Steps 1 to 3 were included in the
method for systematic tracking of user subgroups’ feedback
and they are described in detail below.

Table 1. Overview of the data collection, processing, and analysis, as well as the concretization of improvements in the usability testing, highlighting
the 3 steps included in the subgroup method.

Description of actions and the 3 steps included in the subgroup method
Research phase

Multiple sources of mainly qualitative data on participants’ management and experiences of the applications:
Data collection

•
questionnaire on user characteristics (Multimedia Appendix 1)
•
observation protocol (Multimedia Appendix 2)
•
written interview and user rating documentation (Multimedia Appendix 3)
•
audio recording

Summary of observations and answers to rating and interview questions for each user

Step 1: Identification of difficulties and deficiencies in the applications and the user subgroups experiencing
them

Data processing

•
compilation of difficulties/deficiencies from data collected on participants’ experiences
•
paper strips, containing 1 experienced difficulty/deficiency each, tagged with the participant’s user subgroup

Step 2: Clustering of difficulties and deficiencies
Data analysis including prioritiza-
tion of difficulties/deficiencies to be
rectified/improved
•
thematic analysis, by sorting the paper-strips manually

•
labeling themes to reflect the difficulty/deficiency tagged with an aggregation of user subgroups

Step 3: Prioritization based on user subgroup representation, importance and impact

Concretization of actions to be taken for prioritized improvements
Concretization of improvements

Step 1: Identification of Difficulties and Deficiencies in
the Applications and the User Subgroups Experiencing
Them

The data on difficulties/deficiencies in the applications collected
during test sessions is compiled in a predefined template (Figure

2). In the template, each row documents one identified
difficulty/deficiency tagged with the user subgroup of the
participant (colored to improve visualization of different key
characteristics). One template is completed for each participant.
The template can be expanded by the addition of as many new
rows as needed.

JMIR Res Protoc 2020 | vol. 9 | iss. 12 | e20061 | p. 4

Figure 2. The template used in step 1 for the compilation of observation and interview data.

After 
compiling 
data 
on 
observed 
or 
expressed
difficulty/deficiency for all participants, the templates are printed
out on paper and cut into paper strips. Hence, each strip contains
one observed/expressed difficulty/deficiency tagged with the
participant’s user subgroup.

The main results from this step are paper strips containing
observed/expressed difficulty/deficiency identified during the
usability testing tagged with user subgroup.

Step 2: Clustering of Difficulties and Deficiencies

All paper strips from step 1 are analyzed qualitatively. Any
qualitative method can be used, for example the thematic
analysis described by Braun and Clarke [27]. The paper strips
are sorted manually according to similarity in the difficulty or
deficiency they reflect and subsequently labeled (Figure 3).

JMIR Res Protoc 2020 | vol. 9 | iss. 12 | e20061 | p. 5

Figure 3. Thematic analysis and clustering of the paper strips. Each cluster is labeled according to the difficulties/deficiencies it reflects.

The main results from this step are themes describing
deficiencies/difficulties in the digital applications tagged with
an aggregation of user subgroups that all participants
experiencing the difficulties belonged to (hereafter denoted
“user subgroup aggregation”). For example, if participants from
the two user subgroups “men with lower PA level and higher
level of technology experience” and “women with higher PA
level and higher level of technology experience” express the
same deficiency, the resulting theme (ie, deficiency) is tagged
with the user subgroup aggregation (ie, “men and women with
lower and higher PA level and higher level of technology
experience”).

Step 3: Prioritization Based on User Subgroup
Aggregation, Importance, and Impact

Themes reflecting deficiencies/difficulties in the applications
tagged with aggregated user subgroups (identified in step 2) are
further grouped according to the feature they occur in (eg,
navigation, goal setting, or feedback). All features with
identified deficiencies/difficulties tagged with user subgroup
aggregations are summarized in a prioritization template (Table
2).

Prioritization of difficulties/deficiencies to be improved or
rectified prior to the next test cycle is based on the following
aspects: (1) whether the user subgroup aggregations represent
all or most of the 8 possible user subgroups (ie, if both men and
women with higher and lower PA levels and levels of
technology experience have experienced the deficiency); (2)
whether the deficiency can be related to the participants’ratings
of user experience or perceived value for support in
fall-preventive PA interventions of different features, if
applicable (this can be interpreted as “performance” and “effort
expectancy”, two constructs important for the acceptability and
usability of technology according to the unified theory of
acceptance and use of technology [28]); and (3) whether the
deficiency has high impact on the solution’s purpose and
usability. Previous research has suggested that issues that are
both brought up by users and have a large impact on the overall
purpose of a solution should be considered in development [29].
The researchers’ assessment of aspects (1) to (3) for each
deficiency is documented in a prioritization template (Table 2).

The main result from this step is a list of prioritized
difficulties/deficiencies to be improved before the next test cycle
or saved for later.

JMIR Res Protoc 2020 | vol. 9 | iss. 12 | e20061 | p. 6

Table 2. The template used in step 3 for prioritization of difficulties and deficiencies to be improved or rectified, including a mock result.

When to be im-
proved?
Prioritization
User subgroup aggregation experienc-
ing deficiency

Later
Now
High impact on
the solution?
Related to low

ratings?g
All user characteris-
tics represented?
LTf
HTe
LAd
HAc
Wb
Ma
Deficiency
Features

✓
Yes
No
Yes
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Concepts difficult
to understand
Goal set

✓
Yes
No
No
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Difficult to set a

realistic PA goalh

aM: man.
bW: woman.
cHA: higher activity level.
dLA: lower activity level.
eHT: higher level of technology experience.
fLT: lower level of technology experience.
gThe participants’ answers to the rating questions, on a 100 mm visual analog scale (see Multimedia Appendix 3 for more details).
hPA: physical activity.

Results

This paper describes a novel approach to systematically track
user subgroups’ feedback in usability testing of digital support
systems. The method will ensure that feedback from users

representing all possible variants of 3 selected key user
characteristics (gender, PA level, and level of technology
experience) are shaping the iterative development of digital
support systems. An overview of the key activities in the
subgroup tracking method is summarized in Table 3.

Table 3. Presentation of main activities in the method for identifying key user characteristics and systematic tracking of user subgroup feedback.

Description of main activities in the subgroup method
Research phase

Identification of key user characteristics
Preparation

•
based on previous research and/or theory relevant for the focus area of the digital support system

Definition of user subgroups from possible combinations of key user characteristics

•
dichotomization of the key user characteristics

Coding of individual users according to user subgroup

•
visualization of subgroup on the templates used for data collection, processing, and analysis

Identification of difficulties and deficiencies in the applications and the user subgroups experiencing them
Data processing

•
compilation of difficulties/deficiencies from data collected on users’ experiences
•
paper strips containing an experienced difficulty/deficiency tagged with the user’s subgroup

Clustering of difficulties and deficiencies
Data analysis

•
thematic analysis, by sorting the paper strips manually
•
labeling themes to reflect the difficulty/deficiency tagged with an aggregation of user subgroups

Prioritization based on user subgroup aggregations, importance, and impact

The method was applied in a study approved by the regional
ethics committee in Uppsala, Sweden (Dnr 2018/044). In this
study, the method was used in usability testing of two digital
applications to motivate PA in seniors during spring/summer
2018. Results from the study on the users’ experiences and the
iterative modification of the digital applications are expected
to be published in 2021. The study will provide further insights
into the potential of this novel approach for ensuring that needs
and preferences of different user subgroups are captured and
considered in a UCD process. Moreover, the results are expected
to contribute new knowledge on how digital support for PA
needs to be modified to fit the heterogeneous population of
seniors.

Discussion

Tracking of Subgroups’ Feedback in UCD

The method presented in this study provides a structured way
to document and exploit feedback from different user subgroups
in iterative development of new solutions, exemplified here by
digital support systems for fall-preventive PA interventions in
seniors. Involving seniors in technology development has been
suggested as an important component for improving technology
acceptance [10]. Moreover, physical inactivity is an increasing
global health burden, and it is well documented that older age
groups are less active than younger individuals [24] and that
PA is important for improving health [9]. Moreover, although

JMIR Res Protoc 2020 | vol. 9 | iss. 12 | e20061 | p. 7

inclusiveness is an important design goal, discrimination is a
common deficiency of digital support systems [14]. For
example, gender inclusiveness and equality are important in
system design, since the two aspects influence users’behaviors,
both online and offline [15,26]. GenderMag [30] is a systematic
method for illustrating and tracking gender differences in
software development by the use of personas. The method has
proven effective for finding and fixing gender-inclusiveness
deficiencies in software applications [31] and has been reported
to be appreciated in practice [32]. Research on how to prevent
discrimination and strengthen inclusiveness of digital support
systems needs further attention.

In addition to increasing gender inclusion, the method presented
in this study aims at ensuring that the feedback of users with
varied self-reported technology experience and PA levels is
shaping the development of digital support systems. The aim
of integrating these perspectives is to encourage participation
of persons who, because of lower levels of technology
experience or PA, might have low interest in participating in
UCD studies of technical solutions supporting PA. However,
other user characteristics might also be of relevance when
involving 
seniors 
in 
UCD 
studies. 
For 
example,
Vandekerckhoven et al [11] suggested that creativity and
communication are relevant and important user characteristics
to consider in UCD studies.

Limitations

In this study, the users’ gender, PA level, and level of
technology experience were identified as relevant key user
characteristics to define the subgroups to track in UCD studies.
It could be argued whether these are the most critical key user
characteristics to consider and if additional subgroups are to be
included in order to support the development of digital support
systems that fits the whole heterogenous target population. For
example, fall history might be relevant to consider, since
previous falls have been identified as a risk factor for new falls
in both men and women [18] and it is vital to promote
fall-preventive PA interventions in persons with increased fall
risk. Moreover, users’ level of technology experience and
internet use are related to age [16,33]: younger seniors (mean
age less than 70 years) use the internet the most and older
seniors (mean age 73 years) use the internet the least [16].
Furthermore, older seniors have more problems with activities
in daily living and experience worse health than younger seniors
[16]. However, this study used internet experience instead of
age as a key user characteristic. To ensure that both younger
and older seniors are involved in the UCD process, seniors
representing different ages should be recruited.

Other examples of user characteristics that might be relevant
for defining user subgroups include level of education and
socioeconomic status [12,33], as well as personal qualities such
as the level of communication and creativity [11]. However, in
order to make the method feasible, the number of subgroups
considered needs to be limited. This is accomplished by
selecting user characteristics that are critical for the aim of the
technical solution and can be dichotomized. In this study, 3 key
user characteristics were selected based on the literature, and
by dichotomizing them, 8 (ie, 23) possible user subgroups were
defined. The method represents a pragmatic approach, which
is needed in UCD for balancing the quantitative research
paradigm (requiring involvement of large user groups and
thereby not feasible in UCD) and the qualitative research
paradigm (focusing on one specific user subgroup and thereby
not useful for an entire heterogenous population). However,
further research is needed to validate if the key characteristics
selected in this study are purposeful for creating a solution that
is attractive and useful for the intended users of digital support
systems for fall-preventive PA interventions for seniors.

Conclusions

User involvement alone does not guarantee that feedback from
different user subgroups is correctly shaping the development
of digital support systems and resulting in a solution that is
useful for the whole intended user population. Further attention
is needed on methods for systematic tracking of user subgroups’
feedback to ensure that new systems and services are designed
for the entire target user population. Also, new knowledge is
needed on how to select users to be involved in UCD processes.
The method presented in this study elucidates and documents
potential differences between how different user subgroups
contribute to the development. This may clarify whether new
users need to be added to the process, either to increase the
contribution of specific user subgroups or to involve new
subgroups.

Our hope is that this protocol will be used for systematic analysis
and prioritization of user subgroups’ feedback in the
development of new digital systems. The protocol may help to
identify and improve the understanding of potential differences
between subgroups of seniors in use and experiences of digital
support for fall-preventive PA interventions. This new
knowledge can be of great importance in future research to
develop systems that are relevant, useful, and attractive to the
heterogenous population. Moreover, it can facilitate tailoring
solutions toward specific user subgroups. However, the protocol
needs to be further used and evaluated to validate the potential
value of the method and the purposefulness of the selected key
user characteristics.