Francisco Aguilar Acevedo
Department of Computer Engineering,
Universidad del Istmo,
Ciudad Universitaria S/N,
Barrio Santa Cruz,
4a. Seccion,
Santo Domingo Tehuantepec,
Oaxaca 70760, Mexico

Daniel Pacheco Bautista1

Department of Computer Engineering,
Universidad del Istmo,
Ciudad Universitaria S/N,
Barrio Santa Cruz,
4a. Seccion,
Santo Domingo Tehuantepec,
Oaxaca 70760, Mexico

Marleydy Acevedo Gomez
Department of Computer Engineering,
Universidad del Istmo,
Ciudad Universitaria S/N,
Barrio Santa Cruz,
4a. Seccion,
Santo Domingo Tehuantepec,
Oaxaca 70760, Mexico

Guadalupe Toledo Toledo
Department of Computer Engineering,
Universidad del Istmo,
Ciudad Universitaria S/N,
Barrio Santa Cruz,
4a. Seccion,
Santo Domingo Tehuantepec,
Oaxaca 70760, Mexico

Omar S. Nieva Garcıa
Department of Computer Engineering,
Universidad del Istmo,
Barrio Santa Cruz,
Santo Domingo Tehuantepec,
Oaxaca 70760, Mexico

User-Centered Virtual
Environment for Poststroke
Motor Rehabilitation

The use of virtual reality in the rehabilitation of lost or diminished functions after a
stroke has been shown to be an innovative means in motor recovery. However, there are
still several design challenges to increment the efﬁciency of these systems. This paper
presents the development and evaluation of a nonimmersive three-dimensional virtual
environment for poststroke rehabilitation of elbow ﬂexion–extension movements, which
considers the therapist as a direct user and the patient as a secondary user. The develop-
ment of virtual environment was supported by the criteria of a team of specialists in phys-
ical and occupational therapy, following the philosophy of user-centered design through
three iterations, and incorporating tasks based on the activities of daily living of the Bar-
thel scale. Tests were carried out with healthy users and a patient with a diagnosis of
stroke, using the system usability scale (SUS) test and a ﬂow status questionnaire, respec-
tively. Average satisfaction of user group without diagnosis was 79.6 out of 100 points.
On the other hand, according to mean values observed with the patient, dimensions of
control sense (6.33) and positive emotional experience (6.66) reﬂect an “optimal” expe-
rience, which indicates an enjoyment of virtual tasks despite the effort made to fulﬁll
them. [DOI: 10.1115/1.4053605]

Introduction

Cerebral vascular disease or cerebrovascular disease constitutes
one of the most frequent causes of death and represents one of the
main reasons for hospital occupation at a global level [1]. In par-
ticular, stroke or cerebrovascular accident is a sudden, transitory,
or permanent alteration of the cerebral circulation in an area of
functional tissue in the brain. A stroke can be of two types: ische-
mic or cerebral infarction, which occurs when an artery in the
brain is blocked, suddenly reducing blood ﬂow, or hemorrhagic,
in which the artery ruptures causing a blood leak. Among the
most common sequelae of a stroke are sensory and motor disor-
ders, vision deﬁcit, impaired balance, and impaired language [2].

The disorder that occurs most frequently is motor deﬁcit, which is
characterized by difﬁculty in executing voluntary movements,
resulting in less independence and mobility of the patient.
After the stroke, rehabilitation plays a very important role in
relearning the basic skills that the attack affected, such as eating,
dressing, and walking, improving the independence and quality of
life of patients. Usually, poststroke rehabilitation exercises are
performed with daily practice directly assisted by the therapist.
However, such exercises are tedious and repetitive, frequently
promoting premature abandonment of rehabilitation programs.
Against this background, there is great interest in the scientiﬁc
community to explore new rehabilitation technologies that include
assistive devices [3,4], telerehabilitation, robotic and virtual real-
ity technologies (VR) [5–8], neuroprosthesis [9,10], and smart-
phone applications [11,12], as well as the combination of these
[13]. Researchers have systematically studied the effectiveness of
these technologies, mainly in balance control and gait [14,15],

1Corresponding author.
Manuscript received August 27, 2021; ﬁnal manuscript received December 29,
2021; published online March 2, 2022. Assoc. Editor: Jason Z. Moore.

JUNE 2022, Vol. 16 / 021014-1
Copyright V
C 2022 by ASME

upper and lower limb motor functions [16,17], walking [18], and
the clinical effects of commercially available VR games [19]. The
works listed above show that VR-based systems have two very
important characteristics in the rehabilitation process: Motivation
and feedback, which is why they represent an important alterna-
tive mainly in occupational therapy performed at home [5,7].
In particular, this paper focuses on the use of VR technologies
for poststroke rehabilitation. A VR system is the set of physical
solutions or means to generate experiences deﬁned in terms of
qualities such as immersion, interaction, sensorimotor experiences
and illusion, and that often incorporate elements of gamiﬁcation
to increase motivation of the participant. Nonimmersive VR sys-
tems are the most studied as a therapeutic tool in the treatment of
neurological disorders such as stroke [20,21], as they do not
require specialized hardware for their interaction with the virtual
environment. However, despite the indications about the beneﬁ-
cial aspects of VR in neurorehabilitation programs, the question
remains of how to guarantee that virtual rehabilitation interven-
tions meet the speciﬁc needs of users, as well as the difﬁculty to
validate the clinical result of the use of virtual reality systems that
are not speciﬁcally designed for rehabilitation tasks. In this con-
text, the incorporation of the user’s perspective in the design,
development and reﬁnement phases [22], attention to usability
problems [23], as well as the versatility of user interfaces [24], are
some of the lines of study that seek to increase the usability of
these virtual environments, making them useful as support tools in
rehabilitation programs.
From this perspective, and in attention to one of the most com-
mon pathologies of neurological origin such as stroke, this paper
presents the design and evaluation of a virtual environment for the
rehabilitation of motor function of the upper limb after a stroke,
under the philosophy of user-centered design (UCD). The purpose
of three-dimensional (3D) virtual environment developed is to
support therapy by limiting itself to the ﬂexion–extension move-
ment of the elbow, considering the therapist as a direct user, and
the patient as a secondary user. Thus, the method proposed in this
paper shows, through the development of a virtual environment,
the advantages of guiding software development from the per-
spective of the therapist, who is the one who outlines and monitors
the rehabilitation process. The main contributions of this work
are: (1) a methodology for the development of virtual environ-
ments for rehabilitation that considers the therapist as the main
user, (2) the design and implementation of a virtual environment
for poststroke rehabilitation that integrated the philosophy of the
UCD, the approach of occupational therapy through activities of
daily living (ADLs), and the Kinect and Unity 3D technologies,
(3) the preliminary evaluation of the virtual environment with a
patient with poststroke diagnosis, and (4) delineation of possible
applications of the virtual environment to other mobility disorders
of the elbow as a result of other pathologies or its application to
sports medicine.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: in the sec-
ond section-related works that address the development of 3D vir-
tual environments for rehabilitation from the perspective of the
user are presented. The third section describes the design of the
virtual environment as a product of three iterations of the UCD.
The fourth and ﬁfth sections show and analyze the evaluation of
the environment with healthy users and a patient with poststroke
aftermath. Finally, the sixth section exhibits the conclusions and
future work derived from this research.

Related Works

Virtual reality applied to poststroke rehabilitation has been ori-
ented mainly to motor training of the shoulder, elbow, hand, wrist,
and ﬁngers [25–28], due to that the disorder that occurs most fre-
quently after a stroke is a motor deﬁcit in the upper limbs. These
systems, generally semi-immersive, typically use the Nintendo
Wii (Tokyo, Japan) video game console or the Microsoft Kinect
(Redmond, WA) sensor (version 2) as the means of interaction,

the latter being preferred by developers because it has an software
development kit that allows access to all its functions [29]. In
recent years, a new version of the Kinect called Azure has been
shown as an alternative means of interaction for these types of
applications [30,31]. However, although the performance of the
Azure Kinect ToF (time-of-Flight) camera is superior, the identiﬁ-
able number of characteristic points of the joints of the upper and
lower limbs are the same between both versions. With regard to
software for the development of VR applications, the graphics
engines unity and unreal engine stand out, the former being the
most widely used. Subsequently, under the argument of the beneﬁt
of greater immersion, recent studies have focused on the develop-
ment and use of virtual environments with 3D visualizations, as
an alternative to traditional two-dimensional environments that
continue to represent a viable alternative in medical practice
[32,33].
Regarding the use of VR technology, the inherent difﬁculties
have led to the development of virtual rehabilitation systems that,
under approaches such as usability engineering and UCD, seek to
improve the user experience. In Ref. [34], an active video game
based on Kinect and Unity is presented to improve the balance of
older people under the principles of human-centered design (used
in practice as a synonym for UCD). The iterative process consid-
ers focus group sessions with game designers, the elderly, medical
professionals and caregivers, the development of prototypes, the
use of scales and tests (Berg balance scale, 30 s sit to stand test),
system usability scale (SUS) questionnaires, and semistructured
interviews. In a similar way, in Ref. [35], a new UCD protocol is
presented to develop active video games based on the Kinect sen-
sor, adapted to the needs of older adults. The protocol is the result
of the experience with a group of users that met every two weeks
for three years to make use of an active video game and partici-
pate in interviews and group discussions. Meanwhile, Ref. [36]
presents the development of a virtual environment for poststroke
rehabilitation based on games, which makes use of the Kinect sen-
sor as the main interaction interface. Following the UCD method-
ology, the requirements of each iteration were derived from the
observation of rehabilitation sessions and from interviews with
patients and therapists. At the end of each cycle, the system was
tested by therapists, who outlined the needs to be considered in
the new iteration. The evaluation phase was carried out with ﬁf-
teen healthy users, who after using the virtual environment com-
pleted a series of questionnaires on the perception of the system
(SUS usability, difﬁculty, fun, and motivation).
On the other hand, based on clinical requirements and as result
of a study with users under the UCD approach, Ref. [37] presents
the development of an application that is part of a poststroke
motor tele-rehabilitation system consisting of haptic devices and
the Kinect sensor. To deﬁne the elements of the application, group
sessions were held with ﬁve therapists, while the study with the
tele-rehabilitation system as a whole was carried out with ﬁve par-
ticipants with hemiparesis (muscle weakness or partial paralysis
on one side of the body) with severity between “severely affected”
and “mildly affected.” The participants showed a performance in
the ADL between 50 and 100 on the Barthel scale; in addition,
they carried out some tasks that led to a qualitative analysis of the
problems of use of the application. Meanwhile, Ref. [38]
describes the development of a system to support poststroke reha-
bilitation therapy of the upper limbs, which under the guidance of
UCD makes use of active video games based on Kinect, to repro-
duce exercises used in a physical therapy intervention. A group of
therapists assisted in the deﬁnition of design criteria, generating a
prototype that was evaluated by a group of patients over a period
of three months, comparing its results with a control group.
At this point, it is important to note that few works follows the
UCD
principles
in
the
development
of
poststroke
motor
rehabilitation systems, sometimes limiting itself to considering
the user at the center of decision-making, without adhering to a
regulation standard to the detriment of the quality of the products
generated.

021014-2 / Vol. 16, JUNE 2022

It is important to mention that although the cited studies inte-
grate the UCD to develop systems that have the patient as the pri-
mary user, studies such as in Ref. [39], indicate the concern that
exists on the part of the patients on the correct performance of
their exercises. The foregoing gives great relevance to the sugges-
tions and corrections that the therapist makes during their execu-
tion. Since the therapists are the architects of the rehabilitation
process, it is feasible to consider them as a direct user in the devel-
opment of virtual environments.

Method

In planning the UCD process following the ISO 9241-210
standard, the interview was selected as the inquiry method, and
high-ﬁdelity prototyping as the design method. For the ﬁrst and
second iterations, meetings with specialists in physical medicine
and rehabilitation were planned, while for the third iteration, tests
were carried out with users without and with a poststroke diagno-
sis. The details of the three contemplated iterations are detailed
below, the evaluation of the third being addressed in the results
section.

First Iteration

Understand and Specify the Context of Use. The participation
of two types of users was contemplated: the specialist and the
patient. First considered the direct user and who will provide the
system requirements and the second the indirect user who will use
the scenes designed for therapy. Thus, a ﬁeld study was carried
out through observation to identify the activities concerning the
evaluation of the patient’s mobility, the design of the therapy and
its supervision by the specialists. As a result of this phase, the
detailed writing of the activities carried out by the specialists in
his consulting room was obtained.

Specify User Requirements. An interview was applied to the
specialists to identify the requirements that could support them in
the automatic management of their patients and in the monitoring
of the therapy session. The application of this instrument led to
the following conclusions: (1) Due to the limitations in motor
skills that patients may present, it is appropriate to use a noninva-
sive mechanism for the detection of movement, such as the
Kinect sensor. (2) Focus on the task of rehabilitation of the
ﬂexion–extension movement of the elbow joint, since weakness in the
muscles of this joint is a common consequence after a stroke. There-
fore, the autonomy of the elbow must be analyzed, to know the gener-
alities regarding the types of elbow movement, as well as the
interpretation of the ranges and muscles involved in ﬂexion–extension.
(3) Scenes and virtual tasks will be developed that represent ADLs
contemplated in the modiﬁed Barthel scale [40], and in which the
ﬂexion–extension movement of the elbow is directly implicit.

Produce Design Solutions. The following ADLs considered in
the modiﬁed Barthel scale were selected: feeding, grooming, and
dressing, deﬁning the virtual scenes: “dining room,” “bathroom”
and “bedroom.” To assign to each scene a set of tasks involving
shoulder/elbow movements, the functional tasks of the arm motor
ability test were considered, which is used regularly to evaluate and
quantify upper limb functional limitation in strokes and other con-
ditions [41]. For this ﬁrst prototype, only one task was considered
for each virtual scene. For the implementation of the virtual envi-
ronment, the Unity 3D technology was selected, as well as the

SKETCHUP software to acclimate the different scenes, which allowed
the integration of a nonhumanoid avatar whose function was to rep-
resent the arms of the user, employing at the programming level a
collision mechanism between the avatar and the virtual objects.
Design evaluation: It was carried out with the help of the team
of specialists, who underwent a demonstration of a high-ﬁdelity
prototype that complied with the elements derived from the ﬁeld
study and the initial interview. Through a directed interview, a
discussion environment was established between the developers

and the specialists, which allowed the integration in the next itera-
tion of the UCD of qualitative and quantitative parameters that the
specialists consider important during the diagnosis and recovery
of the patient.

Second Iteration

Specify User Requirements. Based on the observations indi-
cated by the specialists in the evaluation of the prototype in the
previous iteration, the following improvements were indicated:
(1) Allowing the presence of two people on scene (patient and
therapist), with the aim of establishing a system-assisted. (2) Inte-
grate to the conﬁguration: the ﬂexion angle that the patient must
achieve in a certain task to consider it a repetition, the time during
which the patient must perform the repetitions, and the count of
the number of repetitions achieved. These parameters, at the dis-
cretion of our team of specialists, are a means to quantify the pro-
gress of the patient. (3) The inclusion criteria for secondary users
who would use the system were formalized, considering, (i) met-
rics available to the specialist to assess the functional status of the
patient (Ashworth and Daniels scale), (ii) degree of mobility of
the patient’s joint, (iii) time elapsed since the stroke episode. This
information will form the details of the medical history of the
patient. (4) Integration of a database for the initial registration and
progress of patients, in such a way that at the end of a session, the
data is saved allowing the specialist to evaluate the progress of the
patient.

Produce Design Solutions. To meet the new speciﬁcations, a
local SQLite database was integrated to the selected technology,
to store the data related to the new modules (login, manage patient
data, conﬁgure tasks, and consult history) that will be adminis-
tered by the specialist. On the other hand, adjustments were made
at the programming level within the object detection scripts of the
Kinect for the discrimination of the therapist’s skeleton, which is
commonly found on the side of the patient providing assistance at
the shoulder level (if this is required). The angle of ﬂexion of the
elbow (with a precision of 61 deg), was obtained through Eq. (1),
where h is the angle formed by the intersection of the vectors s1
and s2, which represent the arm and the forearm, respectively.
Both vectors are deﬁned by the x, y and z positions of the charac-
teristic points of the joints (shoulder, elbow, and wrist) so that
vector s1 is the difference of the points associated with elbow and
shoulder, while vector s2 is the difference of the wrist and elbow
points (see Fig. 1)

cos h ¼ s1  s2
js1jjs2j

where

s1 ¼ r1  r2

Fig. 1
Obtaining the ﬂexion angle of the elbow

JUNE 2022, Vol. 16 / 021014-3

s2 ¼ r3  r2
(1)

For the repetition count, the behavior base of the tasks was modi-
ﬁed. Each task was modeled using a ﬁnite state machine (see
Fig. 2). The transition between states is determined by the colli-
sion of the virtual arms with the objects, the target-bending angle,
and the minimum time to maintain the target angle that make the
repetition valid, all this subject to the maximum time established
to perform the repetitions of the task.

Design Evaluation. The demonstration of the prototype to the
specialists was carried out in the usability laboratory of the Uni-
versity of the Isthmus. The laboratory is equipped with a 24-in.
TV with 1360  768 resolution, video surveillance equipment,
audio, and a Kinect version 2.0 sensor. The specialists gave their
point of view on the fulﬁllment of the requirements indicated in
the ﬁrst evaluation (see Fig. 3). The procedure ﬁnalized with a
guided interview that made it possible to list requirements with
their respective clariﬁcations.

Third Iteration

Specify User Requirements. Based on the second evaluation of
the prototype by the team of specialists, new requirements were
deﬁned: (1) Integrate the conﬁguration of the affected side (right
or left). (2) Modify the database to incorporate the current inclu-
sion criteria. (3) Add new tasks to the scenes.

Produce Design Solutions. The adaptation of the system to
patients with damage in the left side (left hemiparesis) was based
on the ﬁnite state machines deﬁned in the previous iteration for its
counterpart. New interfaces were integrated for the management
of data that can be manipulated by the specialist, such as the his-
tory of the patients and the conﬁguration of the task, adding the
new inclusion criteria that needed to be administered. The tech-
nology established from the second iteration remained current.
Finally, a visual feedback element was added as a “miniature
mirror” of the user, as a means of proprioceptive stimulation that
allows informing the user of incorrect movements. Figure 4
shows the evolution of the “bathroom” scene and the “brush
teeth” task.

Results

At the end of the last iteration, the evaluation of the virtual
environment was carried out by two different secondary users (see
Fig. 5), at the facilities of the University of the Isthmus, campus
Tehuantepec, Mexico. All participants were informed of the
details of the study, giving their written consent. A ﬁrst group of
14 engineering students (12 men and 2 women), without a history
of neurological disorder, or motor deﬁciency in the upper limb,
aged between 18 and 20 years, and without experience in virtual
environments
but
regular
users
of
the
information
and

communications technology, provided their level of satisfaction
through the SUS test in its positive version, after using the system.
On the other hand, tests were performed by a patient with a diag-
nosis of stroke and no experience in the use of virtual environ-
ments. The motivation and personal enjoyment of the patient was
analyzed based on her optimal psychological state to carry out
an activity, using a ﬂow state questionnaire as an instrument.
The test was realized under the supervision of a therapist, who
performed the assessment of the patient, made the registration in
the software, and monitored the execution of the exercises.
In the group of users without diagnosis, who performed a single
task for two minutes with a target ﬂexion angle of 110 deg,
71.42% presented an “acceptable” satisfaction measure with
respect to the SUS score proposed in Ref. [42]. The average satis-
faction was 79.6 out of 100 points, which indicates that the virtual
environment is considered acceptable (see Fig. 6). Regarding the
users who evaluated the seven tasks of the virtual environment,
two SUS indicators were obtained for each task (see Fig. 7). From
this test, it was concluded that the task that offered the lowest sat-
isfaction indicator was that of “cut meat” from the “dining room”
scene with 60 points, and the task with the highest indicator was
that of “comb hair” from the “bathroom” scene, with 97.5 points.
As a result of the verbal observations made by the users, a series
of improvements were made at the programing level, prior to the
tests with the patient.
Regarding the tests with patients, a user with a diagnosis of
stroke was considered. Table 1 shows the clinical proﬁle of the

Fig. 2
State machine for the “drink coffee” task

Fig. 3
A specialist evaluating the system: (a) ﬁrst iteration and
(b) second iteration

021014-4 / Vol. 16, JUNE 2022

patient based on the on-site assessment carried out by the team of
specialists. According to the inclusion criteria for secondary users
established during the development of the software, the patient
was able to use the virtual environment. The assessment on the
Barthel scale gave the certainty that the patient could perform the
virtual tasks considered. On the other hand, the values on the Ash-
worth scale and the range of motion allowed the therapists to
deﬁne the angle of ﬂexion that the patient could reach, while the
Daniels scale deﬁned the duration of each virtual task.
Once the assessment was carried out, the patient was made
aware of the purpose of the test and, prior to performing each vir-
tual activity, it was explained what it would consist of. Subse-
quently, the primary user (therapist) registered the patient in the
virtual environment database, and ﬁve ADLs were evaluated with
a duration of three minutes and a target ﬂexion angle of 110 deg
for each task. In this way, during the performance of each virtual
task, the patient had the objective of extending and ﬂexing the
elbow until reaching the angle, seeking to perform the greatest
number of repetitions during the established time.
In the “dining room” scene, the patient performed the tasks
“drink coffee,” “eat sandwich” and “cut meat,” performing 6, 6,

and 5 repetitions, respectively. While in the “bathroom” and
“room” scenes, he performed the tasks of “brushing his teeth” and
“putting on his shirt,” achieving ﬁve and nine repetitions. It
should be noted that the patient required a 5-min break after per-
forming the ﬁrst three tasks.

Fig.
4
Evolution
of
the
high
ﬁdelity
prototype
for
the
“bathroom” scene and the “brush teeth” task: (a) ﬁrst iteration,
(b) second iteration, and (c) third iteration

Fig. 5
Tests with healthy users and patient: (a) healthy user
and (b) patient

Fig. 6
SUS scores of undiagnosed users

Fig. 7
SUS scores by task

JUNE 2022, Vol. 16 / 021014-5

Finally, a ﬂow state questionnaire was applied to the patient,
which refers to the optimal psychological state to perform an
activity, being closely related to motivation and personal enjoy-
ment [43]. The 1–7 scale questionnaire (where 1 strongly dis-
agrees and 7 strongly agrees) was derived from the proposal made
in Ref. [44] for occupational therapy, considering for each dimen-
sion (sense of control, positive emotional experience, and absorp-
tion by concentration) only the three items with the highest load
factor.
According to the values obtained in each of the items, the sense
of control f6, 7, 6g and the positive emotional experience f6, 7,
7g, were the dimensions in which the patient presented the great-
est optimal experience. Thus, according to Ref. [43], the patient
manifested an experience of enjoyment as a result of performing
the task, leaving reward or incentives in the background, as well
as getting involved in the task no matter how difﬁcult or compli-
cated it seemed. On the other hand, the least optimal experience
occurred in the dimension of absorption by concentration f2, 1,
1g, where the patient did not present an intense level of concentra-
tion when performing the task. This is attributed to the progressive
fatigue that the patient presented while performing the move-
ments, which led him to be aware of the countdown to end. The
minimum variation (61) between values of the items in each
dimension, allows to infer a consistency in the user’s responses.
In addition, a pilot study was carried out with three rehabilita-
tion specialists, to whom a Thinking Aloud test was applied, with
the intention of obtaining feedback on the user’s expectations
regarding the design of the interface. As a result of the test, only
two usability problems were identiﬁed, related to a failure in the
task or loss of functionality, and the rest were minor problems,
according to the classiﬁcation of Ref. [45]. The prevalence of
minor problems indicates that users were able to complete the
associated usability task, but in a slightly longer time than
expected, indicating design details that were addressed. On the
other hand, the low occurrence of failures in the task or loss of
functionality, presupposes a correspondence of the interface
design with respect to the user’s expectation, which can be
improved through a new version of the software.

Discussion

This paper presented the design, implementation, and evalua-
tion of a 3D virtual environment based on ADLs for the motor
rehabilitation of the elbow after a stroke. Regarding the design
and implementation of the software under the philosophy of the
UCD, unlike the related works [34–38], the therapist was placed
in the center of decision-making, as he is the one who outlines
and monitors the rehabilitation process. In particular, the virtual
environment presents a robust data management system, a

characteristic that is only found in commercial software [46–47].
Additionally, the possibility of conﬁguring virtual tasks responds
to the need to adapt the tasks to the characteristics of the user,
which is a limitation of works where active video games from
video consoles such as the Nintendo Wii are used. Although the
use of games adapted or developed for rehabilitation can provide
“fun” for the patient, there should be a balance between fun and
therapeutic goals. In this sense, the use of virtual ADLs is advan-
tageous, as they promote functional recovery associated with real
situations. In the related works mentioned previously, the integra-
tion of ADLs is not considered for the deﬁnition of virtual tasks.
Regarding the software evaluation, this was carried out from
two perspectives. During the ﬁrst two iterations of the UCD, a
team of therapists, who through directed interviews established
the requirements of the subsequent iterations, evaluated the high-
ﬁdelity prototype. In the third iteration of the UCD, tests were car-
ried out with secondary users, with two complementary purposes:
to evaluate the ease with which the prototype can be used (usabil-
ity), and to estimate the experience it can provide. The tests with
the group of healthy users showed high SUS satisfaction rates,
while the results with a patient with a diagnosis of stroke indicate
an optimal response toward performing virtual tasks. Finally, to
explore the use of the virtual environment for the assessment of
traditional rehabilitation processes, two months after the ﬁrst
intervention with the stroke patient, a second test was performed
with the same tasks, but with an increase of 10 deg in the target
ﬂexion angle, obtaining on average one more repetition in each
task compared to the ﬁrst session. It should be noted that the par-
ticipation of the team of therapists in the test with the diagnosed
patient allowed us to appreciate the attachment between the
design carried out with the therapists and its usefulness in a ther-
apy session, which was reﬂected in the experience of enjoyment
shown by the patient. It is noteworthy that the comprehensive esti-
mation of usability and ﬂow experience are unidentiﬁed mecha-
nisms in works related to the development of virtual environments
for rehabilitation under the UCD philosophy.

Conclusions

Although various studies today place VR as a complement in
rehabilitation processes, the combination of virtual rehabilitation
and traditional approaches, its beneﬁts compared to conventional
treatments, and how virtual environments meet the speciﬁc needs
of users, are still reason for study. In this paper, a 3D virtual envi-
ronment was presented that integrated the philosophy of the UCD,
the approach of occupational therapy through ADLs, and the Kin-
ect and Unity 3D technologies, to form a support tool in the motor
rehabilitation process of patients diagnosed with stroke, contribut-
ing to the research of the adoption of 3D VR in medical practice.

Table 1
Clinical proﬁle/patient inclusion criteria

Attribute
Inclusion criteria
Characteristic of the patient

Age
Adult people (>¼ 18 years old)
51
Ailing
Stroke.
People with involvement of the right / left arm, who present
difﬁculties in ﬂexion-extension movement at the elbow (right/left
hemiparesis).

Ischemic stroke (right hemiparesis)

Time elapsed since
the stroke episode
People in the process of recovery with less than six months from
the stroke episode. Date referring to the clinical diagnosis of
stroke.

4 months ago

Ashworth scale
People with muscle tension in grade 0, 1, 2, and 3
Grade 3

Daniels scale
People with muscle strength in grade 2 and 3.
Grade 3

Barthel scale
People with moderate (61–90) or low (91–99) dependence,
according to the interpretation suggested in Ivanova et al [19].
85

Range of motion
Corresponding to the evaluation under the criterion of the Barthel
scale.
110 deg in elbow, 70 deg in shoulder, and
60 deg in wrist.

021014-6 / Vol. 16, JUNE 2022

Despite the fact that virtual rehabilitation may not be superior to
conventional rehabilitation therapy, it is presented as a useful
complement to increase the duration of therapy and intensity, a
situation that was observable in the results obtained. It should be
noted that, the virtual environment described is presented as a pro-
gressive diagnostic and evaluation tool. In this sense, it is perti-
nent to carry out a study with a larger group of patients, which
allows granting it an attribute of utility in medical practice. Fur-
thermore, a comparative study with a two-dimensional version of
the presented development is also part of the future work. Finally,
from the technological point of view, two lines of research were
identiﬁed around the work presented. On the one hand, the incor-
poration into the VR system of technologies such as the leap
motion controller [48] and the Myo gesture control armband [49],
which allow the detection of ﬁne hand movements, and therefore
greater system performance. On the other hand, the incorporation
of telecommunications technologies to obtain efﬁcient tele-
rehabilitation systems, which are currently essential as a result of
the COVID-19 pandemic.

Acknowledgment

To the team of therapists led by Dr. Sandra Luz Nandez
German for their valuable support in conducting this research.

Nomenclature

s1 ¼ vector which represent the arm
s2 ¼ vector which represent the forearm
H ¼ angle of ﬂexion of the elbow