ezHPC:  Adopting a Program-wide, User-centered Design Approach to the ezHPC 
User Interface 

Julie Baca 
Mississippi State University, Mississippi 
State, MS 

Wes Monceaux, Keith Rappold, Patti Duett, Kimba 
Buchanan, Scotty Swillie, and Glen Browning 
USACE Engineer Research and Development Center Major 
Shared Resource Center, (ERDC-MSRC), Vicksburg, MS 
{Weston.P.Monceaux, Keith.N.Rappold, Patti.S.Duett, 
Kimba.Buchanan, Scotty.Swillie, 

Abstract

 
 The Engineer Research and Development Center 
Major Shared Resource Center (ERDC MSRC) has been 
tasked by the Department of Defense (DoD) High 
Performance 
Computing 
Modernization 
Program 
(HPCMP) to adopt a program-wide design for the 
development of the recently introduced ezHPC user 
interface.  The purpose of ezHPC is to provide all 
HPCMP users intuitive, efficient access to high 
performance computing (HPC) resources needed in their 
regular course of work.  At the core of user-centered 
design is an emphasis on fully understanding HPC users 
and their work environment, enabling support for user 
needs, not developer concerns, to drive the design 
process.  Fulfilling this goal requires the use of a variety 
of methods from the field of usability engineering.  For 
ezHPC, methods have included to date (1) inclusion of 
users as part of the design team, (2) a facilitated focus 
group session, (3) a usability walkthrough, (4) a usability 
evaluation, and (5) rapid prototyping.  
In adherence to user-centered design, a user group 
(UG) was formed to serve as participants in the design of 
the ezHPC software.  ezHPC UG members participated in 
a recent workshop for the purpose of assessing and 
improving the usability of the program-wide version of 
ezHPC.
 
Results are currently being used to guide the new 
design of the ezHPC interface using rapid prototyping.  
Prototypes are under development for regular reviews by 
the UG, followed by iterative refinement.  This direct 
early involvement of users ensures more responsive, user-
centered interfaces.  Formal, large-scale usability 
evaluations are expected in the latter half of the software 
cycle.

1.  Introduction 

 
For ezHPC, usability methods have included to date 
(1) inclusion of users as part of the design team, (2) a 
facilitated 
focus 
group 
session, 
(3) 
a 
usability 
walkthrough, (4) a usability evaluation, and (5) rapid 
prototyping.  
 
In adherence to user-centered design, a user group 
(UG) was formed to serve as participants in the design of 
the ezHPC software.  ezHPC UG members participated in 
a recent workshop for the purpose of assessing and 
improving the usability of the program-wide version of 
ezHPC.
 
Results are currently being used to guide the new 
design of the ezHPC interface using rapid prototyping.  
This paper reports results and status of usability-related 
activities conducted to date and concludes with future 
plans for the project. 

2.  Usability Workshop 

 
A total of seven HPC users from a variety of 
backgrounds participated in the workshop.  Though this 
number may seem small, studies have shown that, if 
properly composed, a group of this size is optimal for 
conducting a user-centered design (UCD) process[1].
Such a process diverges from conventional software 
development methods in that it focuses on eliciting user 
needs, rather than developer concerns, to drive the design.  
(Extensive 
usability 
testing 
occurs 
later 
in 
the 
development cycle and involves larger numbers of users, 
but this is both impractical and unnecessary in the design 
stage.)  Hence, to support the user-centered design 
process, the workshop participants were carefully chosen 
to provide the broadest possible window into typical user 

needs.  Out of the seven participants, four reported 
spending at least 50 percent or more of their time doing 
direct technical work; the other three participants 
provided user technical support to a large group of HPC 
users, each from different agencies with somewhat 
differing user cultures; e.g., some involved the use of 
more students than others.  The latter point regarding 
differing user cultures is significant in obtaining the 
broadest representation of the user population. 

2.1. Preworkshop Data 

 
Prior to the workshop, each participant replied to a 
brief e-mail survey with the purpose of eliciting a broad 
view of the typical user workflow.  These data were 
studied prior to the workshop and used to direct a focus 
group session held the first morning.  A diagram depicting 
a high-level workflow, based on these data, is shown in 
Figure 1.  An analysis of responses to the survey revealed 
three basic categories of work activities:  (1) performing 
direct technical work, (2) communicating, and (3) 
monitoring. Specific activities and ranges for percentages 
of time were reported under each category.  Note that 
some higher level activities, such as user support and 
supervising, encompass more than one of the fundamental 
categories.  Thus, they are listed across the appropriate 
categories, e.g., user support, which requires both 
communicating and direct technical analysis. 

Figure 1. High-level workflow diagram 

2.2. Workshop Focus Group Data 

 
Focus groups, long used in marketing, have also 
proven useful in gathering usability requirements if 
properly facilitated and used in conjunction with other 
data-gathering techniques[2].  The workflow analysis 
shown in Figure 1 was used to initiate a focus group 
session held the first morning of the workshop.  
Participants engaged in discussion to further refine the 
understanding of the typical user work environment and, 
particularly, the most critical problems faced.
 
Though 
the 
fundamental 
workflow 
did 
not 
significantly change, a focus emerged in a few key areas:  
(1) 
resource 
and 
allocation 
monitoring, 
(2) 
communicating with management, and (3) mentoring new 
employees.  First, information that could be used to 
reduce turnaround time for getting jobs through queues 

emerged as a critical concern.  Second, a need to convey 
resource allocation problems to nontechnical management 
was strongly voiced.  Third, issues regarding training and 
mentoring new employees and students, many of whom 
may be non-native speakers, emerged as an area of some 
importance.   

2.3. Usability Evaluation 

 
In addition to the e-mail survey, a usability 
walkthrough 
was 
conducted 
by 
the 
design 
and 
development team prior to the workshop.  The usability 
walkthrough is a technique for identifying potential 
usability problems in an interface[2].  It entails a team of 
usability specialists (and can include developers) who 
“walk through” a set of interactive exercises with an 
interface to identify potential problems, based on known 
usability heuristics and principles[3–5].  This technique has 
been reported to identify a significant percentage of 
usability problems in the design stage.  Results are 
intended to be used as a guide, however, not a 
replacement for user testing.  Hence, the results of the 
walkthrough were used in developing a set of tasks and an 
accompanying questionnaire for a usability evaluation 
performed by users at the workshop. 
 
At the completion of the morning focus group 
session, participants engaged in a usability evaluation, in 
which they performed a variety of tasks using the current 
ezHPC interface and then evaluated its ease of use via a 
questionnaire.  The tasks were designed to exercise all 
critical aspects of the system interface and to cover the 
broadest possible range of activities a user would perform 
in a typical day or week, again, based on results of the e-
mail survey, other previous UG input, and the usability 
walkthrough results.  In addition, emphasis was placed on 
writing the tasks in user (not programmer) language, and 
with maximum neutrality, i.e., instructing *what* task to 
perform, but not *how* to use the interface to perform the 
task.  An example would be as follows: “Copy a file from 
your laptop to another HPC computer,” versus “Go to the 
file management page, select the file you want to copy.”  
The latter phrasing is better suited for testing to identify 
programming errors, not usability issues.  The neutrality 
of the first task phrasing, however, is key to obtaining 
meaningful usability assessments[6].
 
After performing these tasks, participants responded 
to a usability questionnaire, which elicited two types of 
feedback: (1) Likert Scale ratings of system features[7],
(e.g., 1–5, Strongly Agree to Strongly Disagree), and (2) 
freestyle comments.  Each type of data, Likert scale 
ratings, and freestyle comments (as well as any other user 
input) must be considered to gain insight into how to 
improve the interface design.  Highlights of results in job 
management, file management, script management, and 
Web design style are summarized.  Since file 

management issues emerged as one of the higher priority 
items, results for this feature are then presented in greater 
detail.   

2.4. Usability Evaluation Results 

 
In the area of job management, results indicated 
users required better visual tools for job scheduling, clear 
history mechanisms for job queries, and unambiguous 
language for novice users regarding system events.  In 
script management, users needed more comprehensive, 
easier-to-use methods for finding existing scripts, and 
more user-centered methods for sharing scripts.  In the 
area of file management, users required more efficient 
methods for finding existing files, easier-to-use methods 
for copying files from host to host and from laptop to 
host.  Finally regarding Web preferences, users preferred 
lighter, simpler interaction styles. 
 
Again, the file management interface features 
sparked a significant share of the workshop discussion, 
not only in the questionnaire freestyle comments but 
throughout the first day’s sessions.  These features also 
stimulated some of the most highly split ratings (positive 
and negative), flagging it as a priority in the redesign. A 
screenshot of the interface for the file management 
interface evaluated is shown in Figure 2.   

Figure 2. File management screen 

 
To reiterate, this interface was designed by a skilled, 
experienced programming team, though untrained in 
usability.  Based on their best understanding about users’ 
experience with software tools and interfaces, they made 
many seemingly logical choices in the interface paradigm 
and features.  For example, the dual-pane paradigm draws 
on a common graphical interface for file transfer[8].
However, the original intent of this paradigm was 
primarily to support the transfer operation on a file, and 
not the many other operations a user may wish to apply to 
files, e.g., editing, listing, changing permissions, and 
searching.  As an interface paradigm, it does not come 
without cost: by splitting the screen in half horizontally, it 
reduces the display area for the file listing, requiring users 

to scroll right to view important information about a file.  
It also forces a left-right sequencing that is not intuitive 
for all operations, such as changing permissions or 
deleting a file.  Further, the interface used the classic 
terminology for file transfers “upload/download”, mixing 
a “vertical” logical view (up/ down) with a left-right 
interaction orientation. 
 
Second, a “filter” option provided in the file selection 
window presents another example where the developers 
reasonably relied on another interface feature with which 
their experienced UNIX users would be familiar, the 
UNIX filter command line function.  However, this does 
not translate easily to the graphical, Web-based paradigm 
for 
several 
reasons. 
 
Experienced UNIX users, 
knowledgeable of the many ways a filter can be applied, 
might be unsure which was offered, while inexperienced 
users would likely be unfamiliar with the term or 
technique.   These issues did not render this feature 
inherently bad or good; they simply underlined the 
necessity of determining the critical underlying need for 
all users and designing an approach to fit that need.   
These potential problems had been identified in the 
usability walkthrough; the evaluation yielded further 
insight. 
Listing and Viewing.  The most positive Likert 
ratings pertained to ease of obtaining a file listing (5 
Agree, 1 Neutral, and 1 Disagree to “It was easy to obtain 
a file listng.”).  Despite the overall positive ratings, 
several user comments related to this feature, particularly 
file filtering, were negative and important to note for the 
redesign.  Excerpted comments include 
x
“When filtering file listing, I had no idea how the 
filtering was done: whether the filter was applied 
to the file name, the full path, ownership, etc.” 
(User #1) 
x
“I found the filtering mechanism confusing.” 
(User #4) 
x
”Our new users are not familiar with filtering.” 
(User #7) 
Copying and Transferring.  The most split Likert 
scale ratings, as well as some of the most negative 
freestyle comments, pertained to file transfers and copies.  
A near equal split occurred on user’s ratings of the ease of 
copying files from one host to another (three 
agree/strongly agree, and two disagree), as shown in 
Figure 3.  An exactly equal split of user ratings occurred 
for the question on ease of transfers from laptops to hosts 
(three participants agreed, three disagreed), as shown in 
Figure 4.   

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

Ease of Copy Host to Host

Figure 3. Results for ease of copy from host to host 

0

1

2

3

Ease of Copy Laptop to Host

Figure 4. Results for ease of copy from laptop to host 

 
Split ratings often indicate problem areas, but require 
more analysis of user comments than more consistent 
ratings. 
 
Difficulties 
encountered 
included, 
first, 
understanding of how to actually perform the transfer or 
copy, and second, knowing whether the transfer had 
occurred.  Excerpted comments include 
x
“I do not like the upload and download buttons.  
They are confusing.  I think the local client 
should be selectable in the left or right 
window…”  (User #3) 
x
“Problems transferring large files from PC to 
HPC. 
 
Need 
better 
upload/download 
management.  Can’t tell when file is transferred, 
would like visual feedback…”  (User #7) 
 
Finally, two questions in the usability questionnaire 
pertained to user preferences and habits regarding file 
management.  Responses showed overall (six out of seven 
participants) that finding files and copying files were both 
the most frequent and most critical file management tasks 
they performed on a daily basis.  Freestyle comments on 
this feature, along with post-assessment verbal discussion, 
indicated that what users needed most critically was an 
ability to find files through searching the file system, 
rather than applying filters to specific listings or file 

system locations.  Though they rated the latter as 
desirable, they viewed a general search capability as a 
higher priority fundamental need.   

3.  Prototyping 

 
Prototyping is a critical phase in user-centered design 
and involves iteratively generating interface designs and 
refining them based on user feedback[9].  Unlike the 
functional aspects of software, user interface features 
demand this level of interaction with users to achieve 
correct results.  The team began prototyping the new 
interface design once feedback was given on the 
prioritized usability results.  A mixture of horizontal 
(overall system organization) and vertical (specific 
feature) prototyping is being used[10].  Highlights of 
prototyping results to date are given in the following 
subsections. 

3.1. File Management 

 
The home page and file management pages were 
mocked up for user review.  Only the file management 
screen mockups are shown in Figures 5 and 6, since they 
show critical refinements to the home page, e.g., a lighter 
interaction style and streamlined menu.  Key features of 
the file management redesign include (1) a single-pane 
approach with full horizontal file listing as the default, (2) 
a redesigned set of file operations, newly named and 
placed in one location across the top of the single pane, 
(3) a file search capability, and (4) a redesigned copy 
interaction.   
 
The single-pane approach allows a user to view a full 
detailed file listing by default and reduces scrolling and 
other readability issues in the original interaction.  The 
operations supported on a file, as well as their names, 
were 
also 
redesigned. 
 
For 
example, 
the 
“upload/download” and “transfer” terminology was 
discarded in favor of a simple “copy” operation that could 
be applied to any file, regardless of its location. 
 
Some names for file operations were retained, 
however, such as “chmod” for changing file permissions.  
This term, understood by experienced UNIX users, was 
an example where their needs and those of novice Unix 
users required a balance.  For new users, however, once 
learned, this terminology is unlikely to change.  Also, 
training support will be included through such means as 
documentation, tool tips, and a dialog interaction labeled 
“Change File Permissions” that will occur when the 
button is pressed. 
 
Second, in response to the need expressed by users 
for the ability to search the file system, a new operation, 
“Find Files”, was added.  This allows users to perform a 

search of the file system, based on keywords they 
provide. 
 
Finally, the interaction for the copy operation was 
redesigned to use a dialog, prompting users for source and 
destination files and locations.  A progress meter 
displayed on the bottom of the screen indicates the status 
of the copy operation.  This bar can be minimized or 
dismissed.   
 
User reaction to the mockups has been positive 
overall with some mixed reviews on the copy operation.  
Several users expressed the desire to provide persistent 
access to the destination screen in the interaction.  
Methods for providing this while retaining the single-pane 
default view are under consideration by the design team. 

Figure 7. File management mockup 

Figure 8. File copy interaction mockup 

4.  Conclusions 

 
This paper has presented ongoing results of applying 
a user-centered design process to a program-wide version 
of the ezHPC user interface.  This process has applied 
several well-tested usability techniques, most notably the 
formation and input of a user advisory group in activities 
including a focus group session, a usability evaluation, 
and rapid prototyping. 
 
Currently, the prototypes are incrementally evolving 
in response to feedback from the user group to a final 
system; summative usability and error testing is scheduled 
in the latter half of the project life cycle.