Chapter 15

Nilanjana Bairagi and Prathmesh Mahajani

Abstract The present paper aims to redesign a walking aid for the elderly through
a user-centric design research approach. The study involved 12 elderly volunteers.
During the research, detailed observation has been carried out in the area of the
daily activities of the elderly, in their real environment with assistive devices and
interaction with other objects using ethnographic research method. Users’ problems
and preferences toward assistive devices were also studied. It was found from the
pilot study that the existing walkers make the elderly feel psychologically dependent
and disabled. Many elderly persons found it shaky while using. This leads to non-
use or abandonment of the walker, though medically advised. Therefore, this study
focused on redesigning of walker to address the above issues. The designing criteria
were derived from the observations and interviews with stakeholders, concepts were
developed, prototypes were made and user tested, before arriving at the ﬁnal design.
During prototyping and material exploration, indigenous natural material like rattan
cane was used to design the walker with additional features like bottle holder, news-
paper holder, and mobile phone holder. User trials indicated the advantages of the
rattan walker-like easier handling, faster gait speed due to 16% lighter in weight,
and aesthetically pleasing appearance. There was an increase in the gait speed of
the users using rattan cane walker as compared to the conventional walking frame.
The psychological effect of feeling disabled was signiﬁcantly reduced with the new
design as observed during the study. The study shows the possibility of designing a
user-centric walker using a rattan cane walker for the elderly in India.

N. Bairagi · P. Mahajani (B)
National Institute of Fashion Technology, Bengaluru, Karnataka, India

N. Bairagi

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2021
A. Chakrabarti et al. (eds.), Design for Tomorrow—Volume 1, Smart Innovation,
Systems and Technologies 221, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-16-0041-8_15

167

168

15.1
Introduction

Aging is the process of becoming older, wherein the person’s cells and tissues start
to change which leads to greater risk of being diseased or dead [1]. As deﬁned in a
research [2], the elderly is the chronological age of 65 years. Mass of the lower limb
muscles reduces at an older age. This phenomenon is called sarcopenia [3]. This
results in imbalance and falls among the elderly. When the center of mass (COM)
exceeds the bounds of the base of support (BOS), falls are likely to occur. The elderly
walk slowly and tire more quickly due to loss of strength and mass in leg muscles due
to aging. More than 70% of the falls among people aged more than 65 take place at
home and 20% of them need hospitalization [4]. The most common consequences of
falls are hip fractures, restricted activities, psychological impacts like reduced self-
esteem, and reduced quality of life [5]. The majority of falls lead to hip fractures,
which lead to either long-term hospitalization or death [6]. To prevent this, assistive
devices like walkers are used. Walkers increase the base of support of the elderly,
thereby improving their balance and stability [7].
Although the likelihood of disability increases with aging, it is not just associated
with a particular age of population but may affect at any age. Some common reasons
for disability are chronic diseases like cardiovascular disorders, musculoskeletal
disorders and mental health conditions like dementia and depression. Other reasons
are injuries due to accidents or mishaps and malnutrition [8].
Assistive devices like canes, crutches, walkers and wheelchairs are advised to
meet mobility challenges among the elderly. Different novel solutions have been
proposed through a user-centric design approach to meet the mobility challenges of
the elderly. For instance, Khan et al. [9] have designed a novel sit-to-stand walking
aid that incorporates a pantograph mechanism to aid sit-stand transfer, coupled with
a walking frame to assist walking. Another lift-assist walker has been proposed by
Bulea and Triolo [10] for individuals suffering from spinal cord injury, which uses
gas springs to create powerless lift assist. Integration of ergonomics in product design
is found to be relevant and useful in designing products for differently-abled users.
This has been shown by Das and Seid in their work with the self-transfer assistive
devices for wheelchair users [11].
Fundamentally, a walker is a four-legged frame used by people who need support
in balance and mobility. It is also used by older adults to prevent falls. During the
pilot study, it was observed that out of the different types of walkers like rollators
(wheeled walkers), weight-bearing type (with wheels on rear legs of the walker), and
non-weight bearing type of walker (with all four legs of walker without wheels), the
most commonly used was the non-weight bearing type. As a part of the pilot study,
during interviews with doctors and physiotherapists, it was learned that there is a
design opportunity in the area of the walker in the Indian context as many patients
are not comfortable with the existing commercially available models. As there is
limited research in the Indian context, using a user-centric approach in the designing
of an assistive device for the elderly, the aim of this research was to redesign a walker
for the elderly. This would help towards the improvement of physical rehabilitation.

15
169

15.2
Research Methodology

A user-centered design approach was undertaken for this research as presented in
Fig. 15.1. User-centered design is an iterative design process in which the designers
focus on the users and their needs in each phase of design [12]. The ﬁrst step in
user-centered designing is to understand the user needs and requirements. This is
done through an ethnographic research approach where the users were studied in a
real environment in their home setting or home-cum-rehabilitation center. During
the ethnographic observations, the activities, environment, interaction, objects and
users (AEIOU) principles of design thinking were used. The detailed observation
was carried out in the area of their daily activities, their living environment, the
interactions in their real environment with the assistive devices and other objects
and user preferences were studied. Users were also interviewed to study the ease
of using a walker and performing daily tasks. Empathy mapping was carried out to
understand these needs from the perspective of the potential users.
A case study approach has been used. Out of a total population of 28 patients
from an old age home-cum-rehabilitation center, Kadji Care, Vadodara, Gujarat,
interviews of 12 senior citizens using walkers, who volunteered to be a part of the

Fig. 15.1 Research methodology

170

study, were carried out. Informed consent was obtained from all the participants.
Contextual interview questions were asked during the ethnographic research like: 1.
Have you ever experienced a fall? Where? How? How frequently? 2. What kind of
assistive device do you have? How do you ﬁnd it? How easy it is to use this device?
How useful do you think it will be to move around this living environment with this
assistive device? How comfortable do you feel when using this device in front of
other people? 3. Do you think the device can be improved? How? Answers to these
questions have been collected and were noted in the form of insights.
To understand the perspective of healthcare professionals—physiotherapists,
orthopedic doctors, and neurologists have been interviewed using convenience
sampling. A comparative analysis of the most frequently bought walkers was done
with help of 10 surgical shops in Bengaluru, India.
User needs have been assessed at home settings and at rehabilitation center during
the research. The main requirements in a walker were identiﬁed during the obser-
vation and interaction with the users. The emotional feeling associated with the use
of a walker was also investigated through care-givers. The activities of the users are
observed like—using the walker to stand up, navigate in the home spaces, including
accessing the washrooms, sitting on a chair, using mobile phones, carrying small
objects like a bottle of water or newspaper, their stability, and convenience of using
the walker were also observed.
Designs were conceptualized based on the initial research. User feedback was
taken to improve the design and during the material selection process. Prototypes
were developed and feedback was taken from the stakeholders. User testing was
carried out with two elderly volunteers, with informed consent. To understand the
difference in their gait speed, elderly volunteers are asked to travel a 12 m distance
using the conventional walker as well as the redesigned walker. A stop timer is used
to note the time taken to travel the distance and their average speed was calculated.
Based on the feedback and observations, the prototype was modiﬁed and redesigned
before the development of the ﬁnal design.

15.3
Research Findings

During the study, it was observed that the main needs of the users are durability and
stability of walkers. The conventional walker gets shaky and wobbly over a short
period of use. The grip of the walker is too short for the hands of the Indian elderly.
Due to smaller base of the walker, the walker’s legs are often placed on the user’s
footwear, which at times leads to falling. The users expressed the need for a pocket to
keep utility things like—a bottle of water or essentials like newspaper or spectacles.
A foldable seat was also expressed as one of the requirements. The users have to look
behind to avoid fall while performing standing-to-sitting with the walker (Fig. 15.2c)
while using conventional walkers. Once the user sits with the walker, he gets locked
and someone needs to move the walker away (Fig. 15.2b). It was also found that
the common reason to prefer a non-weight bearing walker is its stability and sense

15
171

a.
b.
c.

Fig. 15.2 a User navigating inside home using walker, b user seated and locked around by walker
in front side of body, c user performing sit-to-stand and stand-to-sit

of conﬁdence from falls. Also, it has fewer number of moving parts and needs less
maintenance. The wheeled walkers were not preferred by most of the users as it is
less stable and the users need to walk faster than their comfortable pace. It was also
expressed by the users that the walkers make them feel psychologically dependent
and weak.
Therefore, the design criteria that were derived from the user studies are:

• To design a more stable and durable walker
• Absence of pinch points and sharp edges.
• To be able to withstand everyday use for 2–3 years
• To be able to ﬁt in 18 × 22 × 31-inch space for transportation [7]
• Must be psychologically and aesthetically pleasing to the user.

15.4
Development of Concept Sketches

Based on the research ﬁndings, initial sketches focused on designing the frame that
would meet the criteria of better stability as shown in Fig. 15.3. The ergonomics of
using a walker were considered while concept generation based on the observations.
Figure 15.4 shows the study of grip, sizing, or dimensions and shape for the appro-
priate handling of walker [13]. Accessories like alarm/ horn, torch, seat and bag were
also conceptualized from users’ interviews and feedback.

15.5
Prototyping

To meet the basic requirements of stability and durability, different materials were
explored like steel, plastic, and organic materials as shown in Fig. 15.5. In terms of

172

Fig. 15.3 Sketches of concepts of grip design and walker’s frame design

Fig. 15.4 Conceptualization of grips for walker design

steel, low-scale frugal prototypes are made using locally sourced galvanized wire
(GI) wire and parts of the Mechanix tool kit. To reduce the weight of the walker,
lightweight polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipes were also explored. It was observed that
lightweight PVC structures are prone to bending and twisting.
Walker designs were further developed using natural material rattan cane as
presented in Fig. 15.6. The prototype was developed to check the feasibility of

15
173

Fig. 15.5 Initial prototyping of walkers using Mechanix tool kit, GI wire and PVC pipes

Fig. 15.6 Conceptual design of a walker made out of rattan cane

bendingthematerial, thestabilityof thestructure, andweight assessment as presented
in Fig. 15.7. The dimensions of the rattan cane walker were 20 (width) × 20 (depth)
× 30 (height) inches.

15.6
User Testing

User testing of the rattan cane walker was carried out in real set up as shown in
Fig. 15.8. It was found that the prototype met the required criteria of stability and

174

Fig. 15.7 Process of walker design using rattan cane

Fig. 15.8 Users trying out the rattan cane walker in home setting

was easy to use. From the user’s feedback, it is found that the legs of the walker may
be prone to wearing off, thereby leading to instability of the walker. To overcome
this problem, rubber stubs for walker’s legs were designed. Additionally, gait speed
was calculated using the rattan cane walker.
.
To study the difference in their gait speed, two elderly volunteers are asked to
travel 12 m distance using conventional walker v/s rattan cane walker. A stop timer
is used to note the time taken to travel the distance and speed was calculated. The
results are presented in Tables 15.1 and 15.2. The results of the user testing indicate
that the average gait speed of the two elderly users using a rattan cane walker is more

Table 15.1 Gait parameters using aluminum walking frame

Table 15.2 Gait parameters using rattan cane walker

15
175

as compared to the average gait speed while traveling the same distance using a
commercially available metallic walking frame. The comparison has been presented
in Table 15.3. This may be attributed to the ease of using the rattan cane walker as it
is 16% lighter in weight than the metallic frame walker as presented in Table 15.3.
The rattan cane walker was perceived to be more user-friendly and light in weight.
The prototype was also viewed to be aesthetically pleasing to the users, thereby
reducing the psychological barrier that they have toward the commercially available
walkers.

15.7
Conclusion

During the pilot study, it was learned that there is an opportunity in the area of
redesigning a walker in the Indian context as many users are not comfortable with
the existing commercially available walkers. Additionally, there is limited research
in the Indian context; using a user-centric approach in the designing of an assistive
device for the elderly. Therefore, the objective of this paper was to redesign a walker
for the elderly that would help in physical rehabilitation.
The methodology used was user-centered research, using ethnographic research,
where the users were studied in a real environment in their home setting or home-
cum-rehabilitationcenter.12seniorcitizensvolunteeredforthestudy.Detailedobser-
vation in the area of their daily activities in their actual living environment, the
interactions with the assistive devices and other objects were carried out. During
the research, various designs are conceptualized, prototypes were developed and
natural material-like rattan cane was also explored. The main design needs were
the stability of the walker, ease of use while doing the daily activities. Indigenous
material like rattan cane was used to design the walker with a larger base area and
additional features like bottle holder, newspaper holder, and mobile phone holders.
The redesigned walker was preferred by the elderly in the study. The results of the
user testing indicated that the average gait speed of the elderly users using a rattan
cane walker is more as compared to the average gait speed while traveling the same
distance using a commercially available metallic walking frame. This was attributed
to the ease of using the rattan cane walker as it is 16% lighter in weight than the
metallic frame walker. The psychological effect of feeling disabled was also less
among the users with the rattan cane walker. Therefore, rattan cane can be used as
an alternative natural material for designing of custom-made walkers for the elderly
in the Indian context.

176

Table 15.3 Parameters and challenges addressed by the redesigned walker

(continued)

15
177

Table 15.3 (continued)