Journal of
Personalized 
Medicine

Article
An Implementation Science Framework to Develop a
Clinical Decision Support Tool for
Familial Hypercholesterolemia

Hana Bangash 1
, Laurie Pencille 2, Justin H. Gundelach 1
, Ahmed Makkawy 3,
Joseph Sutton 4
, Lenae Makkawy 3, Ozan Dikilitas 1, Stephen Kopecky 1, Robert Freimuth 5,
Pedro J. Caraballo 6 and Iftikhar J. Kullo 1,*

1
Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, USA;
Bangash.hana@mayo.edu (H.B.); Gundelach.justin@mayo.edu (J.H.G.); Dikilitas.ozan@mayo.edu (O.D.);
kopecky.stephen@mayo.edu (S.K.)
2
Center for Science of HealthCare Delivery, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, USA;

3
User Experience Research, Saharafox Creative Agency, Rochester, MN 55905, USA;
amakkawy@saharafox.com (A.M.); lenaebeth@gmail.com (L.M.)
4

5

6
Department of General Internal Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, USA;

*

Received: 2 June 2020; Accepted: 20 July 2020; Published: 23 July 2020




Abstract: Electronic health record (EHR)-based clinical decision support (CDS) can address the low
awareness and undertreatment of familial hypercholesterolemia (FH), a disorder associated with a
markedly increased risk of coronary heart disease. We aimed to incorporate provider perspectives into
the development and implementation of a CDS tool for FH. An implementation science framework
and a user-centered design process were used to create a CDS tool for FH. Primary care physicians and
specialist physicians participated in qualitative interviews, usability testing and an implementation
survey. The CDS was conﬁgured in two formats—a best practice alert (BPA) and an in-basket message
and subsequently deployed in the EHR in silent mode. The key themes that emerged from the analysis
of interview transcripts included understanding and awareness of FH, clinical workﬂow, physician
preferences and value of CDS tools, perspectives on patient needs and values and dissemination
and implementation. Recommendations related to usability included preferred CDS format and
placement, content, timing and frequency, and level of alert urgency/prioritization. In response to
the survey, 84.6% of physicians agreed that the CDS would improve early FH diagnosis and 92.3%
agreed that it would help them identify and manage FH patients. Physician feedback led to iterative
CDS reﬁnement. In summary, we developed a CDS tool for FH using an implementation science
framework and physician feedback. Initial deployment revealed a signiﬁcant burden of FH and the
potential for the CDS tool to have a large impact.

Keywords: electronic health record; clinical decision support; CDS; familial hypercholesterolemia;
FH; genomics

1. Introduction

Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH), is often monogenic in etiology, remains vastly undiagnosed
and untreated in the United States and is therefore an ideal use case for the development of a

J. Pers. Med. 2020, 10, 67; doi:10.3390/jpm10030067
www.mdpi.com/journal/jpm

2 of 13

clinical decision support (CDS) tool aimed at improving case detection and treatment as well as
promoting cascade testing [1–3]. Awareness of FH is low among both patients and providers [4,5].
Providers in both primary care as well as specialty clinics such as cardiology often perceive all cases of
hypercholesterolemia similarly, failing to recognize the higher risk of coronary heart disease (CHD)
and the need for familial testing when the etiology is genetic. Initiation of appropriate lipid lowering
medications is often delayed and goal low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) levels are achieved
only in a minority of FH patients [1,6].
In the face of the ever-increasing volume and complexity of medical data, the delivery of CDS
to health care providers at the point-of-care is an urgent need. Nowhere is this need more acute
than for the practice of genomic medicine in the primary care setting where providers are often
uncertain about the interpretation and application of genomic test results to patient care [7,8]. In such
settings, CDS tools can provide guidance related to the interpretation of genomic test results and their
subsequent application to patient management [9,10]. However, healthcare providers often express
concern about alert fatigue and poor usability/functionality of CDS tools, which may partly stem
from poor design and a lack of participation by end users during the development phase [11–13].
Disappointingly, electronic health record (EHR) systems have added complexity to clinical workﬂows,
reduced provider–patient interactions and increased cognitive burden and burnout [14].
A potential means of making EHR systems more user friendly and ‘intelligent’ is by integrating
CDS tools that are designed and implemented based on input from relevant stakeholders such
as providers. This could, in turn, reduce provider cognitive burden and increase eﬃciency and
satisfaction [15,16]. Implementation science, deﬁned as the study of methods to facilitate uptake
and integration of evidence-based health interventions into routine practice, can be applied to better
understand the barriers and facilitators of CDS implementation. The use of an implementation science
framework can ensure that CDS tools are optimally designed and integrated in clinical practice to
enhance point-of-care management [17–22]. We therefore used an implementation science framework
to develop a CDS tool for FH based on physician feedback from qualitative interviews, usability testing
and an implementation survey.

2. Materials and Methods

This study was considered exempt by the Mayo Clinic Institutional Review Board and was
conducted between November 2018 and October 2019.

2.1. Participants and Recruitment

The target sample size for the qualitative interviews and usability testing was ~8–10 participants
based on evidence from usability studies, which indicates that up to 80–85% of usability issues can
be identiﬁed by the ﬁrst eight participants [23,24]. To achieve the target sample size, we conducted
purposive sampling with the following inclusion criteria: (i) staﬀphysicians at the Mayo Clinic campus
in Rochester, Minnesota; (ii) from primary care including the departments of family medicine and
community internal medicine as well as specialty ﬁelds such as cardiology and vascular medicine;
and (iii) with previous experience using institutional CDS tools. Physicians were contacted by templated
emails that contained invitations to participate in the interviews and to avoid potential coercion; they
were not contacted by a supervisor.

2.2. Physician Interviews and Usability Testing

Interviews with physicians were conducted from November 2018 to February 2019.
Qualitative methodologies and a user-centered design process were applied within a type 1
eﬀectiveness-implementation hybrid framework [24–29].
Semi-structured qualitative interviews
and usability testing sessions were conducted to obtain physician perspectives on two EHR-based CDS
prototypes. The ﬁrst prototype was a best practice alert (BPA)—A clinical reminder with evidence-based
management guidelines that would passively display to providers (requiring them to click on the alert

3 of 13

to open it) at the point-of-care. The second prototype was an asynchronous in-basket alert—A type of
inbox message that contained patient laboratory data and would be visible to providers upon logging
into the EHR. Both CDS formats (BPA and in-basket) were linked to an automated detection algorithm
in the EHR that identiﬁed individuals as ‘possible FH’ cases, deﬁned as LDL-C ≥190 mg/dL in the
absence of secondary causes of hypercholesterolemia. Both CDS formats were presented during each
interview and the “Think Aloud” usability technique was applied; physicians were asked to talk out
loud and verbalize their thoughts while interacting with the CDS prototypes [30–32]. Four rounds of
physician interviews and usability testing were conducted—new physicians, without prior exposure
to the CDS tool, participated in each round and their feedback informed CDS prototyping and iterative
reﬁnements in subsequent rounds.
Interviews and usability testing were conducted by research study team members, including a
physician, a qualitative researcher, a user experience/user interface expert and a research program
coordinator. Each interview lasted one hour, was audio recorded and transcribed. Participants were
given lunch during the interview and received a USD 100 honorarium. A semi-structured interview
guide was developed and tested in a ‘mock’ interview to ensure that the questions were comprehensive
(see Supplementary ﬁle Methods S1). The results from the mock interview were not included in the
thematic analysis.

2.3. Implementation Survey

Following each interview, physicians were asked to complete a twenty ﬁve-question
implementation survey to elicit multi-level contextual factors that could inﬂuence CDS implementation
in clinical practice (see Supplementary ﬁle Methods S2). Modiﬁed from Weiner et al., twelve survey
questions assessed three implementation outcome measures: Acceptability of Intervention Measure
(AIM), Intervention Appropriateness Measure (IAM) and Feasibility of Intervention Measure (FAM) [33].
The remaining thirteen survey questions were modiﬁed from the Consolidated Framework for
Implementation Research (CFIR) [34,35].

2.4. Deployment of CDS in Silent Mode

Both the BPA and in-basket CDS formats were deployed in ‘silent mode’ across all Mayo Clinic
sites, including the Mayo Clinic Health System (MCHS) for a three-month period (July 2019 to October
2019). The silent mode setting would trigger the CDS alert in the EHR for providers in primary care,
general internal medicine and cardiovascular medicine; however the alert was set to not display for
providers, triggering only in the EHR background. The goal of deploying in silent mode was to gather
initial metrics on the triggering of CDS at diﬀerent sites and use these metrics as a measure of the
burden of ‘possible FH’. Each alert was cued by a diﬀerent action; the BPA ﬁred when a patient’s EHR
was opened, while the in-basket ﬁred when results of a newly ordered lipid were placed in the EHR.

2.5. Data Analysis

The Framework Method was applied to transcript coding [36,37]. An inductive approach was
used to generate themes from the transcribed data through open coding of transcripts. An initial
codebook was developed by two qualitative researchers (HB and LP) who independently coded
two transcripts line-by-line and then read each transcript in a group setting to reach a consensus on
applied codes and ensure inter-rater reliability. After the codebook was established, the remaining
transcripts were coded independently by two research team members and any inconsistencies in
assigned codes were resolved through group discussion at bi-weekly meetings. All transcribed
data were imported into ‘Reframer’—A qualitative research software tool (Optimal Workshop 2015,
Wellington, New Zealand)—And each code was built into the tool as a ‘tag’ that could be applied
to multiple observations. Survey responses of primary care physicians (PCPs) and specialists were
compared using Wilcoxon rank-sum test to identify the median score, interquartile range (IQR) and any

4 of 13

statistically signiﬁcant (p < 0.05) diﬀerences in the responses between PCPs and specialists. Descriptive
data, including frequency of responses, were also noted.

3. Results

Thirteen physicians from primary care and cardiovascular medicine were recruited to the study and
gave informed consent prior to participation in the qualitative interviews and usability testing—seven
were primary care physicians (PCPs) and six were specialist physicians.
Participants included
physicians in leadership roles and those serving on institutional committees. Participant demographic
characteristics are summarized in Table 1.

Table 1. Physician characteristics (n = 13).

Physician Characteristics
n (%)

Gender

Females
7 (53.8)
Males
6 (46.2)

Age

<40 years
4 (30.8)
40–60 years
7 (53.8)
>60 years
2 (15.4)

Race/Ethnicity

Non-Hispanic white
10 (76.9)
Black
1 (7.7)
Asian
1 (7.7)
Hispanic
1 (7.7)

Specialties

Community Internal Medicine
3 (23.1)
Family Medicine
3 (23.1)
Family Medicine/Obstetrics
1 (7.7)
Cardiology
5 (38.4)
Vascular Medicine
1 (7.7)

Years in Practice

0–5
3 (23.1)
6–10
1 (7.7)
11–15
2 (15.4)
16–20
1 (7.7)
More than 20
6 (46.1)

3.1. Physician Interview Findings

Analysis of the physician interview transcripts identiﬁed ﬁve key themes and eleven subthemes
along with representative quotes (Table 2).

Table 2. Themes and representative quotations identiﬁed from physician interviews.

Theme
Quotation

Understanding &
Awareness of FH

“But the initial management as far as I know is the same as anybody else.” (PCP)

“ . . . I mean, I see people that carry that diagnosis [FH], but I don’t think I would,
sort of, come up with it myself.” (Specialist)

5 of 13

Table 2. Cont.

Theme
Quotation

Clinical Workﬂow

“And to be honest, if I’m seeing them for strep throat, I might ignore it [CDS] or
mention to them that they need to talk to their doctor about it. I will try to
mention to a patient ‘hey you’re due for your lipids, you’re due for your
colonoscopy, may I order those things for you?’ and if they say ‘yes’, I will, but if I
have a 15-min appointment for their broken leg . . . I don’t know that I’m going to
get into a huge discussion . . . ” (PCP)

“I would counsel them, and then I would want to send them to the FH Clinic if
they’re around or local. If not, you know, of course I’d start them on a statin, and
then you’re kind of stuck because I wouldn’t feel comfortable ordering the genetic
tests for them. That’s really the logical next step, in my opinion. In which case,
you’d try to send them to Genetics and/or the FH Clinic.” (Specialist)

Physician Preferences &
Value of CDS Tools

“I would suggest one area that we constantly struggle with is ﬁnding the right
orders in Epic when it’s orders that we haven’t done a lot of . . . so the more detail
. . . showing you exactly how to ﬁnd the right order would be very helpful . . .
Because we have really struggled . . . with the amount of diﬀerent things that we
order, that has been a real hard spot . . . ” (PCP)

“Personally, I guess that’s why I’m here, I would really prefer passive alerts . . . I
think, where it was an active alert . . . people get alert fatigue, and they’re just
going to click it to bypass it.” (PCP)

Perspectives on Patient
Needs & Values

“Because I’ve learned when I do risk counseling and I use the shared
decision-making aid, which includes all the risk percentages . . . I’m learning as I
teach my own patients, like, oh, yeah, that’s right, smoking does increase by this
much, and so if you have something like that for FH, if you really want to drive
home the point of how much greater risk, people who use that will start
educating themselves in addition to their patients.” (Specialist)

Dissemination &
Implementation

“I think whenever anything signiﬁcantly new like this [CDS] is deployed; some
type of communication is useful. I mean either in the EHR update, which many
of us are actually reading now, or in like communication from leadership or
through multiple approaches.” (PCP)

“The problem with BPA is, again, that just so many of them don’t apply. You
really have to sort it out from them. You’d have to suppress everything that didn’t
apply to me and patients . . . I’m just going to see a bunch of yellow and I’m going
to ignore it because it’s not . . . it doesn’t apply to me, I’m therefore going to
ignore everything and I’m going to miss the important alarms.” (Specialist)

Abbreviation: PCP, Primary care physician; FH, Familial hypercholesterolemia; CDS, Clinical decision support.

3.1.1. Understanding and Awareness of FH

This theme encompassed physicians’ current awareness and knowledge of FH and their perceived
role in the detection and management of FH patients.

1.
Subtheme: Physicians awareness of FH Amongst both PCPs and specialists, there was a lack of
FH awareness—physicians did not always distinguish between hypercholesterolemia of a genetic
etiology versus hypercholesterolemia due to other causes. In some instances, both were perceived
as being similar and requiring similar management.

2.
Subtheme: Physicians perceived scope of work PCPs and specialists agreed that all physicians
were responsible for diagnosing FH; however, they diﬀered in their views on who was responsible
for the management of FH patients. Some physicians preferred to manage FH patients themselves,
while others preferred referral to a specialist.

6 of 13

3.1.2. Clinical Workﬂow

Clinical workflow aimed to understand physician workflows in primary care and specialty settings
and gain insights into the next steps physicians were likely to take after a patient had been diagnosed
with FH.

1.
Subtheme: Diagnosis in workﬂow Determining how physicians established a diagnosis in
workﬂow centered on understanding when tasks such as ordering laboratory tests and reviewing
results were performed. Physicians identiﬁed CDS alert relevance as being based on both
encounter type and patient type. PCPs with high patient volumes were likely to have limited
time to review alerts.

2.
Subtheme: Next steps for physicians For a patient with suspected FH, the next steps for physicians
included prescribing medication, counseling on lifestyle changes, ordering tests and ruling out
secondary causes of hypercholesterolemia. Most physicians were willing to refer patients to the
institutional FH Clinic if this was the appropriate next step in management.

3.1.3. Physician Preferences and Value of CDS Tools

This theme encompassed physician perspectives on CDS tools and whether these tools impacted
provider cognitive burden and time. Physicians also gave insights into their perceived value of the
institutional FH Clinic.

1.
Subtheme: CDS tool preferences Most physicians had previously used one or more CDS tools
and viewed them positively. However, a physician’s personal style or prior knowledge of a
patient was likely to inﬂuence their decision on whether or not to use a speciﬁc CDS tool. With
a relatively recent transition to a new EHR system at the time of interviews, some physicians
continued to face challenges in interacting with the new EHR and highlighted the need to ﬁnd
more eﬃcient ways to carry out routine tasks.

2.
Subtheme: Cognitive load A common feedback from all physicians was that the increasing
number of CDS alerts and in-basket messages were contributing to rising levels of alert fatigue
and information overload, subsequently resulting in CDS alerts being ignored or bypassed.

3.
Subtheme: Value of FH Clinic referral to physicians Physicians agreed that having the option
to refer patients with ‘possible FH’ to the institutional FH Clinic was likely going to reduce
their cognitive burden and would be useful for complex cases such as those where: (a) goal
LDL-cholesterol was not being attained on maximum statin therapy; (b) a patient had statin
intolerance or (c) cases where genetic testing was warranted.

3.1.4. Perspectives on Patient Needs and Values

Physicians highlighted the importance of engaging with patients through digital tools and also
shared their insights on the value of the institutional FH Clinic to both patients and their at-risk
family members.

1.
Subtheme: Patient engagement through the use of digital tools Physicians indicated that there
was a need for patient education materials that could be printed and attached to messages
as well as videos that could be shared directly through the institutional patient portal. Most
physicians agreed that there was value in shared decision-making tools such as patient decision
aids, especially if these were available on the internet and easily accessible. Physicians also
highlighted the importance of being able to share the computer screen displaying the decision aid
with patients, so as to engage them during clinical encounters.

2.
Subtheme: Value of FH Clinic referral to patients Physicians highlighted that the value of a referral
to the institutional FH Clinic for patients and their family members centered on: (a) obtaining

7 of 13

access to resources available speciﬁcally in the FH Clinic; (b) cascade testing of family members;
(c) receiving access to new medications such as PCSK9 inhibitors and (d) facilitating appointment
scheduling for genetic testing.

3.1.5. Dissemination and Implementation

This theme encompassed multi-level barriers and facilitators that could potentially impact the
adoption of CDS in clinical practice.

1.
Subtheme:
Facilitators to Dissemination and Implementation Physicians suggested that
departmental meetings, conferences, grand rounds as well as newsletters could be used to
promote awareness of the CDS tool and facilitate its uptake in practice. They also highlighted the
need to obtain support from institutional champions, opinion leaders, early adopters and others
likely to inﬂuence the attitudes and behaviors of providers.

2.
Subtheme: Barriers to Dissemination and Implementation The main barriers identiﬁed by
physicians that were likely going to impact utilization of the CDS tool in practice included
use of pre-existing CDS tools that may prevent adoption of new tools, limited time in patient
encounters to view and act upon CDS alerts and lack of institutional guidance and education on
new CDS availability.

3.2. Usability Recommendations

The usability testing of both CDS prototypes led to physician feedback that broadly fell into one
of four recommendation categories summarized in Table 3.

Table 3. Usability recommendations with corresponding descriptions and representative quotations
highlighted from usability testing with providers.

Recommendation
Description
Quotation

Format & Placement

Having both the BPA and
in-basket alert formats
embedded in the EHR would
likely increase the probability of
providers viewing the CDS

“And if you could somehow attach to the results
in-basket that would allow us to see that alert at the
same time that we’re seeing the result, which would be
pretty awesome rather than having more in-baskets on
it.”(PCP)
Physicians indicated preference
for the in-basket format linked to
a lipid panel report

Content

Physicians highlighted the need
for BPA and in-basket content to
be more concise and clear
“There’s a lot of dense text. A lot of dense text . . . don’t
be afraid of white space . . . and be telegraphic. So I
would . . . critically looking at this message, I think I
would look at individual words. This patient has an . . .
those are not useful words yet. So LDL greater equal
190. That could be a line. Warning, possible familial
hypercholesterolemia. Next line . . . Consider
high-intensity . . . I wouldn’t even say high intensity
. . . consider Rosuvastatin 20 or Atorvastatin 40 mg
taken by mouth . . . Recommended laboratory testing
could be another line.” (PCP)

Only important information
should be displayed

Have few clicks to access
knowledge resources and a
relevant order set

Have a reminder present to rule
out secondary causes of
hypercholesterolemia

Timing & Frequency

Have ‘reasons not to use’ at the
end of the CDS so that providers
can explain their decision to not
act upon the alert

“ . . . but if I’m done with it [in-basket message] or I feel
like I’ve addressed it, maybe I’ve put in the orders for
the FH Clinic, I’d like to get it out of there, because
otherwise things get too cluttered, and I’ll get very
frustrated if there’s no way to dismiss it and if it just
stays there forever.” (Specialist)

Viewing one alert should turn
oﬀall other alerts for the same
provider

Prioritization

Most physicians described FH as
being an important condition
and agreed that color coding the
CDS red would likely get their
attention

“I think keep it red, because the people with this
condition have signiﬁcant events, and it’s something
that you can prevent in their family members, so I
would keep it red.”(Specialist)

8 of 13

3.3. Implementation Survey Results

The majority of PCPs and specialists responded positively to questions that assessed
implementation outcome measures; 84.6% (n = 11) of physicians indicated that they liked the tool and
it seemed easy to use (Table 4). Similarly, positive responses were noted for questions pertaining to
the CFIR constructs; 84.6% (n = 11) of physicians indicated that the CDS tool would improve early
diagnosis of patients with FH, while 92.3% (n = 12) of physicians agreed that the CDS tool would
help them identify, refer or manage FH patients. However, in response to the statement ‘this tool
will not increase the time needed with a patient’, 69.2% (n = 9) of physicians were either neutral
or negative in their response. Overall, there was agreement in responses between both PCPs and
specialists (see Supplementary Table S1).

Table 4. Implementation outcome measures by Weiner et al. and Consolidated Framework for
Implementation Research (CFIR) constructs were assessed through a post-interview survey conducted
with PCPs and specialists.

Measures and Constructs
Assessed
Question
Completely
Agree/Agree N (%)
Other 1

N (%)

Acceptability of Intervention
Measure (AIM)

This tool meets my approval
11 (84.6)
2 (15.4)

This tool is appealing to me
10 (76.9)
3 (23.1)

I like this tool
11 (84.6)
2 (15.4)

I welcome this tool
12 (92.3)
1 (7.7)

Intervention Appropriateness
Measure (IAM)

This tool seems ﬁtting
12 (92.3)
1 (7.7)

This tool seems suitable
12 (92.3)
1 (7.7)

This tool seems applicable
12 (92.3)
1 (7.7)

This tool seems like a good match
10 (76.9)
3 (23.1)

Feasibility of Intervention
Measure (FIM)

This tool seems implementable
11 (84.6)
2 (15.4)

This tool seems possible
12 (92.3)
1 (7.7)

This tool seems doable
12 (92.3)
1 (7.7)

This tool seems easy to use
11 (84.6)
2 (15.4)

Intervention Characteristics

I trust the quality and validity of evidence
supporting this intervention
12 (92.3)
1 (7.7)

Implementing this tool is a good option to
identify FH patients at Mayo
11 (84.6)
2 (15.4)

This tool will improve early diagnosis of
patients with FH
11 (84.6)
2 (15.4)

Outer Setting
This tool meets my needs to provide
needed resources to my patients
9 (69.2)
4 (30.8)

Inner Setting

This tool is appropriate for ECH clinicians
11 (84.6)
2 (15.4)

This tool ﬁts within my existing workﬂow
10 (76.9)
3 (23.1)

This tool will not increase the time needed
with a patient
4 (30.8)
9 (69.2)

The implementation of this intervention
within Mayo is important
12 (92.3)
1 (7.7)

I recognize the importance of implementing
this tool into the practice
13 (100)
0 (0.0)

This tool appears easy to access and
incorporate into my workﬂow
10 (76.9)
3 (23.1)

Characteristics of Individuals
This is a valuable tool for ECH clinicians
10 (76.9)
3 (23.1)

This tool will help me identify and refer or
manage FH patients
12 (92.3)
1 (7.7)

Process
It is important to me that the cardiologists
embedded in ECH continue to vet this tool
7 (53.8)
6 (46.2)

1 Other: (neither agree/disagree + completely disagree + disagree). Abbreviations: FH, Familial hypercholesterolemia;
ECH, Employee and community health.

9 of 13

3.4. Silent Mode Metrics

The rapid prototyping of the BPA and in-basket continued until no new physician feedback was
obtained from three consecutive interviews and thematic saturation was attained. The ﬁnal BPA and
in-basket were then deployed in the EHR in ‘silent mode’ for gathering initial metrics (Figure 1). During
a three-month period, the BPA triggered 5415 times for 1440 unique patients, while the in-basket
triggered 953 times for 924 unique patients at the three major Mayo Clinic sites and the MCHS.

 

 

(a) 
(b) 

Figure 1. (a) The ﬁnal best practice alert or BPA deployed in the EHR. (b) The ﬁnal in-basket message
linked to a lipid panel report, deployed in the EHR in silent mode.

4. Discussion

The dearth of usable and relevant digital tools is a major hurdle to the implementation of genomic
medicine [7,38]. In this report, we describe the creation of a genomic CDS tool for FH, using an
implementation science framework aimed at evaluating CDS eﬀectiveness and gaining early insights
into clinical implementation through physician feedback. The relatively high prevalence but yet low
awareness and detection of FH motivated the development of a CDS tool for FH. The work described
herein could inform the creation of CDS tools for other genomic disorders in diverse settings.
The introduction of EHRs has been associated with increased provider cognitive load, reduced
professional satisfaction and increased rates of burnout [39,40]. To address these concerns, the Oﬃce of
the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology (HIT) proposed aligning EHRs and tools
with clinical workﬂows, improving user interfaces to increase eﬃciency and implementing health IT
based on stakeholder engagement [41]. This includes the creation of well-designed, usable CDS tools
that can ﬁll gaps in knowledge and provide guideline-based recommendations at the point-of-care.
We conducted qualitative interviews and usability testing with both PCPs and specialists; PCPs
are often the ﬁrst line of contact for most patients in the community setting, especially for needs such
as the evaluation of lipids. They are also more likely to treat multiple family members and thus can
play a pivotal role in increasing FH detection and screening within a community. However, physicians
identiﬁed a number of barriers that were likely to reduce CDS utilization in clinical practice—the
most common barrier being the increasing cognitive burden on providers due to EHR complexity
and limited time during clinical encounters. These ﬁndings are supported by previous studies that
examined barriers to CDS implementation [9,42,43].
To promote CDS adoption in clinical practice, physician feedback emphasized the need to deploy
passive alerts that would be less disruptive to workﬂows. They also highlighted that in-basket message

10 of 13

alerts should be linked to new lipid panel reports to simplify workﬂows. Physicians recommended
shortening and reorganizing the alert content for clarity and embedding a link to an order set speciﬁc
for FH so as to reduce the number of clicks. Physicians also recommended including a link to
AskMayoExpert, a Mayo Clinic knowledge resource with a topic module dedicated to FH that provides
information on clinical presentation, diagnostic criteria and management [44]. AskMayoExpert also
has links to additional knowledge modules, thereby enabling providers to access a number of relevant
topics without workﬂow disruption [45].
Another important insight was that concurrent to the development of a CDS tool, an attempt
should be made to increase awareness of the tool, provide education on how to use it and obtain
support from institutional leadership. This feedback led to eﬀorts to increase FH awareness amongst
providers and highlight the CDS tool for FH at the Mayo Clinic Rochester campus. Rapid review
pocket cards, which gave an overview of FH, were developed and distributed to PCPs and specialists.
Several grand rounds were conducted across the institution by FH physician experts to disseminate
knowledge and highlight the available CDS tool.
The implementation survey provided physician perspectives on contextual variables that were
likely to inﬂuence CDS adoption in clinical practice. Most physicians indicated a receptive attitude
towards CDS integration. The only survey item where the majority of the physicians gave either a
neutral response or disagreed was regarding the CDS tool ‘not’ increasing time spent with a patient.
This response reiterated the need for CDS to be designed to increase eﬃciency and not add to
provider burden.
A relatively large number of both BPA and in-basket alerts ﬁred during silent-mode deployment,
indicating a high burden of ‘possible FH’. This suggests a potentially large impact of CDS deployment
on health outcomes. Currently, both alerts remain deployed in silent mode and will be further
evaluated in a clinical trial to assess the eﬀect of the CDS on outcomes such as changes in patient
management post-deployment.
A limitation of our study is that interviews were limited to physicians; the input of nurse
practitioners, physician assistants, and residents in training may have relevance for clinical
implementation of CDS tools in diﬀering clinical workﬂows. Additionally, inherent EHR limitations
prevented some physician feedback from being implemented in the ﬁnal CDS tools that were deployed
in the EHR. The number of physicians recruited for the study was modest; however, evidence from
usability studies indicates that such a number is adequate for developing and establishing the tool and
to initiate the application of the tool in clinical practice [23,24]. After initial implementation of the CDS
tool, metrics for its use, including the utilization of the FH order set and AskMayoExpert knowledge
resource will be evaluated to determine need for reﬁnements and modiﬁcations. Such modiﬁcations,
based on the pilot implementation, could further improve the FH CDS tool for use at the point-of-care.

5. Conclusions

Employing an implementation science framework with qualitative interviews and usability testing,
physician feedback was obtained to guide the development of a CDS tool for FH and integrate it with
the EHR for providers in primary care and cardiovascular medicine. A relatively large number of
alerts ﬁred during CDS deployment in silent mode, indicating a high burden of ‘possible FH’ and the
potential for CDS to increase the point-of-care detection of FH. The process described here, along with
the physician feedback obtained, can inform the creation of CDS tools for genomic disorders at other
institutions and health systems.

Supplementary Materials: The following are available online at http://www.mdpi.com/2075-4426/10/3/67/s1,
Supplementary Methods S1: Semi-structured interview guide used to conduct qualitative interviews with
providers; Supplementary Methods S2: Post interview implementation survey administered to providers to
understand contextual variables that could inﬂuence adoption of the clinical decision support (CDS) tool into
practice; Table S1: Comparison of implementation survey responses between primary care providers and specialist
providers using Wilcoxon Rank Sum test.

11 of 13

S.K., R.F., P.J.C. and I.J.K.; software, J.S.; formal analysis, H.B., J.H.G., L.P., L.M., A.M. and O.D.; investigation,
H.B., J.H.G. and I.J.K.; resources, I.J.K.; writing—original draft preparation, H.B.; writing—review and editing,
H.B. and I.J.K.; visualization, H.B. and I.J.K.; supervision, I.J.K.; project administration, J.H.G.; funding acquisition,
I.J.K. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.

Funding: This research was funded by National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI) grants HL135879 and
K24 HL137010 awarded to Iftikhar Kullo.

Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.