1

Open access

Reducing complexity of patient decision 
aids for community-based older adults 
with dementia and their caregivers: 
multiple case study of Decision Boxes

Gabriel Bilodeau,1 Holly Witteman,2 France Légaré,3,4 Juliette Lafontaine-Bruneau,5 
Philippe Voyer,6 Edeltraut Kröger,7 Marie-Claude Tremblay,1,4 Anik M C Giguere1,8

To cite: Bilodeau G, Witteman H, 
Légaré F, et al.  Reducing 
complexity of patient decision 
aids for community-based older 
adults with dementia and their 
caregivers: multiple case study 
of Decision Boxes. BMJ Open 
2019;9:e027727. doi:10.1136/
bmjopen-2018-027727

►
►Prepublication history and 
additional material for this 
paper are available online. To 
view these files, please visit 
the journal online (http://​dx.​doi.​
org/​10.​1136/​bmjopen-​2018-​
027727).

Received 5 November 2018
Revised 19 February 2019
Accepted 14 March 2019

For numbered affiliations see 
end of article.

Correspondence to
Dr Anik M C Giguere;  
​anik.​giguere@​fmed.​ulaval.​ca

Research

© Author(s) (or their 
employer(s)) 2019. Re-use 
permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights 
and permissions. Published by 
BMJ.

Abstract
Objectives  To identify patient decision aids’ features to 
limit their complexity for older adults with dementia and 
their family caregivers.
Design  Mixed method, multiple case study within a user-
centred design (UCD) approach.
Setting  Community-based healthcare in the province of 
Quebec in Canada.
Participants  23 older persons (aged 65+ years) with 
dementia and their 27 family caregivers.
Results  During three UCD evaluation-modification 
rounds, participants identified strengths and weaknesses 
of the patient decision aids’ content and visual design 
that influenced their complexity. Weaknesses of content 
included a lack of understanding of the decision aids’ 
purpose and target audience, missing information, 
irrelevant content and issues with terminology and 
sentence structure. Weaknesses of visual design included 
critics about the decision aids’ general layout (density, 
length, navigation) and their lack of pictures. In response, 
the design team implemented a series of practical features 
and design strategies, comprising: a clear expression of 
the patient decision aids' purpose through simple text, 
picture and personal stories; systematic and frequent use 
of pictograms illustrating key points and helping structure 
patient decision aids' general layout; a glossary; removal 
of scientific references from the main document; personal 
stories to clarify more difficult concepts; a contact section 
to facilitate implementation of the selected option; 
GRADE ratings to convey the quality of the evidence; a 
values clarification exercise formatted as a checklist and 
presented at the beginning of the document to streamline 
navigation; involvement of a panel of patient/caregiver 
partners to guide expression of patient priorities; editing 
of the text to a sixth grade reading level; UCD process to 
optimise comprehensiveness and relevance of content and 
training of patients/caregivers in shared decision-making.
Conclusions  The revised template for patient decision 
aids is designed to meet the needs of adults living with 
dementia and their caregivers better, which may translate 
into fewer evaluation-modification rounds.

Introduction 
In 2015, 46 million adults were living with 
dementia worldwide. This number is expected 

to increase to 131.5 million by 2050.1 The 
medications available to treat dementia are 
of limited efficacy and can cause major side 
effects.2 Non-pharmacological alternatives 
may help with some symptoms, but patients, 
their caregivers and their primary healthcare 
professionals are less familiar with their bene-
fits and harms.3 Moreover, patients experi-
ence adverse health outcomes and reduced 
autonomy and capacities, which result in 
difficult life management or non-medical 
decision.4 In such clinical situations, the 
shared decision-making model calls for 
healthcare professionals and patients to work 
together to reach joint decisions based on the 
best evidence available regarding the benefits 
and harms of all available options (including 
watchful waiting) as well as patient values and 
preferences with regard to those options.5 
However, involving older adults living 
with dementia in decision-making may be 
a challenge given their cognitive decline. 
Their older age also puts them at greater 
risk that other factors limit their participa-
tion in decision-making compared with the 

Strengths and limitations of this study

►
►The multiple case design allows suggesting general 
features for adapting patient decision aid templates 
to user needs.
►
►Integration of user feedback in a user-centred de-
sign approach allowed an in-depth study of deci-
sion aid features influencing adoption of shared 
decision-making.
►
►Caregivers offered their feedback on the Decision 
Boxes in the presence of the person in their care, 
and this could have influenced our conclusions.
►
►The presence of caregivers may also have caused 
some of the seniors with dementia to be less spon-
taneous, particularly if their caregivers played a 
dominant role in the dyad.

Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

 . 
by guest
 
 

2

general population, such as lower levels of literacy and 
numeracy,6 7 the presence of caregivers,8–10 sensory defi-
cits such as deafness or visual impairment and a greater 
propensity to rely on healthcare professionals to make 
health decisions.11 Healthcare professionals may also 
perceive older persons with dementia as being too vulner-
able to participate in decision-making, and thus exclude 
them from the process.12

Patient decision aids are standardised evidence-based 
interventions designed to help people make informed 
and deliberated choices among options.13–16 At a 
minimum, they provide information about the options 
and their associated relevant outcomes.15 An earlier 
systematic review described some features of patient 
decision aids to support understanding and values clarifi-
cation in adults with limited health literacy skills, namely 
presenting essential information more prominently, 
adding videos to verbal narratives, presenting numer-
ical information (1) in tables or pictographs (2) with 
the same denominator and (3) using higher numbers to 
display improvements.17 Health communication research 
also suggests several features to limit the complexity of 
health information, such as simple language and the use 
of pictures,18 and presenting actionable health infor-
mation.19 20 However, no decision aid feature is known 
to support communication between adults with limited 
literacy and their healthcare professionals.17 There is 
also a lack of evidence regarding the features of deci-
sion aids to communicate uncertainty to adults with limited 
literacy,21 and health literacy is still rarely considered in 
the literature to date.17

Moreover, only a few studies so far have described the 
development of a decision aid for people living with 
dementia and their healthcare team.22–24 Hence, knowl-
edge gaps remain on the most efficient design strategies 
and on the specific features of patient decision aids to 
meet the decision-making needs of this population. To 
begin to fill this gap, we have prioritised difficult deci-
sions that older adults with neurocognitive disorders 
(NCDs) and their caregivers frequently face.4 We then 
synthesised the evidence of potential benefits and harms 
for all the options involved in some of those decisions and 
integrated them into Decision Boxes (DBoxes), which 
are the patient decision aids template developed at Laval 
University (Quebec City, Canada).25 26

Our previous results suggested that including user feed-
back is instrumental in designing DBoxes better adapted 
to their needs.25 Preliminary evidence indeed suggests 
that user-centred design (UCD) may enhance the imple-
mentation in practice of patient decision aids.27–32 UCD 
builds on an explicit understanding of users, tasks and 
environments to address the whole user experience.33 
It is driven and refined by iterative user-centred evalu-
ation, and involves a design team with interdisciplinary 
skills and perspectives.33 User experience looks broadly at 
the individual’s interaction with a product, as well as the 
thoughts, feelings and perceptions that result from that 
interaction.34

In the current study, we used a UCD approach to 
tailor three DBoxes to the literacy level of older adults 
with dementia and their caregivers, and improve their 
experience using them. As we observed users inter-
acting with the DBoxes, we sought to identify patient 
decision aid features that reduced their complexity and 
prepared patients and caregivers to participate in shared 
decision-making.

Methods
Study design and approach
We used a multiple case study evaluation across three 
DBoxes. The evaluation comprised interviews and ques-
tionnaires within an iterative UCD approach. We used 
three rounds of questionnaires and semi-structured inter-
views to have patient and caregiver dyads evaluate the 
three DBoxes (figure  1). After a first evaluation round 
with a subsample of nine dyads, we analysed the data and, 
based on the findings, refined the DBoxes to limit their 
complexity and improve the user experience. We then 
used the same evaluation/tailoring process again in two 
more rounds, with new participants each time.

Case selection
Based on an earlier Delphi study,4 and using a rapid 
review approach,35 we created five DBoxes to support 
decision-making regarding five difficult and frequent 
decisions faced by older adults with NCDs and their care-
givers: (1) choosing a non-pharmacological treatment to 
manage agitation, aggression or psychotic symptoms; (2) 
deciding whether or not to stop driving following diag-
nosis; (3) deciding whether or not to prepare a power of 
attorney, called a Protection Mandate in Quebec (Canada) 
covering health, property and financial matters; (4) 
choosing a support option to decrease caregiver burden 
and (5) choosing an option to improve quality of life. For 
the current study, we used a maximum variation sampling 
strategy to select three of these five DBoxes as different 
cases. We chose #1 because it was the longest of the five and 
compared several options, whereas #2 and #3 compared 
only two options each. We chose #2 because it covered a 
very sensitive topic and thus allowed identifying features 
of decision aids to facilitate shared decision-making in 
emotionally charged contexts. We selected #3 because it 
used a more technical and complex vocabulary than any 
of the others. We excluded #4 because caregivers were the 
target users.

Theoretical framework
We chose the Health Literacy Skills framework36 to 
structure data collection and allow comparability across 
cases. This framework hypothesises the relations between 
health literacy and health-related outcomes and reflects 
how factors external to the individual (eg, family, setting, 
community, culture and media) influence the constructs 
represented. The framework incorporates health-related 
stimuli that people receive in their daily life, such as the 

Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

 . 
by guest
 
 

3

DBox. According to the framework, after exposure to 
a stimulus, the health literacy demand of the stimulus 
interacts with a person’s health literacy skills to influence 
comprehension of the message. Health literacy demand 
is defined as the complexity and difficulty of a stimulus, 
and it was the focus of the data collection in the current 
study.

Population and sampling strategy
All healthcare professionals from 11 outpatient geriat-
rics clinics in the Quebec City area, Canada, were invited 
to participate in this project. Those who agreed were 
asked to identify patients (aged 65+  years) diagnosed 
with dementia of any severity among their clientele, and 
the patients’ informal caregivers. They contacted those 
patients or their caregiver, asking permission for the 
research team to contact them and explain the project. 
The research team then followed up with each willing 
patient or caregiver. We aimed to recruit 27 patient/care-
giver dyads, a large enough sample size for this type of 
testing.37

Study procedure
Decision Box prototypes development
We used a rapid review approach35 and the Ottawa deci-
sion support framework38 to create DBoxes prototypes 
that respected the international standards for patient 
decision aids.14 The DBoxes provided information on 
the health problem of interest, included an exercise to 
help patients and caregivers clarify what mattered most 
to them, explained the probabilities of experiencing 
benefits or harms for each of the available options and 
listed resources to guide those experiencing decisional 
conflict. Between two and four experts in the care of 
older adults with dementia (among healthcare profes-
sionals, informal caregivers, managers, representatives 

of community-based organisations devoted to these 
seniors or clinical researchers involved in the organisa-
tion of primary care or services delivered to seniors with 
dementia) reviewed and validated each DBox.

Data collection
Nine patient/caregiver dyads were randomly selected 
as a subsample of all participants at each round and 
randomly assigned one of the three DBoxes (DBox #1 
to #3) studied, for three dyads/DBox at each round 
(figure 1). Copies of the DBox were sent to study partic-
ipants about 1 week prior to the interviews for them to 
review first. A trained moderator, a nurse trained in 
geriatric care (GB)—the same for all participants—then 
met them at their homes for data collection. Patients 
and the caregivers initially completed a questionnaire 
comprising questions on sociodemographic character-
istics (age, gender, race, marital status, education level, 
income) and the type and duration of the relationship 
between caregiver and patient. In cases when patients 
were unable to complete the questionnaire, the caregiver 
completed it on their behalf. Then, using an interview 
guide, the moderator assessed participants’ opinions 
of the strengths/areas of improvement of the DBoxes 
in fostering a shared decision-making behaviour, which 
was ‘to express their priorities to their healthcare profes-
sional regarding the decision to be made’. The moder-
ator also asked participants for suggestions to improve 
the DBoxes.
The moderator initially addressed all questions to the 
patient. If the patient did not participate actively in the 
discussion, then the moderator systematically sought 
the caregiver’s suggestions (1) on how to get the older 
person to express their opinion and (2) how to modify 
the document to facilitate use by the older person. The 

Figure 1  User-centred design process of three Decision Boxes (DBoxes) for seniors with dementia and their caregivers.

Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

 . 
by guest
 
 

4

caregivers’ own perspectives on the strengths/weaknesses 
of the DBox were also welcomed.
At the end of the session, able patients and caregivers 
completed a self-administered questionnaire, comprising: 
(1) the Chew three-item health literacy scale39 adapted 
to French (personal communication, Holly Witteman, 
Laval University), (2) the patient version of the Informa-
tion Assessment Method (IAM) for assessing the value of 
information,40 (3) eight items built from the Technology 
Acceptance Model (TAM-2),41 to assess how useful and 
easy to use the DBox was in expressing their priorities to their 
healthcare professional regarding the decision to be made and 
(4) level of satisfaction with the DBox on a 5-point smiley-
face rating scale ranging from 1 (sad face) to 5 (smiling 
face).
The moderator took written notes during and after the 
interviews to describe non-verbal communication and 
interactions between the older person and his or her 
caregiver.
The interviews were recorded and transcribed verbatim.

Analysis of participants’ experience between rounds
To tailor the DBoxes between rounds, the transcripts 
and notes were entered as project documents into 
specialised software (NVivo V.10, QSR International, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA). Two researchers (GB, 
AMCG) analysed the data using deductive/inductive 
thematic qualitative data analysis, first by searching for 
factors set out in the Health Literacy Skills framework,36 
then by integrating any new themes that emerged from 
the data. To this end, the two researchers reviewed the 
interview transcripts separately. They then compared 
their results and came to a consensus on a list of themes. 
They noted these themes in a codebook, labelled and 
defined them, and entered them in NVivo as nodes. 
One of the researchers (GB) then applied these prelim-
inary codes to all the interview transcripts. Coding was 
updated as necessary, and the second reviewer (AMCG) 
checked the new codes to ensure consistency with the 
chosen framework.

Tailoring the DBoxes
To tailor the DBoxes, we assembled an expert panel that 
comprised graphic designers, a healthcare professional 
specialised in the care of older adults (GB), knowledge 
translation researchers (AMCG, HOW, GB), a human 
factors engineer (HOW) and on one occasion, a health 
literacy expert (EF). Between each round, this expert 
panel met to review the qualitative and quantitative find-
ings and tailor the DBoxes to improve the participant 
experience, that  is, (1) limit their complexity, (2) add 
any missing information and (3) ensure that participants 
felt more empowered to express their priorities to the 
healthcare professional regarding the decision to be 
made.
We used the same evaluation/tailoring process after 
each of the three round.

Quantitative analysis and triangulation
We completed a descriptive statistical analysis of the ques-
tionnaire data at the end of the study using SAS (V.9.4, 
SAS Institute). We then interpreted the results in light 
of the qualitative findings to understand further which 
factors would make it easier for patients and caregivers to 
express their priorities to their healthcare professional. 
We further synthesised insights from individual case 
studies in a cross-project analysis to reveal a pattern of 
findings across all cases.

Patient and public involvement
A caregiver to a person living with dementia (JB) partic-
ipated in the study as a coinvestigator. This person 
participated to the study design and contributed in the 
development of the DBoxes by providing critical feed-
back before user testing.

Ethical issues pertaining to human subjects
When persons living with dementia were deemed able to 
provide consent by their healthcare professionals, they 
were directly invited to participate. To ensure minimal 
risk to the health of incapacitated adults, the research 
team sought informed consent from the caregivers of 
patients who could not themselves provide informed 
consent, in conformity with the Civil Code of Quebec.

Results
Participant characteristics
Healthcare professionals from six ambulatory geriatric 
clinics out of the 11 invited to participate recruited 
patients and their caregiver. These healthcare profes-
sionals invited 34 patients to take part, 23 of whom 
accepted (74%). Either one or two caregivers accompa-
nied the participating patients, for a total of 27 partici-
pating caregivers.
Most of the 23 patients were aged 85 years or more and 
had a high school education (table 1A). They reported a 
mean level of health literacy competency of 2.0±SD of 1.5 
(on a scale of 0–4, with 4=low literacy). We did not have 
access to their medical records, but the moderator—a 
registered nurse—qualitatively classified the severity of 
their dementia as moderate (n=9), severe (n=9) or very 
severe (n=5).
Most of the 27 caregivers were aged between 45 and 85 
and had completed undergraduate degrees (table  1B). 
Caregivers reported a mean level of literacy competency 
of 0.8±SD of 1.1.

Research processes
Before the interviews, several caregivers offered sugges-
tions on how to reduce the emotional burden of the infor-
mation on the patient, such as changing some words in a 
sentence or adding pictures. As caregivers were the ones 
who knew the person best, they were able to warn the 
moderator to avoid certain subjects to limit the person’s 
distress or anger (eg, driving abilities).

Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

 . 
by guest
 
 

5

Continued

Continued

Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

 . 
by guest
 
 

6

Factors influencing adoption of shared decision-making
Despite the main interview focus on identifying patient 
decision aid features influencing their complexity, partic-
ipants reported additional factors influencing their 
adoption of shared decision-making. These factors were 
divided among individual moderators, professional prac-
tice mediators, social environment mediators and health-
care organisation mediators (figure 2) in keeping with the 
Health Literacy Skills framework.36 Additionally, despite 
the main interview focus on participants’ intention to 
express their priorities to their healthcare professional 
regarding the decision to be made, participants sponta-
neously discussed several other shared decision-making 
behaviours, which are listed in figure 2.

Factors influencing the complexity of patient decision aids
Factors that were found to influence the complexity of 
patient decision aids were structured under three main 
themes: informational content, visual design and values 
clarification (listed in figure  2). The next sections 
describe these factors as they were brought up during 
the interviews and the features or strategies that were 
proposed to limit complexity and improve the user expe-
rience. A detailed description of these features and strat-
egies are also listed in table 2. Supplementary files #1 and 
#2 respectively present samples of the initial and final 
versions of one of the three DBoxes studied.

Informational content of the DBoxes
Purpose/topic
Clarifying the purpose of the DBoxes was a more 
important concern in the first and second rounds, as 
participants devoted more time to commenting on these 
aspects. They often did not understand what the DBox 
was intended for, as illustrated in this comment from a 
caregiver:

My father was starting to experience mild demen-
tia, and when he read the document he got stressed 
thinking he would be evaluated. I knew he had read 
it, because he talked about it to me and I knew this is 
what he was talking about. (Caregiver #6, DBox #2)

Several participants could not understand who the 
DBoxes were aimed at:

That has nothing to do with us. It’s not for us (care-
giver) or the patient. So who is it for? (Caregiver #9B, 
DBox #1).

The team prioritised this issue and consequently added 
two statements to improve understanding—in large font at 
the top of the first page—describing whom the document 
was aimed at and what it was supposed to achieve. A picto-
gram was also added showing a person reading a printed 
document to represent the purpose of the DBox. In the last 
version (Supplementary file #2), these features were empha-
sised even more by isolating them on a separate cover page, 
but we could not test this new layout as it was added in the last 
version. Personal stories were also added to the prototypes, 
to provide context for the DBox and its use and purpose. 
Participants appreciated the stories, which increased their 
interest in the content. They also mentioned that the stories 
helped them relate the content to their personal situations, 
as described by this patient:

The disorder that this man has (note from the au-
thor: the patient is referring to a character in the 
personal story), the memory loss and other memory 
problems… I thought about all that, my memory’s 
slipping away, I hope it’s going to be awhile before I 
lose it completely. (Patient #23, DBox #2)

Missing information
In the first evaluation round, several participants formulated 
requests, often several, for very specific information missing 
from the DBox. They asked for more information on the 
health problem itself, on how it was assessed, on options that 
were not quite clear, on specific outcomes to an option or on 
how to implement an option. Some of these questions were 
too specific to generate a change in the DBox template, and 
we could generally address them easily by adding to or modi-
fying the text. For example, one caregiver asked for more 
information on driving skills assessment:

When you’re driving and you can’t see the street 
name, then you can get lost. It’s a physical issue (that 
makes driving dangerous), because your eyes are not 
working properly. But when does dementia make it 
dangerous to drive? (Caregiver #11, DBox #2)

Most of these issues were resolved after the first round.
Some of the requests for more information could 
be grouped together into broader categories and the 
template modified accordingly, so that future DBox will 
have the missing information, before user evaluation. 
First, we added a detailed description of each option 
to the DBox template to address the needs for more 
information on the options. Second, we added a section 
listing contacts and resources (Supplementary file #2), to 
provide information on the services related to implement 
the options. People regularly asked whom to contact 
about the less familiar options, such as music or massage 
therapy, as illustrated in the following discussion between 
two caregivers:

Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

 . 
by guest
 
 

7

Caregiver #1: ‘[…] Perhaps something you could  
add here would be ‘refer to such and such a so-
cial worker, psychologist, psychotherapist’ but for  
psychosocial needs, maybe you should indicate how 
to find those resources, which resources and where. 
That would be really important. (Caregivers #9A, 
DBox #1)

Participants reported fewer issues with missing infor-
mation as the rounds progressed. Most mentioned that 

they would use the information and that they were better 
equipped to discuss the health issue with someone, as 
demonstrated by this quote:

But I think that document is more to know what’s 
best for the person’s well-being: drugs or no drugs. … 
And there are options if you don’t want to be taking 
drugs. That’s the purpose of the document. … In that 
regard I find the document to be complete. (Patient 
#1, DBox #1)

Figure 2  Factors influencing adoption of shared decision-making behaviours by patients/caregiver dyads, adapted from 
Squiers’ Health Literacy Skills framework.

Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

 . 
by guest
 
 

8

Relevance
In every round, several participants mentioned that they 
found the DBoxes to be relevant, credible, interesting 
or useful. They explained how the DBoxes provided 
good information and made them aware of the options 
available:

It’s well presented because we can see the advantages 
and disadvantages next to each other. It would defi-
nitely help someone to decide who has not made 
their mind up yet. It gives you all sides of the coin for 
the various options we have. It’s important to plan 
ahead as you get older. (Caregiver #15, DBox #3)

They also mentioned that the DBoxes gave them some-
thing to think about:

It gets you thinking. It really gives you a good idea. 
If you think ‘I want more protection, I don’t want to 
be taken advantage of or something’, then that tells 
you to draw up advance directives. It points you in the 
right direction.(Patient #8, DBox #3)

On the other hand, participants found some parts to be 
of little relevance, use or interest. A number of caregivers 
mentioned that the DBox was of no use to patients who 
could not participate in the decision-making process 

because of cognitive decline. To address this issue, the 
DBox template was modified to give the caregiver equal 
billing as a target user, specifically on the cover page in 
the bottom line (Supplementary file #2, p. 2) and in the 
values clarification exercise (Supplementary file #2, p. 4).
Other participants’ comments were to the effect that 
the information on evidence, GRADE ratings and benefit 
and harm probabilities was for clinicians and was irrele-
vant to them, as this quote shows:

Anyway, I mean this page, to be practical—page 4—
the harms, I would take it out altogether. I would 
leave it up to the clinicians to read that. We have no 
use for the studies that’ve been done. (Caregiver #9, 
DBox #1)

No strategy was found to address this in the DBox 
template. In the first prototype, the DBox already recom-
mended that the healthcare professional share the deci-
sion with the patient, so we emphasised this in the last 
version of the template by using a visual representation 
of SDM and by putting the message in a box in the last 
version to highlight it (Supplementary file #2, p. 3).
Other comments were more topic-specific and could 
not be addressed by adjusting the DBox template. For 
example, the introduction to DBox #2 (Stopping driving) 

Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

 . 
by guest
 
 

9

described the healthcare professional’s responsibilities 
with regard to driving assessment. Patients and caregivers 
considered this irrelevant.

Take the section aimed at the healthcare profession-
als […], in any event, I think you probably shouldn’t 
put the emphasis on that, or at least you should make 
the part that really concerns the patient bigger so 
that they can really concentrate on what’s essential. 
(Caregiver #6, DBox #2)

Clarity of content
The participants consistently mentioned the complex 
terminology and sentence structure as important barriers, 
as this quote shows:

Physical activity, touch therapy, music therapy, aroma 
therapy: for me, sure, but for them at their age, I’m 
not sure they know what they mean. Those who don’t 
have much education definitely don’t know what 
these are. (Caregiver #13, Dbox #1)

To address this issue, we added a step to the develop-
ment process, before user testing. It consists in checking the 
text reading level with online freeware (eg, https://www.​
webpagefx.​com/​tools/​read-​able/, WebpageFX USA) so that 
it corresponds to a sixth grade level. We also added a glos-
sary to the DBox template, to define more complex terms 
for which we could not find simpler synonyms. The notation 
‘see definition in the glossary on p. x’ in parentheses after 
the term referred users to the glossary. In the last version 
(Supplementary file #2), the word was also highlighted and 
underlined.
Participants also commented on the risk communica-
tion strategies used. One person thought that percent-
ages were obvious and did not understand that the DBox 
also used natural frequencies:

It reads ‘Out of 100 people, 33 will experience stress 
symptoms'. People are going to think 33% rather 
than to keep the two figures separate. … It depends 
on the person, but a dog is a dog. You don’t need 
to draw it, you can just write ‘dog’. (Caregiver #20, 
DBox #3)

In addition, participants were often surprised by the 
harms (eg, that stopping driving led to an increased 
risk of dying). As mentioned above, some respondents 
thought that this type of content should be provided to 
clinicians and that it was irrelevant to them.
Several participants did not understand the GRADE 
scale. They noted the lack of explicit link between the 
GRADE rating beside the evidence and the legend at the 
bottom of the page. To address this, the DBox template 
now has an invitation to ‘see legend’ in parentheses after 
each GRADE symbol. One participant suggested using 
green, yellow and red instead of the ‘+’ for a more intu-
itive representation of the quality of the evidence. This 
idea was not implemented because the DBox needed to 
be usable in a black and white version.

Several participants grasped the essence of the GRADE 
scale displaying the quality of the evidence, as this quote 
shows:

No, it’s all very clear. And also when you look at the 
legend, it’s even easier to see how advanced the re-
search is from that viewpoint. Some are quite obvi-
ous, but others you can see don’t have a lot of data 
from what is shown. (Caregiver #16, DBox #3)

Visual design
Participants shared several recommendations on the 
DBox visual design, which we further categorised into 
layout, pictures, colour and font (figure 2).

Layout
‘Layout’ comprised participants’ comments on naviga-
tion, organisers, length and density. Navigation proved 
difficult in the first rounds as several participants became 
lost when they moved from one section to another, such 
as between the health options and the contact section 
(located at the end of the document). We thus adjusted 
the DBox template by adding organisers and textual cues 
to the related section (eg, ‘see glossary’, ‘see the list of 
resources on page x’).
We also removed the reference list, as the reference 
numbers in the text caused confusion. We chose to 
provide the reference list on the DBox website instead 
for those (eg, caregivers) who might be interested in 
reviewing the sources of evidence.
Participants also recommended adding a table of 
contents at the beginning of the document to help navi-
gation, and to allow choosing the sections relevant to 
them, as this quote shows:

Maybe say, ‘There are a number of activities available. 
Choose those that interest you’. Or have an index like 
in a book: animal therapy, see page 3. Because maybe 
they felt obligated to see all the activities and read 
them all. Maybe it was confusing. Maybe give them 
the option, or say, ‘Here are several activities that can 
reduce aggressiveness…’ (Caregiver #7, DBox #x)

To meet this need, we moved the values clarifica-
tion exercise to a position right after the 'Introduc-
tion' section. This allowed people to choose their priority 
first, and then read only about the options meeting those 
priorities, instead of having to read about all the options. 
In addition to improving navigation, this also shortened 
the time required to read the document.
DBox #3 (power of attorney) received several comments 
on how complex the information was and how hard it 
was for respondents to compare the three legal options. 
After receiving several questions from participants on the 
legal concepts in the first version of the DBox, we added 
more information in the second round, which upped 
the number of pages from 5 to 9 in round #2. Users 
disliked this longer version, as the quantitative finding 
below shows, despite the fact that it was much more 

Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

 . 
by guest
 
 

10

comprehensive. In the third version, we therefore clari-
fied this information in a large table setting out the legal 
implications of the various options (Supplementary file 
#2). This addition improved users’ experience, made the 
DBox shorter and reduced their complexity.

Pictures
In the first round, several people found the DBoxes 
hard to read because they consisted mainly of text. Some 
people, such as this caregiver, suggested adding pictures 
to make things more engaging:

I don’t think you can get away from having text, but 
maybe not so much detail… Maybe you could add 
some pictures… maybe a little drawing, a car in an 
accident, to provide illustration and so that people 
don’t have to concentrate so hard to read the sen-
tence right to the end. (Caregiver #6, BD #2)

In the second round, we therefore added pictograms 
strategically to draw attention to the most important text. 
These generated positive comments, but we did not use 
them systematically, nor consistently, and some partici-
pants found them unclear. In the last DBox template that 
has not yet been evaluated (Supplementary file #2), we 
systematically added pictograms specially designed by a 
graphic designer to illustrate (1) the purpose of the DBox 
on the cover page, (2) each of the activities covered in the 
DBox (Introduction, Clarifying priorities, Exploring the 
options, Choosing an option, Glossary), (3) the bottom 
line on page 2, (4) each option, and (5) the Contacts 
section.

Colours
Participants found the DBoxes’ colours attractive and 
helpful to facilitate reading:

It’s well presented. Colourful documents like that are 
attractive and nice to consult. It’s also easy to spot in-
formation from page to page. Benefits and harms can 
be compared side by side and the other. I really liked 
the document. (Caregiver #15, DBox #3)

Values clarification exercise
The values clarification exercise underwent major changes 
throughout the study. Most participants did not under-
stand the first version of the exercise, which was designed 
using the Ottawa Decision Support Framework.38 We 
initially observed that a number of participants did not 
understand the meaning of the word ‘preference,’ so we 
replaced it with ‘priorities’. This resolved the issue and 
improved participants’ understanding of the purpose of 
the exercise.
Additionally, the exercise asked users to assess the 
extent to which each priority mattered to them, using 
a 6-level Likert scale. Some people perceived it as too 
detailed, and some caregivers mentioned that patients 
might have difficulty using this scale, as they were unfa-
miliar with rating scales:

Well, it’s my generation but not his [speaking of the 
person in his care], so when I look at this form, I look 
which side is important and which side is not im-
portant, then Bingo I complete it. . . . But for him… 
(Caregiver #6, DBox #2)

After the first round, we thus removed the Likert scales 
and used a checklist instead, asking people to select a single 
priority from a list (Supplementary file #2, p. 4). For each 
item on the list, the DBox then proposed a list of options for 
meeting that priority, and the page number to view evidence 
of that option’s benefits and harms. These modifications 
improved participants’ understanding of the purpose of the 
exercise—participants reflected more on the benefits versus 
harms, and before and during the interview they talked 
more about their priorities for that decision. For example, 
with this new format, some people understood perfectly well 
that they had to choose what mattered most to them among 
the list of items, but they were reluctant to do so considering 
the decisional conflict they had to face:

If I have to choose only one—live longer or maintain 
a good health—who wouldn’t pick to live as long as 
possible? For sure, I would. Or stay in good general 
health, of course, I would pick that. I wouldn’t go say-
ing I don’t want to drive anymore. So I don’t know. 
It’s a strange question. (Caregiver #16, DBox #2)

We revised the sentences expressing each of the prior-
ities several times, as participants considered some to be 
unclear or illogical.

Quantitative results and triangulation with qualitative findings
The quantitative data from the questionnaires suggest 
that participants’ perceptions of the DBoxes were gener-
ally positive, with TAM-2 mean scores mostly above 4 
(scale of 1–7, with 7 indicating positive perceptions), 
and satisfaction mean scores above 3 (scale of 1–5, with 
5 indicating positive perceptions) (figures 3A, B, 4A, B 
and 5A, B).
However, the patients who evaluated DBoxes #2 
(driving) and #3 (power of attorney) in round #2 reported 
lower satisfaction and lower perceptions of DBox useful-
ness than did the patients in rounds #1 and #3 or the 
caregivers (figure  4A,  B, figure  5A,  B). They also gave 
lower understanding and relevance scores on the IAM 
questionnaire (table 3). During the interviews, these five 
patients commented repeatedly on the lack of clarity of 
the content and on the inappropriate terminology in the 
DBoxes, for example:

I have trouble understanding. When you start talking 
about legal stuff, you lose me. (Patient #15, BD #3)

The participants in the first round and second rounds 
frequently reported problems with the information, but 
these were mostly resolved in the third round (tables 3, 4: 
cognitive impact of the information). Only three people—
one caregiver (#23) and two patients (#22, #19)—still 
reported problems with the information in round 3. 

Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

 . 
by guest
 
 

11

The interview transcripts reveal that these patients only 
talked about how hard they found the text to understand, 
how long it was or how much trouble they had remem-
bering what they had just read. As for the caregiver, he 
commented that he thought it was inappropriate for the 
DBox to list taxicabs or public transit as resources for 
people who need to stop driving due to dementia:

It’s okay for people who don’t have driver’s licences 
anymore, but still want to go out and still have the 
ability. But there’s no way she could ever take a cab 
or assisted transport. It depends on how serious your 
cognitive loss is. … At first, things were fine. She 
would take cabs to go places. She would travel to and 
from her sister’s by cab. But I’m not sure I’d let her 

Figure 3  Satisfaction, ease of use and usefulness of the Decision Box #1 (agitation, aggression, psychotic symptoms) as 
evaluated by (A) older people with dementia and (B) their caregivers.

Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

 . 
by guest
 
 

12

do that now. There are lots of options, and they help 
lots of people, but it depends on how bad your mem-
ory loss is. (Caregiver #23, BD #2)

Patients and caregivers most frequently reported in 
the questionnaire that they expected the information 
to help them be better equipped to discuss something 

with someone else, to have more confidence in 
deciding about something with someone else and to 
prevent an issue (tables 3 and 4).
Caregivers’ perceptions of DBox #3 (power of attorney) 
were also generally observed to improve as the rounds 
progressed (figure 5B).

Figure 4  Satisfaction, ease of use and usefulness of the Decision Box #2 (driving) as evaluated by (A) older people with 
dementia and (B) their caregivers.

Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

 . 
by guest
 
 

13

Discussion
We studied which features of patient decision aids may limit 
their complexity and improve the experience of older adults 
living with dementia and their caregivers as they prepare for 
shared decision-making with healthcare professionals. We 
described a series of practical features and design strategies 
to improve the user experience of patient decision aids and 

limit the number adjustments required during user testing. 
Some participants considered scientific evidence to be for 
healthcare professionals’ use only and thus had no interest 
in such content. Other participants understood concepts 
related to the quality of scientific evidence and method-
ological biases. Quantitative measures allowed collecting 
distinct feedback from patients and caregivers.

Figure 5  Satisfaction, ease of use and usefulness of the Decision Box #3 (power of attorney) as evaluated by (A) older people 
with dementia and (B) their caregivers.

Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

 . 
by guest
 
 

14

Continued

Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

 . 
by guest
 
 

15

Strength and weaknesses of the study
A strength of this research project lies in its multiple 
case design that allowed suggesting general features for 
adapting patient decision aid templates to user needs. 
Integration of user feedback in a UCD approach also 
represents a strength of this study. However, caregivers 
may have been less spontaneous in some of their opin-
ions because of the presence of the person in their care, 
and this could have influenced our conclusions. The 
presence of caregivers may also have caused some of the 
seniors with dementia to be less spontaneous, particu-
larly if their caregivers played a dominant role in the 
dyad. On the other hand, inviting caregivers to reflect 
on the changes needed for the patient decision aids to 
address the needs of the person in their care provided 
an opportunity to benefit from caregivers’ own exper-
tise in dementia while still receiving direct input from 
the patients themselves.

Relation to other studies
This is the first study focused on identifying general 
design features to tailor patient decision aids to the needs 
of seniors with dementia. It is also unique in its focus 
on the primary care offered to older persons living with 
dementia. Indeed, we found only three other reports on 
the impacts of patient decision aids, which targeted care-
givers of older adults with advanced dementia recruited 
in nursing homes or acute care settings.23 24 42 Their devel-
opment and evaluation were guided by the Ottawa Deci-
sion Support framework,38 which the authors adapted 
minimally. In one study, they added a tutorial regarding 
study design and the strength of evidence to the patient 
decision aid, due to limited high-quality evidence 
regarding the proposed options.24 In the other, they spec-
ified revising the printed decision aid to a sixth  grade 
reading level, and sizes 16–20 font,23 which agrees with 
our proposed features.
Other web-based support tools for this population 
have been studied, but did not qualify as patient deci-
sion aids.43–45 For example, the FIT and DEM-DISC tools 
addressed a major gap, by helping caregivers of older 
adults living with dementia in clarifying their most 
pressing needs and identifying supportive products and 
services meeting those needs.43 44 This converges with 
the current study findings that patient decision aids for 
this population should provide a list of the available 
resources to support users in their implementation 

of the selected option. Interestingly, among the three 
designs evaluated for FIT, caregivers and healthcare 
professionals appreciated the exercise that used ticking 
of checkboxes the most, as it was more familiar to them 
and allowed people to view all the choices at once.43 
Another such tools worth mentioning is the web-based 
DecideGuide that served to support communication and 
step-by-step shared decision-making among the network 
of people involved in the care of the person living with 
dementia.45 However, most of the challenges reported 
by users of the DecideGuide concerned web-based and 
interactive aspects of the tool, and are not applicable to 
a printed patient decision aid.
Interestingly, some of the current study participants 
understood the GRADE level of confidence display, 
which provides a deeper understanding of the uncer-
tainty associated with each risk estimate. GRADE ratings 
communicate one of the types of uncertainty related to 
the outcomes of medical interventions, which is the 
ambiguity about the strength or validity of evidence 
about risks,46 also named ‘epistemic uncertainty’.47 
Despite the influence of uncertainty on patients’ 
choices, there is considerable variation in approaches 
to communicate it in the patient decision aids currently 
available, and more than half do not communicate 
epistemic uncertainty.21 The current project thus adds 
observations on the potential of the GRADE strategy to 
communicate epistemic uncertainty to patients/care-
givers. Future research should look into how GRADE 
ratings are understood by patients, and how they influ-
ence patient preferences.
Participants requested that we enliven the documents 
by adding pictures. Research on health communica-
tion suggests that combining well-designed pictures 
with written or spoken text enhances attention, recall of 
health education information and understanding, espe-
cially among groups with lower literacy.48 Pictures should 
illustrate key points, be accompanied by text using simple 
language, be simple to minimise distracting details and 
be selected with people from the intended audience to 
ensure cultural relevance.48 While several studies focus on 
the inclusion of graphs in patient decision aids to improve 
risk understanding,49 50 fewer focus on the impacts of other 
types of pictures on user experience of these tools. Impor-
tantly, a recent qualitative study described how pictures 
conveying important and detailed information combined 

Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

 . 
by guest
 
 

16

Continued

Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

 . 
by guest
 
 

17

with icon arrays in a patient decision aid were perceived 
as explanatory and easy to understand by women of low 
socioeconomic status.27 There is also some evidence on 
the pictures characteristics to support informed deci-
sion-making,51 but high-quality evidence on the impacts 
of pictures—and their key features—on decision quality 
is still lacking.
Our findings also provide new evidence on the factors 
potentially influencing the health literacy demand of a 
stimulus, recognised in the Health Literacy Skills frame-
work36 as influencing comprehension of the message. 
Our practical descriptions of content and visual design 
features of health-related stimuli allow shifting the focus 
away from the person targeted, towards improvement of 
the stimuli to reach wider audiences.

Meaning and implications of findings
Some comments by participants were useful to suggest 
features to be used systematically so that the same issues 
would not come up again when new patient decision aids 
are developed. On the other hand, some of the reported 
issues cannot be addressed generally, as they were specific 
to a given health problem, intervention or outcome. UCD 
thus remains essential to help users clarify their needs. 
For example, some topics require the use of technical 
terminology, such as BD #3 on the power of attorney 
that included a lot of legal terminology. Some topics may 
also elicit a very strong emotional response, which might 
be impossible to foresee and may lengthen the design 
process.
The glossary proved essential for patient decision aids 
targeting older adults with dementia and their caregivers, 
but navigation to access it was a challenge. Web-based 
decision aids should use pop-ups or other methods to 
provide definitions without further navigation.
When patient decision  aid templates require major 
changes to address topic-specific issues, developers 
should plan one or several additional evaluation rounds. 
In the current study, the DBox on the power of attorney 
required adding much information on the various legal 
options in the second round, generating lower scores 
before the table comparing the various options and their 
features were incorporated in the third round.
The wording used to express priorities required several 
rounds before we were able to arrive at the best expres-
sion, which suggests that the list of priorities would benefit 

from the input from a patient/caregiver expert panel. 
Moreover, the panel could be involved early in the rapid 
review process, to help identify those priorities, accelerate 
the review process and streamline the literature search to 
identify patient priorities early on.
Having questionnaires made it possible to collect 
patients’ perceptions independently from their care-
givers’. This might be a good way to ensure that patients 
with caregivers nevertheless make their preferences 
known and questionnaires could be validated in this 
regard specifically with people with dementia.

Unanswered questions and future research
Several participants questioned the provision of scien-
tific evidence on the benefits and harms of the available 
options in the DBoxes. Such comments might reflect a 
negative attitude toward the shared decision-making 
approach, but more likely demonstrates a lack of under-
standing of shared decision-making principles, namely 
that patients should be informed of the benefits and 
harms of each option to partake in decision-making. This 
suggests that patient/caregiver education is required to 
change attitudes towards shared decision making (SDM) 
before patients and caregivers can really partake in 
shared decision-making. Training is a promising strategy 
to address this issue.52

To improve understanding of risks, the DBoxes provide 
probabilities formulated in two different ways, that is, in 
natural frequencies (eg, for every 100 persons, 30 expe-
rience an effect) and in percentages (30%). Our risk 
communication strategy thus conforms with the current 
literature to the effect that risks should be presented 
in several formats to ensure that a broader audience is 
attained.53 However, we did not use icon arrays, to avoid 
lengthening the DBox, which we designed as a printable 
pdf. With as many as 10 options and 62 health outcomes 
in some of the DBoxes for this population, icon arrays 
seemed inappropriate. A future study on a web-based 
DBox would be useful to assess older adults’ perceptions 
of icon arrays displayed in pop-up windows.
More research is required to evaluate whether the 
modified DBox template, which now comprises several 
features intended to improve understanding, will allow 
designing more satisfactory patient decision aids for this 
population in fewer UCD rounds.

Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

 . 
by guest
 
 

18

Author affiliations
1Laval University Research Centre on Primary Care and Services, Centre integre 
universitaire de sante et de services sociaux de la Capitale-Nationale, Quebec City, 
Quebec, Canada
2Laval University, Family and Emergency Medicine, Quebec City, Quebec, Canada
3Knowledge Transfer and Health Technology Assessment Research Group, Research 
Center of Centre hospitalier universitaire de Québec (CRCHUQ), Quebec City, 
Quebec, Canada
4Family Medicine and Emergency Medicine, Universite Laval Faculte de medecine, 
Quebec City, Quebec, Canada
5Caregiver partner, Quebec City, Quebec, Canada
6Faculte des Sciences Infirmieres de l'Universite Laval, Quebec City, Quebec, 
Canada
7Laval University Research Center on Primary Care and Services, Centre integre 
universitaire de sante et de services sociaux de la Capitale-Nationale, Quebec City, 
Quebec, Canada
8Family Medicine and Emergency Medicine, Laval University, Quebec City, Quebec, 
Canada

Acknowledgements  The authors would like to thank the participants whose 
thoughtful recommendations helped to modify the DBoxes. The authors would like 
to thank Danielle Caron for her support in creation and modification of DBoxes, 
Laura Bogza, Camille Lepage-Perusse and Josée Boulet for designing the DBoxes, 
Elina Farmanova for revising the literacy level of the DBoxes and Pierre-Hugues 
Carmichael for his help in quantitative analysis. The authors would also like to thank 
Grant Hamilton for the writing assistance. This project could not have been realised 
without the great implication of many healthcare professionals in participants 
recruitment : Anne Myrand (Christ-Roi center), Pascale Robichaud (Christ-Roy 
center), Kim Willcocks (Hôpital Chauveau), Annie Desgagnées (Hôpital de Ste-Anne 
de Beaupré), Chantal Beauchemin (Hôpital Jeffrey Hale), Nicole Vézina (Hôpital 
regional de St-Raymond de Portneuf), Nathalie Gagnon (Hôpital du St-Sacrement), 
Lise Laliberté (Hôpital de l’Enfant-Jésus) and all their colleagues who contributed 
to recruitment. The authors would also like to thank the caregiver partner, Madame 
Juliette Lafontaine-Bruneau, for sharing her experience and expertise and 
contributing to the design and conduct of this research project. 

Contributors  AMCG designed this study with JL-B, PV, EK, HW and FL. AMCG 
and GB collected, analysed and interpreted the data. JL-B, PV, EK, AMCG and GB 
critically revised and coauthored one or several DBoxes studied herein. AMCG, 
GB, HW and M-CT participated in the initial drafting of the manuscript. All authors 
drafted, critically revised and gave final approval of the article. AMCG acts as 
guarantor.

Funding  This work was supported by the Ministère de l’Économie, de l’Innovation 
et de l’Exportation du Québec, grant #2014-2015-PSVT2-31494, and by the Société 
de Valorisation SOVAR, Quebec city, Canada.

Disclaimer  The study funders played no role in the study design, collection, 
analysis and interpretation of data, writing of the report or in the decision to submit 
the article for publication.

Patient consent for publication  Not required. 

Ethics approval  This study was approved by the Comité Central d’Éthique de la 
Recherche of the Ministère de la Santé et des Services Sociaux (#15-16-05). 

Provenance and peer review  Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.

Data sharing statement  No additional data are available.

Open access This is an open access article distributed in accordance with the 
Creative Commons Attribution Non Commercial (CC BY-NC 4.0) license, which 
permits others to distribute, remix, adapt, build upon this work non-commercially, 
and license their derivative works on different terms, provided the original work is 
properly cited, appropriate credit is given, any changes made indicated, and the use 
is non-commercial. See: http://​creativecommons.​org/​licenses/​by-​nc/​4.​0/.