What do we mean by Human-Centered 
Design of Life-Critical Systems? 

Guy A. Boy 

Human-Centered Design Institute, Florida Institute of Technology 
150 West University Boulevard, Melbourne, Florida 32901, U.S.A. 

Abstract. Human-centered design is not a new approach to design. Aerospace is a good example of a life-critical systems do-
main where participatory design was fully integrated, involving experimental test pilots and design engineers as well as many 
other actors of the aerospace engineering community. This paper provides six topics that are currently part of the requirements 
of the Ph.D. Program in Human-Centered Design of the Florida Institute of Technology (FIT.) This Human-Centered Design 
program offers principles, methods and tools that support human-centered sustainable products such as mission or process 
control environments, cockpits and hospital operating rooms. It supports education and training of design thinkers who are 
natural leaders, and understand complex relationships among technology, organizations and people. We all need to under-
stand what we want to do with technology, how we should organize ourselves to a better life and finally find out whom we are 
and have become. Human-centered design is being developed for all these reasons and issues.  

Keywords: Human-centered design, life-critical systems, cognitive engineering, complexity analysis, organization design and 
management, modeling and simulation. 

1.  Introduction 

Who are we becoming in our highly-interactive In-
ternet-supported world? We still formally belong to 
the “Homo Sapiens” species, which in Latin means 
“knowing human” or “wise human”1. Are we becom-
ing more knowledgeable and wiser? Modern infor-
mation technology strongly supports knowledge de-
velopment and learning. The Internet is a fascinating 
tool that enables people to learn from each other both 
in space and time. Connectivity is there directly with 
both living people and information previously stored. 
Information access is almost immediate, and people 
are able to interact with living and stored knowledge. 
Then, why in these conditions, are we not wiser than 
before? Perhaps we are but what does it mean to be 
wise today? People have built tools for a long time to 
support themselves in many kinds of activities. For 
the last fifty years, we have developed more tools 
than in the history of mankind. Also, technology de-
velopment is accelerating. Are we mutating from 
“Human Beings” to “Technological Beings”? Jean 

                                                          
1 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Human 

Pinet and I discussed this issue in the aeronautical 
context (Boy & Pinet, 2008.) Technology enables us 
to develop new kinds of skills such as flying. From a 
cognitive psychology viewpoint, humans are now 
augmented creatures that have new kinds of “cogni-
tive functions” emerging from the use of technology. 
Cognitive functions can be represented by their role, 
context of validity and the resources that they need to 
be operated (Boy, 1998, 2011.) Aircraft technology 
led to the development of the aviation industry; new 
types of organizations emerged. Since we are now 
able to travel almost anywhere, anytime and much 
faster than before, our planet has become a global 
village. Consequently, new kinds of interaction 
among people have to be developed; we are still ex-
periencing the very beginning of this, and many ad-
justments will need to be determined. This recent 
evolution is still under way, and it will require some 
time to get to a stable state. 
This paper will present an approach to human-
centered design (HCD) of life-critical systems, which 
is currently developed and taught at FIT in the HCD 
Ph.D. program. This paper will develop six major 
topics. (1) HCD is based strongly on an expansion of 

4503
Work 41 (2012) 4503-4513 
DOI 10.3233/WOR-2012-0029-4503 
IOS Press 

1051-9815/12/$27.50 © 2012 – IOS Press and the authors. All rights reserved

cognitive engineering from single-agent models of 
cognition to multi-agent models of socio-cognitive 
interactions. Human and social sciences are needed 
to support understanding of HCD. (2) Life-critical 
systems (LCSs) include a large number of systems 
where people and machines interact with respect to 
three main principles:  safety, efficiency and comfort. 
A comparison of various LCS domains is needed to 
better grasp these principles. (3) Contemporary hu-
man-centered design of life-critical systems (HCD-
LCSs) cannot dissociate from the evolution and con-
stant development of interactive media, e.g., the In-
ternet. Computer science and human-computer inte-
raction are needed to guide design and development 
choices. (4) LCSs are almost always complex with a 
larger number of components, highly non-linear and 
more interaction among these components. This is 
why mastering complexity analysis is so important. 
Complexity science, including mathematics and biol-
ogy, is needed to better understand the nature of LCS 
complexity. (5) Since technology usage induces the 
emergence of new organizations, organization design 
and management need a human-centered approach 
also. Organization sciences and political science are 
also a must. (6) Finally, modeling and simulation 
(M&S) is extensive use to both foster creativity and 
rationalize LCS concepts. M&S also should be mas-
tered and used during the whole life cycle of an LCS, 
and especially in the specifications of the require-
ments of both technology and organization. 

2.  Cognitive Engineering 

Cognitive engineering is a composite discipline. 
Cognitive engineering deals with engineering and 
computer science. Additionally, it encompasses hu-
man and social sciences. Specifically, cognitive en-
gineering is typically served well by disciplines such 
as cognitive science, artificial intelligence, human-
computer interaction, human factors and ergonomics, 
as well as anthropology and organization sciences. 
Cognitive engineering takes human capabilities and 
limitations into account in systems’ design. Such 
capabilities and limitation are typically expressed in 
terms of workload, fatigue, human errors, perfor-
mance, risk taking, decision-making, situation 
awareness, and teamwork. Cognitive engineering 
became progressively an inescapable discipline main-
ly because computers introduced and established 
dominant cognitive work, as opposed to physical 
work. In addition, we needed to have workable me-
thods to explain why trained and expert human oper-

ators can commit coarse errors. An important goal of 
cognitive engineering is to get socio-technical sys-
tems more reliable and resilient through cognitive 
modeling.  
Cognitive science and psychology need models to 
support their studies and explain their experimental 
results. Cognitive science and psychology should 
take human factors into account during the whole life 
cycle of a product and mainly during the first stages 
of the design. We cannot analytically anticipate 
emerging cognitive functions during design, by defi-
nition! We then need to run human-in-the-loop simu-
lations to discover and identify such functions or 
properties. These functions or properties emerge 
from interactions among the various agents. If these 
interactions are not effective, involved personnel will 
not figure out what these interactions are. The very 
concept of interaction promotes the multi-agent ap-
proach to socio-cognition. The big shift in cognitive 
engineering is right here today, i.e., from single-agent 
to multi-agent cognitive modeling. 
In addition, designers should be aware of emer-
gence. In complex systems, i.e., systems with numer-
ous highly interconnected components or agents (of-
ten called systems of systems), interactions among 
components eventually generate emergent behavior 
and properties. First, designers need to understand 
the emerging cognitive function (ECF) concept, i.e., 
functions that components and agents need to have in 
order to achieve individual and collective goals. 
Second, designers need to understand that without 
appropriate scenarios and criteria, they will not 
recognize ECFs. Third, they need to be proactive and 
take reasonable risks to provoke the emergence of 
such functions. Design teams should be multidiscip-
linary, innovative and curious. Fourth, designers and 
engineers should train in a human-centered pers-
pective. Designing the right function from the begin-
ning is the key. Consequently, designers’ cognition is 
a real research topic that needs more investigation. 
The term “human-centered design” is better than “us-
er-centered design”, because there are many people, 
i.e., humans, dealing with products for design, devel-
opment, use, maintenance and eventually decommis-
sion. End-users constitute one of these categories of 
people. 

3. Life-Critical Systems 

A life-critical system (LCS) may have one, two or 
three of the following major dimensions, i.e., safety, 

4504

efficiency and comfort. In addition, we live in a 
world where software is everywhere. Software is 
used in cell phones, cars, public places, homes, and 
appliances of any kind including computer-aided 
design (CAD) tools. Software systems are not only 
used as tools; Software systems interact with people. 
Human-computer interaction (HCI) emerged as a 
field in its own right during the last three decades. 
Comparing various kinds of life-critical systems is 
a good way to improve the design of life-critical sys-
tems. Metrics typically support the categorization of 
emerging properties of such systems. Appropriate 
organizational set-ups need to be put in place. Tech-
nology is critical. Legal and regulatory requirements 
need to be addressed and developed, for certification 
in particular. For example, life-critical avionics (i.e., 
electronic systems on aircraft) is produced using pro-
cedures based on standards that are incrementally 
upgraded. LCSs can be very simple systems such as 
circuit breakers, fire alarms, or a fuse. They also can 
be very sophisticated such as aircraft, spacecraft, 
nuclear power plants (NPP), operating rooms in hos-
pitals, hospitals themselves and disaster management 
centers. Robotic surgery machines, NPP instrumenta-
tion and control (I&C), scuba-diving equipment, 
railway signaling and control systems, advanced 
braking systems on cars, air traffic management sys-
tems and space launch vehicle safety are life-critical 
systems. 
These systems are characterized by several proper-
ties. They must be reliable, (human error and system 
failure tolerant and resistant) resilient, redundant, 
socio-cognitively stable, as well as controllable and 
observable. They require operator’s training. They 
also induce the generation of appropriate operating 
procedures, specific human skills, human operator 
selection, regulations and heavy (more standardized) 
design and development processes. 
This brings us to the difficult problem of expertise. 
Many contributions have been produced since the 
glorious time of expert systems and knowledge engi-
neering, typically started during the early eighties 
(LaFrance, 1987; Boose & Gaines, 1988; 1990; 
Bradshaw, Ford, Adams-Webber, & Boose, 1993; 
Hoffman, Shadbolt, Burton & Klein, 1995). What do 
these contributions bring to the field of human-
centered design (HCD)? Even if these contributions, 
situated at the intersection of artificial intelligence, 
cognitive psychology and philosophy, did not address 
HCD directly, they introduced a very valuable 
framework. Other contributions come from the HCI 
field (Sutcliffe, 1997), anthropology (Hutchins, 
1995), and human engineering (Vicente, 1999). 

All these theories are great, but they will never 
eliminate the involvement of domain experts in the 
design process. You cannot design an aircraft if you 
do not have both aerospace engineering and opera-
tional aviation practice knowledge and knowhow. 
We are back to the complexity chapter where com-
plex things have to be handled by expert people. The 
cockpit in Figure 1 looks horribly complex; it is the 
Concorde cockpit with about 600 instruments for 
three crewmen. Guess what? Twenty Concorde air-
craft were built (more concretely, 14 airline aircraft), 
pilots learned how to use them and did not have any 
accident with it in 27 years of operations, except the 
Paris accident in 2000 that was caused by an external 
unpredictable mechanical event. Concorde pilots 
were experts and they were able to manage the com-
plexity of this aircraft. We need to mention that to 
become a Concorde pilot, they had to go through the 
whole chain of aircraft first, i.e. knowledge gained by 
experience was also considered as a requirement. 
Analogously, climbing Mount Everest requires expe-
rience climbing many other smaller mountains. 
 

 
Figure 1. Concorde cockpit. 
 
Complexity, expertise and life-critical systems are 
intimately related. I am regularly told by some of my 
friendly visitors that they do not understand how I 
can manage with what appears to be my cluttered 
desk, with many layers of documents, reports, books 
and post-its all over the place. It looks like a mess 
from the outside, but believe me I know where things 
are. Why? This is a matter of implicit cognitive in-
dexing. Sometimes, documents are placed on top of 
each other chronologically. Other times, they are 
organized by topics or proximity of my current task. 
There are various kinds of organizations that look 
invisible, and therefore not understandable to outsid-
ers, but are extremely effective in everyday life. In 
reality, the outsider’s perceived complexity of my 
desk turns out to be a very organized internal com-

4505

plexity in my brain… well, nobody can access my 
thoughts but me! I must admit that I get lost from 
time to time, just because I have overwhelmed my 
own cognitive indexing capacity. Also, this is why I 
use post-its to upgrade this implicit indexing of the 
documents on my desk to an explicit one. This is a 
concrete example showing that the way we observe 
the world is highly cognitive, depending on our own 
knowledge, knowhow and experience. This is why it 
is so important to construct cognitive representations 
and models that help us observe and manage life-
critical systems in a more educated way. 
In addition, I noticed that by increasing the size of 
my desk I did not reduced its perceived complexity. 
Indeed, I observed that I put even more documents 
on it. The desktop is a cognitive attractor (Lahlou, 
2000). This concept is also valid for the metaphor of 
the desktop on our contemporary computers. It is so 
easy to put files on the desktop that we usually do it. 
The entropy keeps increasing until it is not accepta-
ble any longer, and we have to clean it.  

4. Advanced interaction media (AIM) 

User interfaces are recognized as approximately 
50% of work for real programs. User interfaces have 
a very important impact on the way products are 
made and used. User interfaces may contribute to the 
reputation of the organization that produces them. Be 
aware of any user interfaces safety issues. Usability 
engineering (Nielsen, 1993) has become a mandatory 
discipline in the production of software systems. Ac-
cording to the International Standard Organization 
(ISO), usability is “the effectiveness, efficiency, and 
satisfaction with which specified users achieve speci-
fied goals in particular environments” (ISO 9241-11.) 
This being said, be careful of the interpretation of 
this definition. Indeed, “users” are either novices, 
occasional users or experts in a given domain. 
The HCI community grew from the early eighties 
with the use of the mouse, graphical displays, win-
dowing systems and the developments of various 
kinds of widgets. The combination of hypertext and 
networked computer systems generated the World 
Wide Web. The evolution of such tools transformed 
our lives. Our long-term memory is now extended to 
the point that we are able to access almost any kind 
of information in a very short period of time. At the 
same time, we are able to access almost anybody on 
the planet easily and comfortably.  

The shift from paper to electronic information is 
now almost definitive. Ubiquitous computing and 
cloud technology enable us to access our own infor-
mation anywhere without carrying heavy hardware; 
handheld devices are sufficient. Advanced interaction 
media enable mobility and flexibility. In addition, 
information can be accessed in context and context-
aware systems enable faster access to information. 
Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) has become a 
very useful indexing technology that enables new 
types of automation. Specifically, RFID increases the 
potential for context-sensitive information systems. 
Advanced interaction media (AIM) are computer-
based systems that enable interaction with informa-
tion and knowledge, in either a vivid form coming 
from people directly or various kinds of data formats. 
Computer-supported cooperative work research con-
tributed to the development of AIM devoted to hu-
man-human communication, not to mention that con-
stantly increasing amounts of data require new kinds 
of visualization techniques and tools. 
Specifically in return, human-centered design ben-
efits from advanced interaction media support. De-
veloping and testing a mockup contribute to in-
creased usability from the early stages of design. Ac-
tive design documents enable storage of design histo-
ry and support traceability during the later stages of 
the development of a product (Boy, 2005). AIM faci-
litates product integration by simulation, and even 
facilitates product management (Coze et al., 2009). 
In many cases, AIM is the most important part of the 
products such as the iPhone or the iPad. 
Today, software-based interactivity is almost eve-
rywhere. New cockpits are qualified as “interactive 
cockpits”, not because pilots interact directly with 
mechanical parts of the aircraft, but because pilots 
interact with a pointing device enabling the manage-
ment of computers, which interact with mechanical 
parts such as rudder, flaps and slats. AIM therefore 
mediates interactions between people and their sur-
rounding physical world. Consequently, it is crucial 
to better understand the nature of AIM to overcome 
increasing lack of situation awareness and decision-
making problems. The next section will describe why 
and how to analyze complexity of LCSs, where AIM 
are even more integrated today. 

5. Complexity analysis 

Complex systems exist in the natural world, and 
scientists have studied such complexity for a long 

4506

time, trying to figure out persistent behavioral pat-
terns, identify generic phenomena, relationships 
among components and so on. Today, technological 
developments have brought new kinds of complexity. 
In other words, scientists have developed models in 
order to “simplify” complexity. For example, a long 
time ago people used to watch the sky as a complex 
set of stars; Copernicus, Kepler and Galileo simpli-
fied complexity by providing models based on two 
simple variables, i.e., distance and mass. In the same 
way, scientists develop models in order to describe 
what they observe, i.e., they rationalize complex da-
tasets.  
Complexity is often a matter of knowledge or ig-
norance. The more we know about something, the 
more we find it simple to understand and use. For 
example, you may have a hard time driving to a place 
for the first time. You may need a map and directions. 
Specifically, you may need to think, concentrate and 
act appropriately. Once you have driven to this place, 
it becomes easier. You constructed a pattern (or 
model) of the way to get to this place. You may re-
fine this way by optimizing time and distance. In fact, 
complexity was mainly in your ignorance of the sa-
lient entities and the relationships among them, 
which determined the relevant pattern. Discovering 
and/or learning patterns/models tend to deconstruct 
complexity. 
We actually simplified flying when we understood 
that flying was a matter of thrust and lift. Once we 
had the right structural devices to insure the lift, and 
the right propulsion to insure the thrust, we managed 
to fly. Clement Ader was one of the first to make this 
point. He built the first flying machine Éole that he 
attempted to fly on October 9, 1890 in the vicinity of 
Paris. He flew 50 meters reaching a height of 20 cen-
timeters. This was 13 years before the Wright Broth-
ers (AAE, 1994). At this time, Ader deconstructed 
the complexity of human flight by proving that it was 
possible to physically stay in the air propelled by an 
engine. After Ader’s work, many other people de-
signed, developed and used aircraft along these lines, 
and refined the manned-flight concept, i.e., they mas-
tered the complexity of the manned-flight concept 
both functionally and structurally. Note that we in-
crementally learned from experience. Also, it is im-
portant to mention that aircraft improved over the 
years from safety, efficiency and comfort points of 
views because they were developed symbiotically 
with pilots. More importantly, the experimental test 
pilot (ETP) job emerged from the human-centered 
design approach, even if it was not formalized as it is 
today.  

HCD is about artifact design and use. Artifacts, 
i.e., artificial things, differ from natural things be-
cause people build them. They can be simple, but this 
paper focuses on complex artifacts, and more pre-
cisely complex systems. Systems are usually defined 
as an integrated set of interconnected components. 
Examples of systems may include aircraft, spacecraft, 
nuclear power plants, medical operating rooms and 
disaster-management centers. These systems are in-
herently complex because they are cognitive prosthe-
ses (Ford, Glymour & Hayes, 1997). An aircraft is a 
cognitive prosthesis because it is designed to supply 
people with flying capacity (remember that people do 
not fly naturally!)  
I will make the distinction between intrinsic com-
plexity and extrinsic complexity. Intrinsic complexi-
ty results from system architecture and internal rela-
tionships among its components. Extrinsic complex-
ity results from the activity of the system, i.e., inte-
raction between the system and its environment in-
cluding its users. Of course, intrinsic complexity and 
extrinsic complexity are closely related. First, we will 
try to analyze them separately. Next, we will show 
how they relate to each other.  
Technology is supposed to make our lives safer, 
more efficient and comfortable, but in reality we ob-
serve that technology creates new kinds of security 
and safety issues, catastrophic events and compli-
cated ways of living. I am not an anti-technology 
activist! My research work focuses on HCD where it 
is important to involve the right people in the design 
of complex life-critical systems. This humanistic 
approach to design and engineering forces the devel-
opment of new integrative methods, techniques and 
tools that encapsulate the Technology, Organization 
and People (TOP) approach.  
For a long time, systems were designed individual-
ly without much attention to their coupling to other 
systems and most importantly people. Their integra-
tion into an organizational environment was always 
the source of various kinds of surprises and discove-
ries, with a few catastrophes. Adjustments were al-
ways necessary and often systems had to be rede-
signed to fit the reality of their actual use. This 
process seems natural and acceptable during devel-
opment phases, but this variance is not acceptable 
when the system is delivered. This is a question of 
maturity. Maturity is technology maturity and ma-
turity of practice. The former deals with intrinsic 
complexity; the latter deals with extrinsic complexity.  
In design and engineering, maturity is strongly re-
lated to the nature of high-level requirements. When 
high-level requirements are “well-defined”, it is like-

4507

ly that the resulting system is good, with respect to 
appropriate principles and criteria. However, when 
high-level requirements are “badly-defined”, it is, in 
most cases, that the resulting system is not acceptable. 
In addition, the nature and the number of tests per-
formed before delivery are crucial to insure the ma-
turity of the system. High-level requirements are not 
defined well without a human-centered design ap-
proach that enables the designer to create a holistic 
view and actual use of the targeted product. Model-
ing and simulation are key methods, techniques and 
tools to achieve this goal. They enable an outside-in 
approach to design, instead of the classical inside-
out approach of current engineering practices, 
where systems design is technology-centered, seldom 
taking into account user experience and ergonomic 
design factors. The inside–out approach created the 
need for user interface approaches where such an 
interface attempts to compensate and ultimately hide 
intrinsic complexity, and sometimes force users to 
adapt to the system. Conversely, the outside-in ap-
proach takes extrinsic complexity into account from 
the early stages of the design process.  
We have used the inside-out approach for a long 
time because early engineering systems were simpler 
than systems that we know today. Therefore, it was 
easy to design a user interface because the number of 
variables and parameters was reasonably small. To-
day, this number has become huge, and designers 
have to make difficult choices in the design of user 
interfaces. What is important to show? What should 
be controlled? Layers and layers of software are de-
veloped to take into account safety, efficiency and 
comfort, while at the same time increasing both in-
trinsic and extrinsic complexity. Consequently, sys-
tems have their own behaviors that people need to 
perceive, understand, consider and react to appro-
priately. We have moved into a human-system inter-
active world not considered as a single human opera-
tor using a machine, but as a multi-agent interactive 
environment.  
In the design of a complex system, we have to take 
into account not only its intrinsic complexity but also 
and foremost its extrinsic complexity. Without de-
signing the overall architecture and enabling its func-
tionalities and behaviors, it is not possible to access 
its extrinsic complexity (nor its intrinsic complexity 
also!) Therefore, instead of designing systems indivi-
dually and then integrating them into an environment, 
it is better to adopt the systems-of-systems (SoS) 
approach. The SoS concept originated in the defense 
sector (Luzeau & Ruault, 2008.) Several different 
definitions are given by many authors (Jamshidi, 

2005), but these definitions require more research to 
arrive at a workable definition. Today, we cannot 
think of the air traffic management of the future 
without stating it in terms of SoS. Other examples are 
the Internet, intelligent transport systems and enter-
prise information networks (or Intranets). The SoS 
concept now integrates the distinction of intrinsic and 
extrinsic complexity. 
Since SoSs consist of humans and systems, origi-
nal natural systems tend to become artificial systems. 
Many examples have emerged from this evolution 
such as genetically modified organisms and inte-
grated prostheses. Technology is now part of our 
lives and needs to be investigated appropriately if we 
want to take care of humanity and the Earth. Improv-
ing our understanding of complexity is very impor-
tant when we, humans, attempt to modify natural 
complexity. Consequently, life-critical systems need 
better investigation and understanding in order to 
find the right mix between humans and machines. 
In fact, the classical positivist approach is no 
longer sufficient, and often ineffective and inappro-
priate, and we prefer to use more phenomenological 
approaches to design and development. HCD re-
quires 
us 
to 
emphasize 
the 
positivism-
phenomenology distinction2. In particular, a complex 
system is an articulated set of dedicated sub-systems 
that induces emerging phenomena that each of these 
sub-systems does not have initially. Good human-
centered design should focus on the discovery of 
these emerging phenomena. 

6. Organization design and management 

In this section, we will uncover the difficult prob-
lem of organization influence on human-centered 
design. Many authors already investigated and ana-
lyzed such problem. In the human error arena, Rea-
                                                          
2  The French philosopher and sociologist Auguste Comte 
introduced positivism in the beginning of the nineteenth century. 
Positivism asserts that the only authentic knowledge is that which 
is based on sense experience and positive verification. The 
German philosopher Edmond Husserl introduced phenomenology 
in the beginning of the twentieth century as the study of 
consciousness and conscious experience. Among the most 
important processes studied by phenomenology are intentionality, 
intuition, evidence, empathy, and intersubjectivity. The positivism-
phenomenology distinction opens the debate on objectivity and 
subjectivity. Our occidental world based most of our design and 
engineering on positivism which led to developing a very precise 
and verifiable syntax, often leaving semantics somewhere behind, 
may be because semantics is full of subjectivity. It is time to re-
qualify phenomenology in design and engineering. A few 
organizations and companies already work in this direction. 

4508

son (1990) provided the famous Swiss cheese model. 
This model provides a macroscopic view of what it 
requires to anticipate potential accidents by develop-
ing appropriate defenses. However, this model does 
not tell us how the organization should be designed 
to manage socio-technical reliability. Kletz (2000) 
addressed the influence of senior management on 
functional risk, and its involvement in the detail of 
safety issues with their close attention to output, costs 
and even product quality. 
Vaughan (1996) examined the origins of the 1986 
Challenger space shuttle accident. She pointed out 
that the accident was caused mainly by social struc-
tures: “a mistake embedded in the banality of organi-
zational life.” Organizational routine and compla-
cency lead to accidents. Specifically, Vaughan 
showed how “deviance in organizations is trans-
formed into acceptable behavior.” We are talking 
about the culture of the organization itself, and the 
role of the senior management that needs to ensure 
this safety culture glue among the actors involved. Of 
course, an accident does not happen, usually, from 
only one cause, but the main issues remain senior 
management’s situation awareness and appropriate 
decisions. 
Use statistics carefully. NASA management esti-
mated safety as 10-5 accident per space shuttle launch, 
and in contrast NASA engineers estimated safety as 
between 0.5 x 10-2 and 10-3 (Feynman, 1989). In real-
ity, it has been 2 on 135 launches, i.e., around 2 x 10-

2 per launch. Of course, organizational decision-
making was carried out as though management's es-
timate was correct. This brings to the front the issue 
of management authority and competence. Some-
times, the distance between the top management and 
the real technical competence can be large. This is 
why it is crucial to make sure that technical compe-
tence is present at the highest level of the organiza-
tion. 
HCD of a product is not developed properly if the 
organizational aspects are not taken into account in 
both the structure where design and development are 
performed, and the organization that will receive the 
product designed. In the first case, we will talk about 
organizational genotypes of the product; in the 
second case, we will talk about organizational phe-
notypes of the product (Figure 2.) Organizational 
genotypes include the way the organization influ-
ences product design, development, work assignment, 
articulation between technical and financial man-
agement, planning, quality control, evaluation, certi-
fication, external relations and personnel training 
(this is a non exhaustive list of course.) Organiza-

tional phenotypes include the way the recipient or-
ganization integrates, operates and maintains the 
product. 
 

 
Figure 2. Organization genotypes and phenotypes of a product, and 
human-centered design feedback. 
 
System design and development is a matter of 
networked component production and integration. 
The organization producing the system is defined as 
an autopoietic system, in Maturana and Varela’s 
sense (Varela, Maturana & Uribe, 1974; Maturana & 
Varela, 1987.) This system produces a system that 
includes its own genes. An autopoietic system is pro-
ducer and product at the same time. Following the 
autopoietic model, human-centered design is both the 
process of design and the design itself, i.e., a human-
centered system design is incrementally modified in a 
participatory way by the various actors or agents who 
deal with it. HCD feedback is not only a matter of 
fixing the values of appropriate parameters; it contri-
butes to regenerate the product itself. This biological 
definition of the genesis of a system encapsulates 
organizational genotypes and phenotypes. The HCD 
feedback takes into account emergent organization 
phenotypes in the redesign of organization genotypes 
and therefore the product itself. 
Now, technology is almost always equipped with 
layers of software that enable machines to interact 
with humans, at least in very limited contexts. We 
commonly talk about human and machine agents 
(HMA). Human-computer interaction was tradition-
ally thought of as a person facing a computer in a 
one-to-one relation. Today, there are HMA net-
worked societies in the sense of Minsky (1986), i.e., 
an agent being a society of agents. Human modeling, 
often 
commonly 
thought 
of 
as 
information 
processing (Newell & Simon, 1972; Wickens, 1992,) 
progressively migrated towards multi-agent organiza-
tion modeling where cognition is distributed (Hut-
chins, 1995.)  
In addition, the evolution of practices due to auto-
mation within an organization required developing a 
model that could support human-centered design of 

4509

multi-agent systems. The cognitive function concept 
(Boy, 1998) emerged as a useful representation to 
support such modeling of both individuals (i.e., indi-
vidual agents as organized structures of cognitive 
functions) and organizations (i.e., a set of cognitive 
functions distributed among a set of agents)). Exam-
ples of cognitive functions are “speed control,” “tra-
jectory management,” “collision avoidance” and 
“failure detection and recovery.” Function allocation 
in life-critical (human and machine) systems is not a 
new research topic (Fitts, 1951.) However, there is a 
need for unifying what is separately done in engi-
neering, human factors and organization science.  
The Orchestra model (Boy, 2009) suits well this 
kind of evolution where (1) agents require a common 
frame of reference (a music theory analog); (2) con-
tracts (scores) must be appropriately and formally 
coordinated (the role of the composer); (3) real-time 
coordination must be assured (the role of the conduc-
tor); and (4) agents must have specific abilities to 
perform according to contracts (role and proficiency 
of the musicians.) Contracts are seen as scenarios or 
storyboards, with an additional responsibility dimen-
sion. Consequently, the Orchestra model will support 
the identification of both deliberate and emergent 
cognitive functions during the life cycle of a multi-
agent life-critical system. It is based on previous 
work on cognitive function analysis (Boy, 1998, 
2011) and function allocation work (Grote et al., 
2000.)  
This metaphoric model was motivated by the in-
troduction of new concepts of operations (CONOPS) 
in air traffic management (ATM), such as task dele-
gation from ground controllers to flight crews. This 
kind of transfer of authority is typically expected to 
induce the emergence of new cognitive functions 
among the various ATM agents whether they are 
humans or automation. More specifically, the current 
hierarchical model of air traffic control (ATC), where 
authority is centralized on the ground, is evolving 
toward a distributed model of authorities that need to 
coordinate among agents that are evolving also. More 
generally, authority has become the central driving 
force of the Orchestra model, where authority encap-
sulates both control and accountability.  

7. Modeling and simulation (M&S) 

Designing a system requires both creativity and ra-
tionalization. These two processes are antagonistic. 
The former is about divergent thinking, generation of 

ideas and brainstorming processes when it is done by 
a group of people. The later is about convergent 
thinking, analysis of ideas and synthesis into con-
cepts, evaluation and prioritization of concepts. Ge-
nerating concepts requires formalizing them. This is 
where modeling enters into play. We need to have 
the right conceptual tools to share ideas and concepts. 
What is a model? A model is a simplification of 
the reality, e.g., a system or an environment, which 
we try to represent. Therefore a model is a simplified 
representation that puts forward a few salient ele-
ments and their relevant interconnections. If the 
model takes care of the interconnections among sys-
tem components, we need the simulation to take care 
of the interaction among these components. In other 
words, simulation brings the model to life. 
Modeling and simulation (M&S), as a discipline, 
enables understanding of the purposeful components, 
their interconnections and interactions. This brings to 
mind the issue of the level of detail and granularity of 
the representation being used in chosen models. 
When you are developing a model, you are always 
facing a tradeoff in choosing the right level of granu-
larity, i.e., what is meaningful against what is unne-
cessary. If you stay at too high a level, you might 
miss interesting interactions during the simulation 
process. Conversely, if you want to model every de-
tail, you might run into very complicated interactions, 
which are extremely difficult to understand. The 
model of everything does not exist and will never 
exist. Stay focused on the purpose! There are various 
kinds of models, and we will see the main distinc-
tions that need to be understood into order to use 
and/or combine them appropriately.  
Simulation is typically computer-supported and 
generally, but not necessarily, interactive, e.g., it 
could be paper-based or part of a brainstorming ses-
sion such as a role-playing game. As already dis-
cussed, simulation is used to improve understanding 
of the interactions among the various elements of the 
model that it implements and simulates. Simulation is 
used also to improve the model and eventually modi-
fy it (Figure 3). Simulators enable people to engage 
into the activity that the system modeled enables 
them to perform, e.g., driving a car simulator. You 
may use simulation to learn about a domain, such as 
flying. Typically, simulators are upgraded as we 
learn more about this domain. In addition, simulation 
enables human operators to “experience” situations 
that are not experienced in the real world such as 
possible accidents. As shown on Figure 3, modeling 
a system also takes into account people involved and 
other relevant systems interacting with each other. 

4510

The modeling process produces a model that can be 
simulated on a simulator, which in turn produces 
experimental data. These data are usually analyzed. 
Data analysis enables potential identification of 
emerging properties, which enable learning about 
system use. The M&S design cycle shows that mod-
eling is a closed-loop process that in turn enables 
system re-design, modification of people practic-
es/profiles and potential re-definition of other sys-
tems.  
 

 
 
Figure 3. The M&S design cycle. 
 
Simulation is imitation. The first time I observed 
the Concorde simulator at Aeroformation was in 
Toulouse, France, in the late seventies. The view was 
generated from a small camera moving over a giant 
model landscape that was fixed to the wall in a big 
hangar. The images from this camera were projected 
onto large screens in front of the cockpit windows. 
The original simulation setup was limited to a single 
airport. Then came computer-generated images that 
totally changed the possibilities of flight simulation. 
This kind of simulator was used only for training. 
Also, simulation is used to explain and aid difficult 
decision-making processes. For example, modeling 
and simulation were used very much at the Kennedy 
Space Center to figure out launch pad configurations 
prior to a shuttle launch. Current M&S tools, such as 
CATIA and DELMIA, for example, enable the visua-
lization of complex structures and functions. NASA 
engineers and management use resulting simulations 
as mediating representations and decision support 
tools. 
Disney and Universal, for example, use simulation 
for a totally different purpose, i.e., entertainment. In 
addition to attempting to provide natural sensations 
and “real-world” experience, Disney and Universal 
create fiction. It is amazing how people can manage 
both simulated “natural” things and fictive objects 
brought to life through simulation. Computers and 

software make this kind of mix possible, but there are 
techniques and art to make this kind of technology 
acceptable to people and provide them with a me-
morable experience. 
There are several kinds of simulation that involve 
both real and simulated people and systems interact-
ing among each other. The term human-in-the-loop 
simulation is broadly used in this case. The industry 
can simulate various kinds of effects such as visual 
scenes, sounds, motion, and odors. The videogame 
industry is progressing very fast to integrate these 
sensations. 

8. Conclusion and perspectives 

Human-centered design of life-critical systems is a 
discipline under development. The HCDi of FIT ad-
vances future generations of designers and leaders of 
life critical systems through outreach, education and 
research in science, engineering and human and so-
cial sciences. Our interdisciplinary approach pro-
motes innovation and leadership to synthesize emerg-
ing properties of technology, organizations and 
people for safe and efficient system design. We pro-
vide a single point of contact for students, faculty, 
funding agencies and businesses.  
HCDi members are faculty, permanent and visiting 
research scientists and graduate students who have 
strong backgrounds in complex systems (e.g., cockpit 
design, aircraft certification, air traffic control and 
management, space systems, space shuttle engineer-
ing) and science (e.g., physics, mathematics, psy-
chology and education.) HCDi members conduct 
research in cognitive engineering, AIM, complexity 
analysis in human-centered design, LCSs, human-
centered organization design and management and 
M&S. 
Projects carried out at HCDi include: (1) Nuclear 
control room design, i.e., cognitive function analysis 
and allocation, human-centered automation, ad-
vanced interaction media, eye tracking experimenta-
tions; (2) The virtual camera in planetary exploration, 
i.e., multi-source data visualization techniques; (3) A 
multi-source weather awareness system for future 
cockpits that is expected to improve flight condition 
situational awareness by design; (4) Design of air 
traffic management systems and complexity analysis 
of Trajectory Based Operations for NextGen; and (5) 
Design of instructional technology for the online 
learning environment. 

4511

Human-centered design of life-critical systems 
will make the world a better place through the crea-
tion of engineering leadership, and a new motivating 
development of science, technology, engineering and 
mathematics (STEM). Apply human-centered design 
throughout the entire life cycle of LCSs. We also 
need to educate key leaders about HCD practices. 
Finally, we need to develop a broad community of 
HCD experts collaborating across academia and in-
dustry.