Original Paper

User-Centered Development of Bolster, an mHealth Intervention
for Early Psychosis Caregivers: Needs Assessment, Prototyping,
and Field Trial

Benjamin Buck1, PhD; Mary Wingerson1, BA; Erica Whiting1, BS; Jaime Snyder2, MFA, PhD; Maria Monroe-DeVita3,
PhD; Dror Ben-Zeev1, PhD

1Behavioral Research in Technology and Engineering (BRiTE) Center, Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, University of Washington,
Seattle, WA, United States
2Information School, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States
3Supporting Psychosis Innovation through Research Implementation and Training (SPIRIT) Lab, Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences,
University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States

Benjamin Buck, PhD
Behavioral Research in Technology and Engineering (BRiTE) Center
Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences
University of Washington
Box 356560
1959 NE Pacific Street
Seattle, WA, 98105
United States
Phone: 1 206 221 8518
Fax: 1 206 543 9520

Abstract

Background: Caregivers play a critical role in the treatment and recovery of youth and young adults at risk for psychosis.
Caregivers often report feeling isolated, overwhelmed, and lacking in resources. Mobile health (mHealth) has the potential to
provide scalable, accessible, and in-the-moment support to caregivers. To date, few if any mHealth resources have been developed
specifically for this population.
Objective: The aim of this study was to conduct user-centered design and testing of an mHealth intervention to support early
psychosis caregivers.
Methods: We conducted a multiphase user-centered development process to develop the Bolster mobile app. In phase 1, a total
of 21 caregivers were recruited to participate in a qualitative needs assessment and respond to an initial prototype of the Bolster
platform. Content analysis was used to identify key needs and design objectives, which guided the development of the Bolster
mobile app. In phase 2, a total of 11 caregivers were recruited to participate in a 1-week field trial wherein they provided qualitative
and quantitative feedback regarding the usability and acceptability of Bolster; in addition, they provided baseline and posttest
assessments of the measures of distress, illness appraisals, and family communication.
Results: In phase 1, participants identified psychoeducation, communication coaching, a guide to seeking services, and support
for coping as areas to address. Live prototype interaction sessions led to multiple design objectives, including ensuring that
messages from the platform were actionable and tailored to the caregiver experience, delivering messages in multiple modalities
(eg, video and text), and eliminating a messaging-style interface. These conclusions were used to develop the final version of
Bolster tested in the field trial. In phase 2, of the 11 caregivers, 10 (91%) reported that they would use Bolster if they had access
to it and would recommend it to another caregiver. They also reported marked changes in their appraisals of illness (Cohen
d=0.55-0.68), distress (Cohen d=1.77), and expressed emotion (Cohen d=0.52).
Conclusions: 
To our knowledge, this study is the first to design an mHealth intervention specifically for early psychosis
caregivers. Preliminary data suggest that Bolster is usable, acceptable, and promising to improve key targets and outcomes. A
future fully powered clinical trial will help determine whether mHealth can reduce caregiver burdens and increase engagement
in services among individuals affected by psychosis.

JMIR Ment Health 2023 | vol. 10 | e50522 | p. 1

(JMIR Ment Health 2023;10:e50522) doi: 10.2196/50522

KEYWORDS
caregiving; psychosis; mobile health; mHealth; user-centered design; mobile phone; artificial intelligence; AI

Introduction

Background

Caregivers, or individuals who provide ongoing support or help
to an individual (usually a family member, eg, a child, spouse,
or other relative) with a mental illness [1], play a critical role
in the recovery of young adults at risk for psychosis [2]. Most
youth with early psychosis live with a caregiver [3], and these
caregivers are often the first to detect and respond to the signs
of psychosis in their loved ones [4]. They also often seek
resources and treatment [5], establish contact with providers
[6], or work to persuade the individual to make such contacts
on their own [7]. Furthermore, once their loved ones are
connected to care, caregivers provide logistical and emotional
support [8]. Having a caregiver engaged in supporting care is
associated with increased engagement in services [9,10] and
improved outcomes [11,12].

Caregivers face significant barriers and challenges in their
efforts to facilitate help seeking. Many lack accurate information
about psychosis and are prone to misattribute symptoms to
substances or developmental transitions [13]. Stigmatizing
attitudes related to mental illness and help seeking can manifest
in unwillingness to reach out to providers or disbelief in the
seriousness of symptoms [14]. Caregivers are also prone to
severe levels of distress related to confusion, frustration, and
worry induced by responding to a loved one’s psychotic episodes
[15] and the experience of mental illnesses of their own [16,17].
Better caregiver knowledge of psychosis symptoms is linked
with an increased likelihood of recommending professional help
seeking for the affected person [18]. However, caregivers
commonly report a skill deficit when faced with the challenges
of caregiving in the context of psychosis. They often report
feeling isolated [19], distressed, and unable to help [20]. Without
effective caregiving skills, they are vulnerable to a
communication style that is overly emotionally involved,
alienating, or hostile (ie, interactions high in expressed emotion)
[21,22]. This interaction style can worsen family communication
[23], which impedes the process of treatment facilitation [24]
and is linked with elevated symptoms [25-27] and increased
risk for future episodes [28-32]. Family psychoeducation
interventions are designed specifically to address these needs;
however, specialty psychosis clinics that offer them are out of
reach for families who—as a result of limited access or
reluctance—have not yet accessed them or are unable to engage
in services (eg, because of the distance from clinics and other
responsibilities). To address these needs, caregivers often search
the internet for resources, information, and support early in the
help-seeking process [33]. A majority of caregivers report
dissatisfaction with the illness-related information available to
them, and they report particular difficulties accessing necessary
and actionable information when it is most needed [34].
Caregivers report that although information can be accessed

easily on the internet, much of it lacks direct and actionable
steps [4].

Mobile health (mHealth) may provide unique advantages in
addressing the needs of early psychosis caregivers. First,
mHealth tools can serve as just-in-time interventions [35],
wherein users can use content that responds to particular
in-the-moment needs. Caregiving challenges can unfold in an
unpredictable manner; optimal resources for caregivers may be
those that are available in the environments and moments when
these needs emerge. mHealth could also enable more frequent
ongoing engagement with intervention content than is possible
through psychoeducational websites, many of which provide
information in a single large bolus. Second, mobile apps have
greater penetration than other web-based platforms. In a day’s
engagement with media, the average adult spends much more
time engaged with mobile devices than internet-connected
computers [36]. Third, mHealth interventions show promise in
their scalability. A new generation of self-guided interventions
have demonstrated efficacy in a number of psychiatric concerns,
including depression [37], anxiety [38], and psychosis [39].
Such interventions can be provided rapidly, at low cost, to
individuals who face significant barriers to access the traditional
modes of mental health services.

mHealth Interventions for Caregivers

mHealth interventions designed for caregivers lag behind those
designed for individuals with psychosis or other mental health
conditions. A recent systematic review of digital technologies
for early psychosis caregivers examined 8538 studies and
identified no mHealth intervention designed for this high-need
population [40]. Given the fact that many mental health care
settings focus exclusively on the needs of the identified patient
and lack specific services for caregivers [1], self-guided digital
tools might fill a particular glaring need in this population. There
is a need for literature describing the specific applications of
mHealth to address the needs of caregivers of individuals at
risk for psychosis. Our team has conducted a multiphase
user-centered design and development process to develop an
mHealth intervention for caregivers of individuals with early
psychosis to support treatment facilitation, including a
qualitative needs assessment, live prototyping sessions, and a
field trial. The finished product—Bolster—is one of the first
ever mHealth interventions designed specifically to support
caregivers of young adults with early psychosis. In this paper,
we describe the user-centered design process through which
Bolster evolved from a set of design objectives to a prototype
to a fully functional mHealth support tool.

Methods

Overview

Following examples from our team [41,42] and others [43,44],
we conducted a multiphase user-centered design and
development process that aimed to optimize the Bolster

JMIR Ment Health 2023 | vol. 10 | e50522 | p. 2

intervention to meet the needs of caregivers of young adults at
risk for psychosis. This user-centered development process
involved 2 phases. In study phase 1, a total of 21 caregivers
participated in a qualitative needs assessment to identify key
intervention goals and engaged in a live interaction with a
preliminary prototype. Our team analyzed the results of this
first phase to develop and optimize the beta version of the
Bolster intervention. In study phase 2, a second sample of 11
caregivers participated in a 1-week field trial of the Bolster
mobile app.

Recruitment

Several channels were used to recruit participants. First,
advertisements were purchased on Google by the research team
to target individuals using particular search terms (eg,
“schizophrenia 
symptoms,” 
“psychosis,” 
and 
“bipolar
symptoms”) and iteratively optimized using the Google Ads
broad match algorithm. Second, the study team placed
advertisements in the newsletters of multiple advocacy
organizations (eg, the National Alliance on Mental Illness
[NAMI] and Mental Health America) and sent email postings
to national networks focused on early psychosis (eg, the
Psychosis-Risk and Early Psychosis Program Network
[PEPPNET] and Washington state’s New Journeys network)
encouraging distribution to caregivers served by members of
these networks. In each of these postings or flyers, participants
were linked to a study landing page that summarized the study
and contained links to the consent form and eligibility survey.
After opting to take the eligibility survey, participants were
required to read the study consent form and confirm
understanding in comprehension questions covering study key
points. All participants were contacted by a member of the study
team to confirm and inform participants of their eligibility status.

Participants

Across study phases, participants were 32 caregivers of youth
and young adults who had experienced symptoms consistent
with psychosis. All met the following inclusion criteria: (1)
responses of somewhat agree or definitely agree to ≥2 items on
the Caregiver Prime Screen–Revised (CGPS-R) [45]; (2) loved
one met the criteria of psychosis onset (per caregiver report)
following definitions derived from previous work [46,47],
including (2A) experiencing at least 1 positive symptom of
psychosis and (2B) at least 2 of the following: serious
deterioration of functioning, marked social withdrawal,
persistent self-neglect, or episodic marked anxiety; and (3)
within the past 5 years, caregivers became aware of their loved
one’s symptoms, their loved one first experienced a psychotic
episode, or their loved one first engaged in treatment for
psychosis. To represent varying caregiver experiences
concerning treatment engagement, the first sample (ie, those
completing the needs assessment and prototyping) was stratified
such that only half provided caregiving to an individual who
was already established in specialty services for psychosis. In
the phase 2 field trial, all participants were caregivers of young
adults who were engaged in specialty psychosis programs.

Phase 1: Intervention Development

Procedures

In the study’s first phase, we aimed to develop Bolster through
identifying user needs and gathering concrete feedback in
response to a preliminary prototype. This study builds on our
team’s previous quantitative work [33] by gathering detailed
qualitative data on needs and preferences as well as more direct
and actionable information in response to a concrete prototype.
Participants completed semistructured needs assessment
interviews followed by live prototype interaction sessions
through videoconferencing links provided by the research team.
The interviewer (MW) was a BA-level research coordinator
following a semistructured interview guide developed by senior
team members with experience in user-centered design; these
senior team members also supervised the interviewer. The
interviewer had no established previous relationship with
participants, and she provided them with the goals of the
research project during the informed consent process.
Participants used their own devices for videoconferencing and
thus could choose their own environments to complete data
collection. No other individuals were present for these interviews
aside from the interviewer and the participant. Qualitative
interview topics included barriers and facilitators of help
seeking, currently available resources that support caregiving,
unmet needs in supporting the affected relative’s help seeking,
and proposed digital solutions to better meet these needs (ie,
what ideal digital supports the participant would create to meet
their needs if they had a magic wand). Live prototyping sessions
involved engaging with a preliminary but fully responsive
prototype. This prototype included the following features: an
interactive messaging-style (ie, preprogrammed rule-based
chatbot) interface where users interacted with the system as it
provided psychoeducational content. Example modules focused
on caregiver resilience (ie, the importance of taking care of
oneself to more effectively provide caregiving support) and the
communication skill of using I-statements. Additional modules
involved a video-based deep breathing exercise and a text-based
psychoeducation page introducing the stress-vulnerability model
of psychosis. This prototype allowed the demonstration and
testing of the structures and functions of the platform as well
as sample content to allow test participants to provide feedback.
The Bolster prototype was connected to the videoconferencing
interview session, and cursor control was provided to the
participants such that they could click through and respond to
prompts in the app remotely. Participants were asked to
complete tasks (eg, complete a module) while thinking aloud.
In this approach, participants are asked to express reactions to
the functions and content of the app as they come to mind and
after completing each task. Interview sessions lasted
approximately 90 minutes and were audio recorded and later
transcribed for research team analysis. Participants were
compensated with US $75 gift cards for their time. There were
no additional contacts with participants for repeat interviews
or feedback on findings.

Analysis

Participants’qualitative responses were analyzed for key themes
using conventional content analysis [48]. Interviews were

JMIR Ment Health 2023 | vol. 10 | e50522 | p. 3

segmented such that themes could only be coded in relevant
sections of the interview. Two coders independently assigned
first-level codes (concise summaries no longer than a phrase,
eg, “Ability to persuade loved one to take her medication”) to
segments of participants’ responses. The 2 coders grouped
first-level codes and collaboratively developed second-level
interpretive codes (eg, “Communication with loved one”) that
also serve as themes reported here. Second-level codes were
developed iteratively following discussion of first-level coding
and compiled into a codebook with thorough definitions and
rules for application in text. The coders then independently
returned to the text to apply second-level codes to interview
segments. A high degree of agreement was established between
the coders (κ>0.72), and all disagreements were resolved
through consensus discussion. Prototype reactions (ie,
problematic or positive interactions and issues noted in the think
aloud
sessions) were listed exhaustively to provide a
comprehensive review of areas to adjust in the final version of
Bolster. We also report on our team’s design objectives and
overall features of the version of Bolster tested in the phase 2
field trial.

Phase 2: Field Trial

Procedures

This field trial deployed the updated version of Bolster based
on phase 1 feedback in a sample of caregivers for 1 week.
Eligible participants were texted links to a battery of baseline
questionnaires (refer to the next subsection). Once these
questionnaires were completed, a study team member scheduled
and completed a remote installation session wherein the study
team member ensured that Bolster was installed on the
participants’ own device and provided orientation to the app,
the 1-week testing period, and the remaining assessment
schedule. Participants were encouraged to use the app as they
would normally but also to do so in a manner that allowed them
to provide honest and detailed feedback. If participants did not
engage in the app for multiple consecutive days, a member of
the study team contacted the participant on the third day to
ensure that the platform was functioning properly or to provide
a reminder of the upcoming end of the testing period. This type
of outreach occurred for 4 (36%) of the 11 participants.
Participants were sent links to complete the full baseline
assessment battery a second time on day 8. Following
completion of the postintervention questionnaires, participants
were invited to postintervention qualitative interviews. In these
interview 
sessions, 
participants 
connected 
to 
the
videoconferencing platform with their own smartphones such
that the interviewer could observe their interactions with the
platform in real time. During these interviews, participants were
asked (1) to provide ratings of (1A) how easy to use and (1B)
useful they found each feature, as well as (2) to show on their
devices something memorable and representative (positive or
negative) of their experience with Bolster. Participants were
compensated with a US $50 gift card per completed assessment
(i.e. baseline and post-test) as well as a US $40 gift card for
completing a qualitative interview.

Measures

Bolster was designed to have an impact on the primary targets
of illness knowledge, illness appraisals (caregiving-related
appraisals and psychosis-related appraisals), and coping in hopes
that changes in these primary targets would result in
improvements in the primary outcomes of caregiver distress
and expressed emotion. Illness knowledge was assessed with
the Knowledge About Schizophrenia Test (KAST) [49], an
18-item multiple-choice assessment that scored participants’
knowledge of the etiology, symptoms, and prognosis of
schizophrenia on the number of items answered correctly. The
Illness Perception Questionnaire for Schizophrenia: Relatives’
version (IPQSR) [50] is a self-report scale of caregivers’beliefs
about the severity, prognosis, and responsiveness to treatment
of mental illnesses and used to assess caregiver knowledge of
illness appraisals. We administered subscales focused on
emotional representation (high scores reflecting high levels of
distress related to the condition), incoherence (high scores
reflecting lacking an understanding of the illness), and the
measures of control (high scores reflecting belief that the actions
of the individual and the caregiver can affect the course of the
illness) and consequences (high scores reflecting a perception
that psychosis results in greater negative consequences for the
individual and the caregiver; given evidence from Lobban et al
[50] suggesting relationships between the caregiver version and
patient version of each consequences and control subscale, these
were combined for simplicity). Caregiving-related appraisals
were assessed with the Experiences of Caregiving Inventory
(ECI) [51], a 66-item assessment of the perceived impact of
caregiving on the individual’s life, with subscale scores for both
negative and positive experiences. Coping was assessed with 2
measures: the Brief Coping Orientation to Problems Experienced
Inventory (Brief-COPE) [52], a 28-item self-report scale of
coping skills in response to stressors, with 16 items assessing
coping skills proposed a priori as positive [51]; and the Coping
Self-Efficacy Scale (CSES) [53], a 26-item self-report
questionnaire measuring the perceived ability to cope with
various life challenges. Expressed emotion was assessed using
the Family Questionnaire (FQ) [54], a 20-item self-report
assessment of emotional expression in family members toward
patients with mental illness, and caregiver distress was assessed
a revised version of the General Health Questionnaire, 12-item
version (GHQ-12) [55,56], a self-administered questionnaire
that measures general psychological distress. The scale was
revised consistent with recent psychometric studies examining
the confounds of wording effects on this measure [57] in that
scale items were kept consistent (ie, ranging from not at all to
much more than usual). Positively worded items are reverse
scored such that higher scores indicate greater distress.

Analysis

Analyses were conducted using SPSS software (version 28.0;
IBM Corp). Acceptability and usability were assessed through
a review of individual items on the modified System Usability
Scale. With regard to use statistics, we also reviewed the
following metrics: (1) the percentage of days on which
participants opened Bolster of those days on which they had
access, (2) the number of minutes per day that participants used
Bolster, and (3) the number and rate of completion of Bolster

JMIR Ment Health 2023 | vol. 10 | e50522 | p. 4

lessons and practices. We conducted exploratory analyses of
clinical outcomes using paired sample 2-tailed t tests, assessing
significant within-individual change during the testing period
and reviewing effect sizes.

Ethical Considerations

The institutional review board of the University of Washington
approved all study procedures (STUDY00013334). All
participants provided informed consent to participate. Any
identifiable 
information 
was 
kept 
on 
secure 
and
password-protected servers; data were deidentified for analysis.

Results

Participant Characteristics

Participant demographics across study phases are provided in
Table 1. The sample consisted almost exclusively of women
(31/32, 97%) and parents (31/32, 97%) aged approximately 50

to 55 (mean 50.19, SD 10.74 in phase 1; mean 55.27, SD 7.85
in phase 2) years. The affected relative was on average aged in
their early to mid-20s and had been experiencing symptoms of
psychosis for approximately 3 years. The majority of participants
(23/32, 72%) were non-Hispanic White. Most of the caregivers
(22/32, 69%) endorsed a diagnosis of schizophrenia for their
loved one and endorsed symptoms and scores on the CGPS-R
that reflected a high severity of illness. As stipulated by our a
priori stratified recruitment strategy in phase 1, a total of 10
(48%) of the 21 participants were caring for individuals who
were not engaged in treatment or were in the process of
supporting their loved one seeking a higher level of care. The
remainder (11/21, 52%) were caring for individuals who were
already established in specialty mental health services. Across
phases, of participants whose loved ones were engaged in
specialty mental health services, the majority (17/22, 77%) were
engaged in coordinated specialty care programs. No participant
dropped out or refused to participate in any study procedures.

JMIR Ment Health 2023 | vol. 10 | e50522 | p. 5

Table 1. Demographic characteristics of study participants.

Sample 2: field trial (n=11)
Sample 1: needs assessment and prototyping (n=21)
Characteristics

55.27 (7.85)
50.19 (10.74)
Age (y), mean (SD)

24.55 (3.36)
23.33 (5.18)
Age (y) of loved one, mean (SD)

Sex, n (%)

11 (100)
20 (95)
Female

0 (0)
1 (5)
Male

Gender, n (%)

11 (100)
20 (95)
Woman

0 (0)
1 (5)
Man

Relationship to loved one, n (%)

11 (100)
20 (95)
Parent

0 (0)
1 (5)
Sibling

Race and ethnicity, n (%)

1 (9)
3 (14)
Asian

2 (18)
1 (5)
Black or African American

0 (0)
2 (10)
Hispanic White

8 (73)
15 (71)
Non-Hispanic White

Loved one’s diagnosisa, n (%)

8 (73)
14 (67)
Schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder

6 (55)
8 (38)
Bipolar disorder

3 (27)
5 (24)
PTSDb

2 (18)
6 (29)
Major depressive disorder

1 (9)
4 (19)
Other psychotic disorder

1 (9)
1 (5)
Not sure or prefer not to say

54.88 (10.10)
51.33 (9.88)
CGPS-Rc, mean (SD)

7.09 (2.98)
6.33 (2.33)
CGPS-R (number of items rated somewhat agree or higher), mean
(SD)

Symptoms endorsed, n (%)

10 (91)
17 (81)
Hallucinations

11 (100)
19 (91)
Thought disorder

10 (91)
20 (95)
Delusions

10 (91)
20 (95)
Bizarre or erratic behavior

7 (64)
11 (52)
Strange psychomotor behavior

Functional impacts endorsed, n (%)

11 (100)
19 (91)
Deterioration in daily functioning

11 (100)
18 (86)
Social withdrawal

7 (64)
13 (62)
Persistent self-neglect

10 (91)
20 (95)
Severe anxiety or agitation

3.63 (2.69)
2.93 (2.15)
Years since first aware of symptoms, mean (SD)

3.01 (2.34)
2.98 (2.07)
Years since first episode (if applicable), mean (SD)

aCoded nonexclusively.
bPTSD: posttraumatic stress disorder.
cCGPS-R: Caregiver Prime Screen–Revised.

JMIR Ment Health 2023 | vol. 10 | e50522 | p. 6

Phase 1: Intervention Development

Qualitative Needs Assessment

During the course of the analysis, the study team observed that
the structure of 2 qualitative interview prompts—unmet needs
and ideal supports (the magic wand question)—often generated
responses that aligned with one another or reiterated key themes
(eg, unmet need of actionable information related to help

seeking and ideal feature of an actionable guide to help seeking).
In light of this, our team analyzed and interpreted these items
together (refer to Table 2 for examples and theme frequencies).
Thus, these themes reflected salient areas to address in a digital
intervention based on the ways in which they represented current
unmet needs. Themes fell into four broad categories: (1)
communication coaching, (2) general psychoeducation, (3)
guide to treatment seeking, and (4) support for caregiver coping.

Table 2. Combination of themes from unmet needs and magic wand items linked to Bolster elements (n=21).

Bolster elements (ie, ways to address themes using scalable

self-guided mHealtha)

Theme fre-
quency, n
(%)

Theme identified in re-
sponse to magic wand
prompt

Theme fre-
quency, n
(%)

Category and theme identified
in response to unmet needs
prompt

Communication coaching

Interactive communication coaching such that the caregiver
can practice various communication skills in the app via
text or be coached through how to complete an in vivo
practice session

18 (86)
Communication with
loved one
•
•
11 (52)
Tool supporting com-
munication with loved
one

Lessons and practices that target stigmatizing attitudes
alongside information on strategies for how to talk with
others about your loved one’s experience

—b
7 (33)
Communication with
others about psychosis
•
No theme identified

Psychoeducation

Psychosis 101 lessons providing introduction to key points
about psychosis
11 (52)
General information and
knowledge of psychosis
•
•
11 (52)
Psychosis-related infor-
mation and guide to
recognizing symptoms
•
5 (24)

•
Expert Q&Ac

Psychosis 101 lessons providing introduction to key points
about treatment and recovery
7 (33)
General information and
knowledge of treatments
and medications

•
•
9 (43)
Treatment-related infor-
mation

Structured instrument to aid caregivers in tracking symptom
changes over time
—
No theme identified
•
•
6 (29)
Tracking loved one’s
symptom presentation

Guide to seeking services

Actionable step-by-step guide on how to encourage your
loved one to seek services, as well as how to go about
finding appropriate treatment for your loved one

11 (52)
Actionable guide to help
seeking
•
•
11 (52)
Actionable guide to
help seeking

Links to information about resources related to housing,
employment, or food security
5 (24)
Actionable guide to other
(ie, nonmedical) re-
sources

•
•
7 (33)
Actionable guide to
nonmedical or nonpsy-
chiatric resources

Step-by-step guide to evaluating and responding to a crisis,
as well as links to emergency resources if caregiver is re-
sponding to crisis in the moment

7 (33)
Planning for, and respond-
ing to, emergencies and
crisis situations

•
•
9 (43)
Crisis-related informa-
tion and support

Support for coping

Video and interactive text-based practices supporting cog-
nitive restructuring (eg, self-compassion), behavioral exer-
cises (eg, heathy habits), and simple mindfulness practices
(eg, deep breathing)

11 (52)
Support for caregiver’s
coping
•
•
9 (43)
Peer connections
•
•
8 (38)
Self-guided support for
caregiver well-being

amHealth: mobile health.
bNot applicable.
cQ&A: question and answer.

Responses related to communication were common and salient
in many interviews, at times regarding communication with
others (eg, family and friends) about the loved one’s symptoms
but primarily in relation to communicating directly with the
loved one and especially in response to difficult topics (eg, in

response to delusions, disorganization, or opposition to
engagement in mental health treatment):

How can you give her support when it doesn’t make
sense because the support she wants doesn’t make
any sense because it’s not real?...Learning how to

JMIR Ment Health 2023 | vol. 10 | e50522 | p. 7

support them without trying to make them think that
you believe what they’re saying is true. [Unmet needs,
participant 67]
So, if there was a nice app that said “Okay, people
in psychosis may interact with you like this and here
are some techniques to respond and here’s when you
need to disengage,” because it was clear to me at
some points that the best thing I could do was get out,
my presence was not helpful. [Magic wand, participant
5]
On the basis of insights from caregivers related to this topic,
the project team ensured that Bolster was primarily oriented
around communication skills, including both foundational
listening skills (eg, active listening) and those related to
particular challenging topics (eg, responding to delusions). This
content would provide both clear directives and opportunities
to practice new skills.

Caregivers also commonly reported feeling overwhelmed and
in need of support in coping with this demanding role. This
manifested in desires for reminders to engage in self-care and
supportive connections with peer caregivers who had shared
experiences:

How do you take care of yourself, remembering to
take care of yourself. Because you’re so much into
the problem, that then you forget you. So people forget
themselves to the extent that they start failing in their
jobs, and that’s important. [Unmet needs, participant
126]
[T]o have a trained person who can work with you
on developing boundaries and helping you create a
strategy, helping to hold you accountable to the things
you said you were going to do. That would be really
helpful. [Magic wand, participant 66]
Caregivers noted the common experience of neglecting their
own needs and well-being, often acknowledging the dissonance
between an awareness of the importance of one’s own needs
while lamenting the frequency with which they neglected them.

Caregivers emphasized 2 broad categories related to
informational needs as well, including general psychoeducation
(eg, information about psychosis as well as its treatment and
prognosis) and a guide to engaging in the mental health services
system, both for ongoing outpatient treatment and in response
to psychiatric crises. Many participants noted that although
informational resources exist on the web (and in concert with
treatment programs), it is not always easy to tell which sources
are trustworthy, and even among those that seem to be
trustworthy, many provide general overviews more effectively
targeting a general or academic audience rather than a caregiver
needing direct guidance in response to specific challenging
situations:

When you research something like that, you have to
read a lot of different sources, so having one place
that has as much information as it can pack in, that
explains in a way that anyone can understand. [Unmet
needs, participant 73]

I didn’t know how to find support, I didn’t have a list
of potential therapists outside of the [treatment]
program...He came home untreated in a lot of ways
and I didn’t have any direction on how to find those
resources. [Unmet needs, participant 82]
In response to the magic wand item, a number of caregivers
(6/21, 29%) also reported a desire to have the ability to assess,
track, and monitor changes in symptoms over time, either to be
able to determine whether symptoms were improving or to more
easily report changes to providers at future clinical visits. Two
additional prompts in the qualitative interview focused
specifically on the positive features of existing resources that
caregivers had used for support as well as attributes that were
negative or lacking. First, digital or web-based resources that
caregivers had found useful were most commonly described as
detailed (12/21, 57%), hopeful (11/21, 52%), and providing
clear actionable steps for help seeking (4/21, 19%) or in
communicating with their loved one (3/21, 14%). Frustrations
that were related to web-based resources often stemmed from
such resources simply being absent (7/21, 33%) or the fact that
existing resources were provided in the context of clinical
services that caregivers found to be inadequate or unhelpful
(10/21, 48%); were lacking in detail (3/21, 14%); discouraging
(5/21, 24%); or, again, lacking clear actionable guidance (7/21,
33%):

I mean there’s a lot of general information about
psychosis, Google is there...When you see somebody
who’s in psychosis, you don’t need to read an article
about what is psychosis. You’re like, “I know what
psychosis is, thank you.” But what do you do?
General information isn’t helpful when you are in a
crisis situation. [Disappointing resources, participant
11]

Prototyping

Open-ended feedback on the Bolster prototype was overall
positive, but it also identified areas for improvement.
Participants reported finding the information useful and new
and the tone of the content to be encouraging and comforting.
Several participants were particularly enthusiastic about the
opportunities for interactive practices and reacted positively to
opportunities to write their responses into the app, which made
the platform feel more personalized.

Most notable among areas for improvement was the
messaging-style interface. Participants expressed some
frustration with the fact that this method of delivery was not
self-paced (eg, “It’s choppy”), and others were confused by
whether and from whom app content was being delivered
conversationally (eg, “Who am I talking to?”). In addition, many
participants expressed a desire for more detailed information
in response to the sample psychoeducational prompt, but they
also expressed some reticence about providing too much text.
One comment that balanced these concerns was a suggestion
to provide information in diverse presentation modes (eg, video
and audio in addition to text) as well as highlighting key or
important points within larger chunks of text. Participants also
stressed the importance of setting expectations in advance of
each Bolster module (eg, providing a summary statement of the

JMIR Ment Health 2023 | vol. 10 | e50522 | p. 8

purpose of a module and a time estimate). Several participants
reported a desire for a symptom tracker that they could use to
track and follow changes in their loved one’s symptoms over
time, and, if necessary, share these updates with a provider at
a future visit. Most other comments pertained to suggestions
for additional content (eg, crisis line telephone numbers and
information on communicating with others about psychosis)
and minor changes to navigation (eg, adding home, back, and
next buttons) or display (eg, greater color contrast and removing
particular icons).

Insights and Design Objectives

Design objectives were identified based on insights collected
from qualitative interviews and prototyping sessions. First, our
team identified content areas to develop based on the qualitative
needs assessment, including communication coaching, general
psychoeducation, information on seeking services, and support
for coping. Given the fact that many caregivers expressed
concerns about their difficulty fitting in additional activities or
practices because of the current demands on their time, we
resolved to create modules that were brief and simple and that
normalized difficulties in making time to engage in the system.
In addition, it was important for Bolster content to communicate
information with an appropriate tone that balanced accurate
information about the seriousness of psychosis with appropriate
levity and positive messages about recovery.

Second, participants expressed a desire for clear actionable
guidance rather than more general psychoeducational
information. On the basis of these comments, a key guiding
design principle for Bolster was to provide information and
support that was targeted and actionable, as opposed to generic.
The Bolster app could provide ongoing scaffolding and support
for caregivers that differs from informational websites that are
designed to provide overviews of key topics in a few visits (or
a single visit). These comments resulted in the proposal of new
features, including an index of clear directive guides in
responding to common challenging situations (refer to Action
Plans in the next subsection); curated links to resources,
additional information, and treatment listings (refer to Resources
in the next subsection); and the ability to track the loved one’s
symptoms over time (refer to Tracking in the next subsection).

Third, participants had difficulties with content delivered in a
messaging-style interface. Our team responded to these concerns
by altering the method of presentation of psychoeducational
content. All message-style interactions were removed. In their
place, all psychoeducation lessons were delivered through 2
modalities: videos of a clinician explaining a key idea and a
text-based carousel. In these carousels, participants could swipe
through a series of screens that each introduced 1 key idea in 1
or 2 sentences at a time with a related illustration or icon. This
method responds to several key comments made by participants:
it is self-paced, highlights key information, and reduces the
overall amount of text on each page.

Fourth, given participants’ positive reaction to interactive
features (eg, those where they could enter information specific
to their situation) and their expressed need for communication
skills coaching, more interactive text-based modules were added
such that each lesson introducing a skill included an
accompanying practice; for example, a video and carousel would
introduce the communication skill of using open-ended questions
(ie, the lesson), and an interactive text-based module (ie, the
practice) would prompt the user to brainstorm ways to adjust
their communication style to include more open-ended
questions. The user could choose to engage in either the lesson
or the practice on its own or one after the other. Finally, to
address concerns about user privacy, our team designed Bolster
to only save written text on the user’s device (and not in a
database); thus, no one—neither the app developers nor the
study team members—could access what the user wrote in
free-response items. On the basis of these conclusions, new
mock-ups were developed by the research team mapping out
design objectives, and these were incorporated by the software
developers who built the final source code for Bolster.

The Bolster mHealth Intervention

The final Bolster mobile app is a web-based mobile app for
iOS, with the test version available on the Apple App Store.
Intervention content was drafted by the study team, 3 of whom
are clinical psychologists with specialized expertise in cognitive
behavioral therapy for psychosis and/or family psychoeducation.
The Bolster app’s components are based on the cognitive model
of caregiving [16], according to which caregiver appraisals lead
to emotional and behavioral changes that affect interactions
with the affected individual and with service providers. Bolster
aims to improve illness and caregiving appraisals and support
coping through 4 primary sections (Figure 1). Caregiving
provides users with psychoeducation and communication
coaching through paired lessons and practices. Self-care
similarly offers paired lessons and practices; however, these
focus specifically on skills related to managing one’s own stress
and well-being (eg, mindfulness, behavioral activation, and
self-compassion). Resources offer links to external web pages,
treatment listings, and videos of young adults and family
members with lived experience describing their experiences.
Within the Resources tab, the Action Plans feature provides
users with specific targeted guidance in responding to
challenging situations related to caregiving (eg, responding to
delusions and encouraging help seeking). Finally, Tracking
provides users with the ability to enter their perception of their
loved ones’ symptoms (based on Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition [DSM-5] symptoms
of psychosis [58,59]), and then graphs and indexes these ratings
so that changes can be tracked over time. Importantly, Bolster
was designed such that no identifying information is collected
by the app, and nor are written responses stored anywhere in
the app or in a database, thus providing users with privacy. Even
so, data are encrypted in transit and at rest using secure HTTP
and transport layer security.

JMIR Ment Health 2023 | vol. 10 | e50522 | p. 9

Figure 1. Screenshots of the Bolster final version: (A) the caregiving main menu screen, (B) an example of a lesson page delivered through a swiping
carousel, (C) the action plans menu, and (D) the tracking graph view.

Phase 2: Field Trial

Use of Bolster

All participants who installed Bolster completed the study, and
none were lost to follow-up. Participants opened Bolster on
66% (58/88) of the days that it was available and on average
had Bolster open for 26.64 (SD 13.61) minutes per use day.
This equated to 14.87 (SD 7.21) minutes per day on average
during the testing period overall. Participants opened 22.91 (SD
17.69; 2.86/participant/d) lessons and 10.91 (SD 8.80;
1.32/participant/d) practices on average. Completion rates for
practices were quite high: participants fully completed 86.5%
(218/252) of the lessons and 80% (96/120) of the practices that
they initiated. Among the lessons opened, 47.6% (120/252)
pertained to psychoeducation about psychosis and treatment,
29.8% (75/252) to communication skills, and 22.6% (57/252)
to self-care skills. Practices were somewhat evenly split between
their 2 categories: communication skills (70/120, 58.3%) and
self-care (50/120, 41.7%).

Usability and Acceptability of Bolster

Participants also reported that Bolster was highly usable. All
items on the modified System Usability Scale can be found in
Table 3. Of the 11 caregivers, 10 (91%) reported that they would
recommend Bolster to another caregiver and that they would
use Bolster if they had access to it. Most of the caregivers (9/11,
82%) also reported that they were satisfied with Bolster and
would like to use it often. Negatively worded items also
consistently reflected positive experiences with Bolster because
no participant reported finding Bolster to be inconsistent,
awkward, or needing lots of training to use. Nearly all
participants (10/11, 91%) disagreed with the item stating that
Bolster was very complicated. In postintervention qualitative
interviews, participants rated (on scales of usefulness and ease
of use ranging from 1 to 10) overall Bolster usefulness on
average as 8.95 (SD 0.98) out of 10 and gave an average
easy-to-use score of 9.36 (SD 0.50) out of 10. Notably, no
participant gave an overall easy-to-use rating of <9 or an overall
usefulness score of <7. Qualitative comments typically
emphasized how participants enjoyed that Bolster was
comprehensive and detailed, that it was simple, had a clean
design, and was easy to use.

JMIR Ment Health 2023 | vol. 10 | e50522 | p. 10

Table 3. Participant usability and acceptability ratings (n=11).

Agree, n (%)
Neutral, n (%)
Disagree, n (%)
Items

Acceptability

10 (91)
1 (9)
0 (0)
“If I have access to Bolster, I will use it”

10 (91)
1 (9)
0 (0)
“I would recommend Bolster to another caregiver”

9 (82)
2 (18)
0 (0)
“I think that I would like to use Bolster often”

9 (82)
2 (18)
0 (0)
“I am satisfied with Bolster”

7 (70)
2 (20)
1 (10)
“I feel I need to have Bolster” (n=10)

6 (55)
4 (36)
1 (9)
“Bolster is fun to use”

Usability

11 (100)
0 (0)
0 (0)
“Overall, I am satisfied with how easy it is to use Bolster”

11 (100)
0 (0)
0 (0)
“I felt comfortable using Bolster”

11 (100)
0 (0)
0 (0)
“It was easy to learn to use Bolster”

10 (91)
1 (9)
0 (0)
“I found that the different parts of Bolster work well together”

10 (91)
1 (9)
0 (0)
“I would imagine that most people would learn to use Bolster very quickly”

10 (91)
1 (9)
0 (0)
“I felt very confident using Bolster”

10 (91)
1 (9)
0 (0)
“I was able to complete the lessons and practices quickly in Bolster”

10 (91)
1 (9)
0 (0)
“The information provided for Bolster was easy to understand”

10 (91)
1 (9)
0 (0)
“How things appeared on the screen was clear”

9 (82)
2 (18)
0 (0)
“I thought Bolster was easy to use”

9 (82)
2 (18)
0 (0)
“Bolster helped me with caregiving”

9 (82)
2 (18)
0 (0)
“Bolster was interactive enough”

8 (73)
3 (27)
0 (0)
“Whenever I made a mistake using Bolster, I could recover easily and quickly”

7 (70)
3 (30)
0 (0)
“It was easy to find the information I needed” (n=10)

6 (56)
5 (46)
0 (0)
“Bolster works the way I want it to work”

1 (6)
0 (0)
10 (91)
“I found Bolster to be very complicated”a

0 (0)
1 (9)
10 (91)
“I think that I would need the support of a technical person to be able to use Bolster”a

0 (0)
0 (0)
11 (100)
“I thought there was too much inconsistency in Bolster”a

0 (0)
0 (0)
11 (100)
“I found Bolster very awkward to use”a

0 (0)
0 (0)
11 (100)
“I needed to learn a lot of things before I could get going with Bolster”a

aReverse coded such that disagreement denotes higher perceived usability or acceptability.

Effects on Targets and Outcomes

An exploratory examination of changes from baseline to posttest
assessment (Tables 4 and 5) showed improvements in clinical
targets. Participants experienced improvements consistent with
medium effects in 3 kinds of illness appraisal or knowledge
variables—emotional representation (Cohen d=0.63), coherence
(Cohen d=0.55), and consequences (Cohen d=0.68)—as well
as in coping self-efficacy (Cohen d=0.54). They experienced
small improvements in coping skills practiced (Cohen d=0.27)
and appraisals of caregiving experiences as positive (Cohen
d=0.26). With regard to primary outcomes, participants
experienced large improvements in overall distress (Cohen

d=1.77) and medium-level improvements in expressed emotion
(Cohen d=0.52). All assessed outcomes moved in the direction
associated with improvement, with the exception of illness
knowledge and appraisals related to the controllability of
psychosis, each of which did not seem to change during the
study period. Notably, illness knowledge scores seemed to be
affected by ceiling effects because many participants received
a high score on the KAST at baseline (mean 16.72 correct out
of 20 compared with psychometric work on the initial
development of the KAST [49] suggesting typical average scores
among family members of 10.9 out of 20 or among lay
community members of 9.3 out of 20).

JMIR Ment Health 2023 | vol. 10 | e50522 | p. 11

Table 4. Baseline and posttest scores of intervention targets.

2-tailed
Posttest score,
mean (SD)
Baseline score,
mean (SD)
Measure
Variablea

Cohen db
P value
t test (df)

−0.09
.78
−0.28 (10)
16.63 (2.01)
16.72 (1.19)
KASTc
Illness knowledge

0.55
.10
−1.81 (10)
8.82 (2.56)
10.18 (2.64)
IPQSRd: coherence
Illness knowledge

0.63
.06
−2.10 (10)
29.82 (5.91)
31.90 (5.45)
IPQSR: emotional representation
Illness appraisals

0.68
.07
−2.03 (10)
68.27 (10.26)
71.72 (8.54)
IPQSR: consequences
Illness appraisals

−0.09
.78
−0.29 (10)
32.72 (2.97)
33.00 (2.76)
IPQSR: control
Illness appraisals

0.19
.55
−0.62 (10)
75.58 (33.81)
77.55 (33.72)
ECIe: negative
Caregiving appraisals

0.26
.42
0.85 (10)
37.18 (7.47)
34.90 (9.57)
ECI: positive
Caregiving appraisals

0.27
.39
0.91 (10)
25.86 (7.20)
23.97 (9.08)
Brief COPEf: positive coping
Coping

0.54
.10
1.79 (10)
199.57 (27.77)
168.18 (59.10)
CSESg: total
Coping

aMean imputation (by factor-analytically defined subscale) was used to replace missing values.
bCohen d values are scaled such that a positive value denotes movement in the hypothesized direction.
cKAST: Knowledge About Schizophrenia Test.
dIPQSR: Illness Perception Questionnaire for Schizophrenia: Relatives’ version.
eECI: Experiences of Caregiving Inventory.
fBrief COPE: Brief Coping Orientation to Problems Experienced Inventory.
gCSES: Coping Self-Efficacy Scale.

Table 5. Baseline and posttest scores of intervention outcomes.

2-tailed
Posttest score, mean (SD)
Baseline score, mean (SD)
Measure
Variablea

Cohen db
P value
t test (df)

1.77
<.001
−5.88 (10)
11.35 (2.34)
17.48 (3.49)
GHQ-12c
Distress

0.52
.12
−1.72 (10)
46.64 (10.92)
50.22 (11.14)
FQd
Expressed emotion

aMean imputation (by factor-analytically defined subscale) was used to replace missing values.
bCohen d values are scaled such that a positive value denotes movement in the hypothesized direction.
cGHQ-12: General Health Questionnaire, 12-item version.
dFQ: Family Questionnaire.

Discussion

Principal Findings

mHealth could play a useful role in supporting caregivers of
young adults at risk for psychosis. mHealth interventions are
scalable, acceptable, and can provide in-the-moment support
well suited to the challenges of caregiving. Our team developed,
optimized, and tested Bolster, an mHealth intervention designed
in response to the needs and preferences identified by members
of this population. In a qualitative needs assessment, caregivers
expressed interest in a tool that provided actionable guidance,
opportunities for personalization, and the ability to track changes
over time. Prototyping revealed preferences for static text and
video (rather than messaging-style interactions), personalization,
and interactive features. The intervention that was optimized
based on this feedback—Bolster—provides written and
video-based lessons and practices focused on psychoeducation,
communication skills, and self-care, as well as assessments to

track changes in the relative’s symptoms and links to curated
resources related to psychosis, treatment, and treatment listings.
In a 1-week usability field trial, Bolster seemed promising.
Participants found it to be acceptable, usable, and reported
marked changes in their appraisals of illness, distress, and
expressed emotion. Given the nature of this study as a usability
field trial, the lack of a control condition, and the absence of
hypotheses about clinical targets and outcomes, the results
related to intervention effects are highly preliminary and should
be interpreted with caution. However, they do seem to reflect
that providing mHealth specific to caregiving support is
promising and that additional, larger, controlled studies are
warranted.

Our systematic Bolster development process led to several clear
conclusions about the needs and preferences of caregivers. First,
participant responses suggested needs in a few key areas:
psychoeducation, information about seeking services, coping,
and communication skills. Second, many caregivers expressed

JMIR Ment Health 2023 | vol. 10 | e50522 | p. 12

frustration with the lack of actionable information available on
the internet today and described finding general information
about psychosis that did not provide clear guidance in how to
respond to caregiving-related challenges. This reflects previous
qualitative work in which caregivers expressed the desire for
step-by-step guides or instructional resources [4]. Others were
disappointed when they found information that they found
demoralizing or discouraging about psychosis and its prognosis.
Previous literature suggests that caregivers can receive
stigmatizing reactions from general practitioners and hospital
staff, and the ongoing stigma of psychotic illness persists as a
barrier to information and treatment seeking [60,61].

Initial prototype usability testing led to several key principles
for the optimization of Bolster. Most notably, the initial
messaging-style interface of the prototype seemed to have
several limitations, including difficulties in pacing, confusion
about the messaging-style interface, and the lack of a mechanism
for highlighting key information. It is unclear based on this
feedback whether these identify generalizable limitations with
messaging-style interventions or chatbots in this population or
whether these comments were specific to our prototype. Many
other examples of rule-based mental health chatbots have
demonstrated promising usability [62,63], and recent and
ongoing developments in language-based artificial intelligence
technologies [64-66] will likely lead to concurrent innovations
that facilitate positive user experiences with these tools. By
contrast, many participants reacted positively to interactive text
modules wherein they could enter particulars related to their
caregiving situation. Such interactive features seem to be linked
with improvements in help-seeking behaviors in studies of
interventions of this construct [67]. Additional usability changes
responded to user comments related to clear expectation setting
(eg, time estimates and a summary statement describing
modules) and changes to navigation (eg, consistent back, home,
and next buttons). The subsequent field trial suggested that the
user-centered design process was effective. All participants who
completed baseline assessments engaged in the intervention
and were retained at 1-week follow-up. Participants provided
highly positive usability feedback: nearly all participants (10/11,
91%) reported that they would use Bolster if they had continued
access and that they would recommend it to a fellow caregiver.
Although exploratory, preliminary analyses of clinical effects
unveiled a promising result and suggest that a sufficiently
powered trial of Bolster is warranted. Participants provided
scores indicating changes in illness knowledge, appraisals,
coping self-efficacy, distress, and expressed emotion. Other
caregiver-focused interventions, including those delivered in
person by providers [68,69] or remotely in asynchronous
web-based interactions [70,71], have demonstrated similar
promising effects; however, as a fully self-guided mobile
intervention, Bolster may have several advantages: it is scalable,
can be used repeatedly over long periods of time, and is well
suited for in-the-moment needs.

Limitations

This study has several limitations. First, our user-centered
development process was meant to solicit detailed guidance
from caregivers with lived experience; study conclusions are
drawn from small samples and may not generalize to all
members of this population. Furthermore, given the fact that
recruitment occurred primarily on the internet, participants may
be drawn from a population that is already predisposed to digital
tools. Second, design objectives for Bolster were constrained
to some extent by predefined project goals. Bolster was a priori
proposed as a self-guided mobile intervention. Thus, caregiver
feedback related to intervention features that could require
clinical support (eg, an expert question-and-answer feature) or
social features (eg, peer forums) was incorporated into Bolster
in a manner consistent with these a priori constraints (eg,
providing 
clinician 
videos 
rather 
than 
synchronous
communication and links to support websites rather than the
development of new tools). Third, field trial results may speak
primarily to caregiver experiences during a test period rather
than the real-world deployment of Bolster. Participants were
likely motivated to provide helpful feedback, and this likely
affected their frequency of use of the intervention, particularly
given the fact that the field trial lasted just 1 week. Interactions
with the study team also likely encouraged use. This is
particularly the case given the fact that participants received
outreach to ensure that the app was functioning. The conditions
of a usability field trial may not fully reflect how such an
intervention would be deployed under real-world conditions.
Finally, analysis of clinical effects was exploratory. The trial
was brief and conducted in a small sample of caregivers already
connected to treatment.

Conclusions

The development of Bolster responds to the identified lack of
mobile interventions designed for caregivers [40]. Our team’s
development of Bolster was grounded in user-centered design
and thus seems well suited for future testing to determine
whether mHealth can assist caregivers in their critical roles of
early identification, treatment facilitation, and ongoing support.
These results add to the growing body of literature supporting
the use of digital technologies to reduce barriers to treatment
and recovery for families affected by psychosis. Bolster seems
to respond to specific user-identified interest in more structured,
directive, and concrete guidance, as well as support that attends
to the emotional experience of caregiving. Future work will
examine whether Bolster is an effective tool to support early
psychosis caregivers, and our findings here suggest that similar
digital approaches to support caregivers of individuals
experiencing mental health conditions may have promise. These
results demonstrate promise regarding the use of mHealth to
support caregivers who—in many settings—lack structured
supports to meet their own needs.