https://doi.org/10.1177/1932296820937347

Journal of Diabetes Science and Technology
2021, Vol. 15(5) 1121­–1133
© 2020 Diabetes Technology Society
Article reuse guidelines: 
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
DOI: 10.1177/1932296820937347
journals.sagepub.com/home/dst

Original Article

Introduction

Diabetes mellitus (DM) during pregnancy is an increas-
ingly prevalent public health problem, driven by the grow-
ing obesity epidemic.1-7 Both gestational diabetes mellitus 
(GDM) and type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) pose risks to 
the health of the pregnant woman and her fetus, such as 
cesarean delivery, hypertensive disorders, macrosomia, and 
neonatal metabolic complications.8,9 Moreover, racial, eth-
nic, and socioeconomic disparities related to DM during 
pregnancy exist, with minority and low-income women at 
greater risk of GDM, T2DM, and recurrence of GDM.2,7-17

937347 DSTXXX10.1177/1932296820937347Journal of Diabetes Science and TechnologyYee et al
research-article2020

1Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Division of Maternal-Fetal 
Medicine, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, 
IL, USA
2Institute for Sexual and Gender Minority Health and Wellbeing, 
Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA
3Departments of Obstetrics and Gynecology and Preventive Medicine, 
Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA

Lynn M. Yee, MD, MPH, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 
Division of Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Northwestern University Feinberg 
School of Medicine, 250 E. Superior Street, #5-2145, Chicago, IL 60611-
3008, USA. 

Patient and Provider Perspectives on a 
Novel Mobile Health Intervention for 
Low-Income Pregnant Women With 
Gestational or Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus

Lynn M. Yee, MD, MPH1 
, Karolina Leziak, BA1,  
Jenise Jackson, MPH1, Angelina Strohbach, BA1,  
Rana Saber, MS, MSL2, Charlotte M. Niznik, APRN, CDE1, 
and Melissa A. Simon, MD, MPH3

Abstract
Background: Management of diabetes mellitus (DM) during pregnancy is burdensome given the intensity of required 
patient engagement and skills, especially for women with greater social disadvantage. Mobile health (mHealth) technology is 
a promising avenue for DM health promotion, but few evidence-based mHealth tools exist for pregnancy. Thus, we designed 
a theory-driven mHealth tool called SweetMama, and planned a priori to gather usability and acceptability feedback from 
patients and providers to ensure a user-centered design.
Methods: In this qualitative assessment, we solicited patient and provider feedback on this novel educational and motivational 
mobile application for low-income pregnant women with type 2 or gestational DM. Patients and providers participated 
in separate focus groups. Participants shared feedback regarding SweetMama’s visual appeal, architecture, and content. 
SweetMama modifications were made in an iterative manner. Transcripts were analyzed using the constant comparative 
technique.
Results: Patient (N = 16) and provider (N = 29) feedback was organized as positive feedback, negative feedback, or 
additional desired features. Within each category, themes addressed SweetMama visual features, information, or functional 
features. The majority of negative feedback was addressed and multiple desired features were implemented via iterative 
application development, resulting in a user-friendly, efficient, and potentially impactful mHealth app designed to support the 
unique needs of this population.
Conclusions: SweetMama users had largely positive feedback about the mHealth tool’s appeal, content, and functionality. 
Suggested improvements were incorporated in preparation for further evaluation steps, which include longitudinal usability 
testing, feasibility trials, and larger trials to determine the efficacy of SweetMama use for improving perinatal outcomes.

Keywords
behavioral intervention, gestational diabetes, mobile application, pregnancy, qualitative research, type 2 diabetes, user-
centered design

1122	

Treatment of abnormal glucose homeostasis during preg-
nancy reduces the risk of adverse outcomes.18,19 However, 
logistical, social, financial, informational, access-related, 
and attitudinal challenges to DM management exist.20-27 
Furthermore, given the complexity and intensity of perinatal 
DM management, women must be equipped with a multitude 
of communication, literacy, numeracy, problem-solving, and 
organizational skills to optimize outcomes.20,21 Thus, DM 
self-management during pregnancy is burdensome and 
challenging, particularly for women with greater social dis-
advantage.25 Although traditional DM behavior support 
interventions such as in-person coaching can be effective for 
nonpregnant adults,28 such interventions have been less 
commonly studied in pregnancy and scalable interventions 
that promote sustainable behavior change, address dispari-
ties, and are specific to pregnancy are needed.29,30

Mobile health (mHealth) technology is a promising ave-
nue for promoting sustainable behavior change, addressing 
disparities, and promoting self-efficacy.30 mHealth technol-
ogy has been effective in supporting DM management in 
nonpregnant populations.31 Furthermore, work by Alqudah 
et al indicates that women are willing to utilize mHealth 
technology to remotely manage their pregnancy, under man-
agement by healthcare staff, suggesting potential accept-
ability of various mHealth tools.32 However, many programs 
lack rigorous evidence-based or user-centered design,33 and 
DM-specific perinatal mHealth interventions, particularly 
for low-income populations, are absent.34 Additionally, 
although some commercial mHealth products are designed 
to enhance glucose logging or track personal progress, inter-
ventions largely fail to promote the skills required for 
sustainable and successful DM self-management during 
pregnancy.35-37

To fill this gap, we initiated a multiphase project to 
develop a mHealth intervention to support pregnant 
women with DM, with particular attention to low-income 
women. In prior work we developed a model of barriers to 
self-care and mitigating factors, which served as a founda-
tion for a text message-based mHealth intervention 
designed to facilitate DM self-management during preg-
nancy.25-27,38 Feedback from this text messaging phase 
indicated that although the curriculum was well received, 
users desired a more extensive and interactive platform. 
We subsequently developed SweetMama, a mobile-
friendly web-based application. SweetMama delivers a 
comprehensive educational and motivational DM-focused 
curriculum tailored for low-income pregnant women with 
GDM or T2DM with the long-term goal to improve peri-
natal DM-related outcomes. Adopting a user-centered 
design approach, the objective of this study was to gather 
SweetMama feedback from patients and healthcare pro-
viders, which informed the iterative modifications neces-
sary to enhance the application’s usability, functionality, 
and accessibility. This analysis reports on this feedback 
and modification phase.

Methods

Overview

This prospective, qualitative study was designed to elicit 
feedback from patients and healthcare providers regarding 
usability of the SweetMama prototype. Data from this phase 
represent participants’ first exposure to SweetMama. Patient 
and healthcare provider participants were recruited from the 
Prentice Ambulatory Care practice at Northwestern Memorial 
Hospital, a large academic medical center in Chicago, 
Illinois, from August 2017 to March 2019. The first phase 
(August 2017 to July 2018) focused on patient users and the 
second phase (December 2018 to March 2019) focused on 
providers. All participants provided written informed con-
sent. This study was approved by the Northwestern University 
Institutional Review Board.

Participants

Patients were eligible for study participation if they were at 
least 18 years old, diagnosed with GDM or T2DM, spoke 
English as a first language, and received public insurance 
for prenatal care. Patients were recruited during routine 
clinical care in the DM-focused clinic within this practice. 
Test smartphones were provided for patient focus groups so 
that smartphone access was not a barrier to participation. 
Patient focus groups were conducted separately from pro-
vider focus groups.
Any provider with experience treating or educating preg-
nant women with DM was eligible for participation. Eligible 
providers included physicians, nurses, medical assistants, 
and health educators. All providers were over age 18 and 
English-speaking. Provider participants were recruited by 
conducting a review of the institution’s clinical personnel 
records. Provider focus groups were intentionally composed 
of providers of different types. All providers used their own 
smartphones for participation.

Focus Group Conduct

Participants were organized into focus groups of three to 
seven individuals. Focus groups were conducted by a 
trained research assistant using a semi-structured inter-
view guide to facilitate open-ended conversation. The 
e-Health “User-Task-Context” (UTC) usability frame-
work was used to develop the interview guide and frame 
the direction of probes; the UTC helps clarify user require-
ments and preferences during development stages of novel 
eHealth/mHealth programs.39 During focus groups, par-
ticipants were presented with an early, minimally func-
tional SweetMama prototype and were instructed to think 
aloud as they interacted with the prototype. The “Think 
Aloud” protocol is a common approach to usability testing 
where participants verbalize their thoughts as they per-
form a certain task.40 This approach permits investigators

1123

to evaluate the ease of learning the system and provides 
first-hand information about design problems.41 In this 
case, participants were asked to familiarize themselves 
with SweetMama and use it how they would in a real-
world setting. Development of the application occurred 
iteratively such that different participants were not always 
presented with the same version of the application (ie, 
prototypes often reflected modifications not featured in 
prior versions). No at-home use of SweetMama was 
included. Focus groups lasted 60-75 minutes and were 
recorded on a digital audio recorder. All participants were 
compensated with gift cards.

SweetMama Features and Development

Original SweetMama features, developed based on estab-
lished health behavior theories as well as feedback from 
a prior text message-only phase, involved SweetMama 
users receiving three motivational and/or informational 
tip messages, and one individualized goal message, per 
week.25-27,38,42-45 Messages are designed to promote self-effi-
cacy, healthcare engagement, and health knowledge.46-48 
Message content addresses knowledge regarding DM and 
pregnancy and provides information tailored for the needs 
of low-income individuals, such as inclusion of regional 
resources like local food banks and community centers, 
while also ensuring culturally competent content. Messages 
were tested in prior phases of work and adapted as needed.38 
Given that low health literacy has been identified to be a 
barrier to DM self-management in this population, content 
was also delivered via simple and straightforward language, 

tailored such that the majority of content was at a sixth grade 
reading level or less. Individualized goals, based on the 
goals for DM self-management by the American Association 
of Diabetes Educators, are set by patients and providers 
together during routine healthcare, and are delivered weekly 
via SweetMama to serve as a reminder and benchmark for 
goal-oriented behaviors.46,47 The motivational, tip, and goal 
messages allow users to either exit the message or press a 
button taking them to more detailed information related to 
the message (Figure 1a and b). In the original version of 
SweetMama, these messages appeared on a home screen, 
but based on patient’s feedback (discussed below), later ver-
sions experienced by patient and provider participants 
housed messages in a message center (Figure 2). The home 
screen (Figure 3a–c) in later versions was reserved for per-
sonalized information, including the participant’s first name, 
gestational age, next appointment, and a technical support 
request portal.
Also based on early patient user requests, the versions of 
SweetMama experienced by later patient focus groups and 
all provider focus groups included a library component. 
The library consisted of: (1) trusted online educational 
materials from reputable sources such as the American 
Diabetes Association and other culturally tailored diabetes-
specific resources, (2) clinic-based resources consisting 
of DM-focused handouts provided to patients in face-to-
face care at this site, and (3) a recipe repository. While mes-
sages were used to convey quick tips and motivations, the 
library resources are intended for in-depth education. Users 
can “Favorite” preferred messages and library resources for 
later viewing.

Figure 1.  Example of SweetMama motivational message.

1124	

Analysis

Interviews were professionally transcribed and uploaded 
to a secure, qualitative data-organizing platform (www.
dedoose.com). Transcripts were analyzed using the con-
stant comparative method.49,50 In this method, transcripts 
are read line-by-line and are coded for recurring concepts 
called subthemes. Trained research assistants indepen-
dently coded transcripts and met regularly to review, 
negate, and modify subthemes, and eventually collapse 
subthemes into broad, overarching themes. Analysis was 
focused around the central goal of improving SweetMama 

to optimize the user experience before proceeding to sub-
sequent stages of testing. We planned to undergo iterative 
thematic saturation analysis throughout the investigation 
in order to determine appropriate sample size. Recruitment 
of new participants ceased at saturation, or the point at 
which the dataset captured a wide range of responses, 
analyses of transcripts yielded redundant themes, and 
recruitment of additional participants would likely not 
yield novel results. Results presented below reflect the 
themes and subthemes in the context of their user type, 
stage of research, and the actions taken in response to the 
feedback.

Figure 2.  Example of early and current SweetMama message center home page.

Figure 3.  Progression of SweetMama home menu and home screen design.

1125

Results

During the study period, 16 patients and 29 providers partici-
pated in focus groups (Table 1). Patients were largely non-
Hispanic black (88%). Half had T2DM and half had GDM. 
Patient focus groups were discontinued after 16 participants 
were enrolled when thematic analysis demonstrated full satu-
ration and provided sufficient information to move 
SweetMama development forward. In contrast, more than 
this number of healthcare provider interviews were required 
before saturation was reached due to the diversity of their per-
spectives. Providers largely identified as female and included 
a diverse range of professional backgrounds (Table 1).
Based on thematic analysis, data were organized into three 
overarching categories: positive feedback, negative feedback, 
and additional desired features for SweetMama. Within each 
category, we further organized data into themes based on 
whether they referred to visual features, information, or func-
tional features. Each theme contained specific subthemes, 
described below.

Positive Feedback

First, participants expressed satisfaction with multiple 
SweetMama visual features, including personalization, aes-
thetic appeal, and content organization (Table 2). Regarding 
personalization, participants (N = 9 patients; N = 6 provid-
ers) viewing later versions (after SweetMama was modified 
based on early user feedback) liked the personalized home 
screen, which featured a welcome message with the user’s 
name, gestational age, and estimated due date (Figure 3b). 
The more developed home screen also included the patient’s 
next appointment (Figure 3c). Aesthetic appeal was also 
high; patient participants (N = 11) reported enjoying the 
SweetMama icon and the color scheme. Notably, patients 
enjoyed the pastel color theme, which was described as 
“fun” and reminiscent of “cotton candy.” Finally, a majority 
of patient participants (N = 11 patients) described liking the 
content organization, which included the separation of con-
tents between tabs, the ability to see all messages on a single 
page, and the ability to navigate to each tab from the home 
screen.
Second, both patients and providers expressed satisfac-
tion with the information in SweetMama and its presentation 
(Table 2). Predominantly provider participants noted that the 
language used in goal and motivation messages was easy to 
understand and had a “positive” and “upbeat” tone. One pro-
vider commented on the lighthearted language of the mes-
sages, saying, “It’s. . .not like someone is trying to lecture 
you,” while a patient, after reading a motivational message, 
stated, “. . . that is what will be a little more helpful in the 
messages.” Another provider said, “I like the language you 
mentioned like, ‘I’m still working on this goal,’” language 
that was seen as having an encouraging effect on those who 
fell short of achieving their goal. Patient (N = 2) and 

provider (N = 4) participants also stated that the SweetMama 
content was practical and helpful. One resident physician 
said, “They all seemed really practical. . . they seem easy to 
integrate but also all things that I wanna know. And I really 
like how tailored ‘I would like more information’ stuff is to 
our clinic, to Chicago. . .” The schedule of information 
delivery was seen as an effective way to present information 
to users without being overwhelming or overly frequent. One 
provider said, “. . .these are coming in over time too so it’s 
not just a ton of information you get all at once. . .one tip at 
a time you actually can read the whole tip, digest it and then 
be ready for more information at a different time.”
Third, multiple functional features were favorably 
reviewed by participants. In particular, participants posi-
tively reviewed the app’s goal-setting activity, which patients 
(N = 4) and providers (N = 8) felt helped focus patients’ 
efforts during pregnancy. One provider stated,

I think it helps to actually have [goals] written down because I 
think sometimes when you tell people stuff. . .they tend to glaze 
over after a while and it’s clear you’re just totally overwhelming 
them and so I think having something concrete and specific that 
they can do every week, I like that.

This sentiment was echoed by a patient, who said, “I like 
goals, period. It makes you challenge yourself and then it 
makes you look forward to what you got going on.” 
Participants also praised the appointment reminders feature 
that was added in response to prior feedback. Patient (N = 3) 
and provider (N = 2) participants viewed the option to 
“favorite” content favorably, which saves preferred materials 
in a designated folder and allows users to easily access the 
contents at a later time. Additionally, patient (N = 1) and 
provider (N = 2) participants mentioned the interactivity of 
messages, specifically the ability to view more content after 
the initial message or to favorite content, as being beneficial 
features.

Negative Feedback

Participant opinions of SweetMama’s shortcomings also 
encompassed themes of visual features, information, and 
functional features. Development of the app occurred con-
currently with ongoing evaluation and many suggestions 
for improvement were addressed (Table 3) throughout the 
process of iterative app development. The majority of neg-
ative feedback came from providers.
Early focus groups indicated that the app’s aesthetic fea-
tures needed improvement. For example, one patient user 
viewed the original colors in the message notifications as 
“boring”; these colors were replaced with ones that comple-
mented the color scheme selected by patient participants. 
Later, multiple providers (N = 3) commented on the pastel 
color scheme: “I feel a little weird about it being pink. . . it 
just seems weird that so many apps targeted toward women

1126	

are pink and we like other colors too.” However, due to the 
almost entirely positive feedback regarding the color scheme 
from patient focus groups and because patient users had 
selected the colors, we opted to retain the color scheme. 
Providers (N = 2) also expressed concerns about the presen-
tation of the SweetMama icon, a graphic profile of a preg-
nant person that used colors and shapes chosen to suit the 
topic and population (Figure 3c). Though the icon was 
designed to be racially ambiguous, providers were concerned 
that our objective may not have been achieved and that the 
icon could be refined to enhance application to a diverse 
group. However, patient participants did not comment on 
this issue. Additionally, later iterations of SweetMama fea-
tured improvements requested by users such as a modernized 
interface, more images, alterations in background colors, 
more effective use of the home screen via inclusion of 
appointment reminders, messages featuring more profes-
sional punctuation, and compartmentalized library informa-
tion organized by topic.
Participants also suggested improvements to SweetMama’s 
application architecture. For example, two participants 
(N = 1 patient) stated that it was difficult to determine the 
most recently delivered message; in subsequent prototypes, 
messages were organized chronologically, message badges 
with the number of unread messages appeared in the mes-
sage center and navigation bar, and new messages were 
shaded blue to indicate which ones were unread. Similarly, 
early patient participants expressed frustration with having 
to “click through” too many pages to view a message, seeing 

the same message on the home screen and in the message 
center, and having a message disappear from the home 
screen after interacting with it. These complaints were 
addressed by changing SweetMama’s message pathway; 
instead of delivering messages to the home screen, users 
navigate to the message center to view messages (Figure 2). 
After interacting with a message, it does not disappear 
(though it changes color to indicate it has been read) and 
users may navigate back to other screens.
Provider participants were critical of certain aspects of 
information presentation in SweetMama (Table 3). Although 
the overall goal concept was well received (see above), some 
providers (N = 6) felt that the goal language lacked specific, 
achievable goals. For example, one provider commented:

[quoting goal message] ‘During my pregnancy I will try to 
maintain an active lifestyle to support diabetes control.’ It’s very 
broad and I would easily just put a checkmark by that at like 
week 12. . . I’m just saying. . . ‘I need to do 30 minutes of 
exercise three days a week’ [would be better].

Additionally, providers (N = 3) commented that the nature 
of some goal messages may be too harsh, saying,

“To me it sounds like a little harsh to say [a statement such as], 
‘During my pregnancy I will take my medication as prescribed.’ 
It seems a little cold or removed rather than saying, ‘My goal is 
to take my medication without missed doses’. . .”

Because provider focus groups were initiated later than 
patient focus groups, only providers, and not patients, viewed 
a more advanced SweetMama prototype containing specific 
goal messages. Upon review of the motivational curriculum, 
goal messages were revised to include specific goals with 
empowering language.
Other suggested areas of information weakness in the 
early stages of evaluation included the lack of personaliza-
tion of information, specifically, the desire for messages that 
were tailored to the individual, information about the indi-
vidual’s gestational age, and appointment reminders that 
included the appointment time. One patient stated,

“. . . like with someone who is not on insulin how do you tailor 
that to just her specifically in the app and then for somebody like 
me who has been on insulin since the beginning.”

Improvements in personalization, such as the customized 
home screen containing specific appointment reminders, 
were reviewed positively in subsequent groups (discussed 
above). To address the desire for medically tailored informa-
tion while balancing the need for a scalable intervention, we 
developed a set of 12 messages for women with an insulin 
regimen, which contains insulin-specific tips and motiva-
tions. This curriculum can be activated whenever the woman 
initiates insulin therapy.

Table 1.  Participant Demographic Characteristics.

Characteristic
N (%) or mean (SD)

Patient participants
Age, years
33 ± 6
Race/ethnicity
 
  Non-Hispanic black
14 (88%)
  Hispanic
2 (12%)
Gestational diabetes mellitus
8 (50%)
Publicly funded prenatal care
16 (100%)
Provider participants
Female
28 (97%)
Provider type
  Physician
14 (48%)
    Maternal-fetal medicine faculty
5 (17%)
    Maternal-fetal medicine fellow
3 (10%)
    Obstetrics and gynecology resident
6 (21%)
  Nurse
6 (21%)
  Medical assistant
2 (7%)
  Registered Dietitian
1 (3%)
  Licensed Clinical Social Worker
1 (3%)
  Lactation counselor
1 (3%)
  Certified Health Educator
4 (14%)

Abbreviation: SD, standard deviation.

1127

Table 2.  Provider and Patient Positive Feedback on SweetMama.

Theme
Subtheme
Exemplary quote
N

Visual features
Personalization
On the home screen I think it’s cool that it has how many like weeks and 
days because mine doesn’t do how many days I am.
15

Aesthetic appeal
I like the color, especially the Mom there. She looks like a sweet momma. 
Like I said it’s really pleasing to me, to my eyes.
12

Content organization
So I think this is a perfect at least breakdown of how to organize the app, 
so that’s pretty cool.
11

Information
Language is easy to 
understand, encouraging
Yeah. I was reading through the tips. It’s easy to understand. The little 
messages here.
7

Content is practical and 
helpful
I like the example messages. I think they’re good. They’re like the type of 
tips that I anticipated would be helpful.
6

Effective schedule of 
information delivery
I also think they’re kind of a good length. If it’s a long text message, people 
get bored, but I feel like these are digestible little morsels which are 
great.

5

Functional features
Goal-setting activity
I think it holds the patient to some accountability and in a good way that 
you are having these goal discussions with your provider, and there is 
somebody following what your goals were.

12

Appointment reminders
Yeah. I like the appointment reminder. I think that was really good.
12
Option to “favorite”
I like that you can favorite things.
5
Interactivity of messages
They’re initially succinct and then there’s the option to read more if 
they’re interested. I like that they have links to some of the more 
information ones.

3

Table 3.  Provider and Patient Negative Feedback on SweetMama and Subsequent Improvements.

Theme
Subtheme
Examples
N
Improvements made

Visual 
features
Aesthetic 
shortcomings
Color scheme
4
Contrasting colors removed
Icon not racially ambiguous 
enough
2
More diverse imagery added to messages

Needs modernization
2
Added swiping motions in app, interactive heart button for 
favorites, compartmentalized library information by topic
Home screen space not used 
effectively
1
Added features such as appointment reminders to home screen

Too many exclamation points
1
Lessened usage
Application 
architecture
Difficult to determine new 
message
2
“Shading” of message in message center to indicate unread 
message(s)
Dislikes sidebar
2
Replaced with horizontal bar
Too much clicking to navigate 
to goals
1
Architecture changed to simplify message pathway

Same message present in 
different places
1
All messages delivered to, and retained in, message center

Message disappears from home 
screen after opening
1
Messages now opened in message center, do not disappear

Information
Goal language
Vague goal language
6
Goals reframed with more specific, achievable milestones
Commanding goal language
3
Language adjusted to be more empowering
Personalization
Messages not tailored to 
individual
1
Insulin curriculum added, goals made customizable

Appointment time not listed 
on reminder
1
Appointment times added to reminder message

Functional 
features
Limitations of 
web-based app
Data usage
1
Potential future standalone app to address these issues
Text notifications vs push 
notifications
2

Tech support
Response should be faster than 
72 hours
2
Confusion about function of tech support;
clarified in app that app/tech support is not for medical advice
More information about how 
to use app
1
Introduction video created and uploaded to app

1128	

Third, participants noted the limitations of SweetMama’s 
functionality. For example, one provider noted that users 
could incur excessive data charges when not using WiFi. 
Additionally, two patient participants commented on their 
preference for push notifications, as opposed to the text mes-
sage-based notification system SweetMama currently uses. 
Participants also voiced qualms about SweetMama’s techno-
logical support. Two patient participants mistakenly assumed 
that the “Tech support” page within SweetMama extended to 
medical advice, despite the disclaimer that it did not, and 
desired a response. In subsequent versions, it was further 
clarified that technological support encompassed app prob-
lems only (Figure 4). Finally, in response to feedback (N = 1 
patient) that not enough information was provided on how to 
use SweetMama and the team’s desire to create a streamlined 
introduction to SweetMama, we created an introduction 
video that plays when a user opens SweetMama for the first 
time and explains the app’s main features.

Additional Desired Features

Participants suggested additional novel features for 
SweetMama (Table 4). Multiple subthemes within visual 
improvements were identified; for example, both patient 
(N = 7) and provider (N = 3) participants desired a custom-
izable homepage. This included being able to upload one’s 
own picture or ultrasound images or being able to create a 
customizable avatar to replace the SweetMama icon. 
Patients also desired the ability to customize the greeting on 
the home page with a specified baby name. Participants’ 
desire for customization included being able to control 

notification topics and frequency (N = 3 patients; N = 3 
providers). One participant said, “I think that an ideal app 
would give you the option to decide what you want to be 
alerted for.” Participants also voiced their desire for a 
greater number, and improved quality, of graphics and vid-
eos within the app. Mostly provider participants desired the 
ability to “declutter” messages, that is, to delete or file them 
away according to topic after interacting with them.
Second, suggestions related to SweetMama’s general and 
DM-specific pregnancy education information were made. 
Patient participants especially desired general pregnancy 
information in addition to the DM-focused health informa-
tion and motivational messaging. One patient stated,

. . .it needs more information pertaining to pregnancy. . . I’m 
24 weeks and what should I expect at 24 weeks? . . . How big 
should the baby be? How should I be feeling? What are some 
of the things that studies show that a woman that’s a diabetic at 
21 weeks pregnant, what should she be expecting or feeling 
like?

Participants (N = 6 patients; N = 7 providers) also desired 
nutrition education and support, for example, in the form of 
a glycemic index, suggestions of what to eat, and recipe sup-
port. One resident stated,

Or just like a how would I use this [ingredient] if I’m going to 
the grocery store? I think when you tell people to buy fruits and 
vegetables, they’re like great, now what do I do with them? Like 
if you tell somebody to buy salad and kale and that is not 
incorporated in their diet . . . what the hell are you gonna do 
with the kale?

Figure 4.  SweetMama “Contact us” page.

1129

Table 4.  Additional Desired SweetMama Features by Participant Type.

Theme
Subtheme
Exemplary quote
N

Patients and 
providers
Visual features
Customizable home page
. . .that would also be kinda cool if like it had the baby’s names 
or information about the baby . . .or like the option to put 
maybe an ultrasound picture of the baby if you have one or 
something like that would be cool.

10

User can control notification 
topics and frequency
You know how with notifications you can have it set if you 
want it to be one time daily, two times daily or stuff like that, 
I think it should have an option.

6

More images, animations, 
videos
. . .it’s too boxy aesthetically. It seems like it could be, have a 
little bit more interactive features, more visuals.
6

Ability to declutter messages
I think that I’m inclined to want to be able to read everything 
and then file it away and delete things, so that it looks like I’ve 
dealt with all the things on there. So I don’t know how the 
interface would look normally, but if I favorited something, 
I’d want it to go into the favorite and then go away from this 
inbox screen. . .

4

Information
Information about pregnancy, 
not just diabetes
. . . you know when it’s 25 weeks, what should the baby be 
doing, how should he be feeling or how they show the 
different growths and stuff. Something to do with the baby, 
what stage you should be at at that stage or the time you 
should look for like the signs you should look for with your 
diabetes, stuff like that.

9

Nutrition education and 
support
For me I would want [to] have the glycemic index to tell me 
whenever I eat, how much it makes my sugar go up.
13

More information in “Option 
2” in messages
Depending on what that goal was and what I didn’t need about 
it, it would be nice to see some other options other than 
calling PAC, depending on what the goal is. I think it should 
you know take it to a different level.

4

“Newsfeed” for new 
information
. . .something to break down some of the new stuff that is 
happening in that week and that’s in the pregnancy, ya know? 
We need to know this new stuff. I mean technology is 
something. Every day. So something like that to keep us up to 
date, keep us posted on what’s happening now and some of 
the new stuff. . .

4

Functional 
features
Health maintenance support
I would like a centralized place though to track sugar, food 
intake, something that’s gonna notify me when I need to take 
my blood sugars.

40

Ability to communicate 
directly with provider
And then if you could use that app to like communicate data 
with the doctors, that’s even better, ya know?
28

Journal feature
If you can, have like a journaling feature or something. When 
I say that, you know I mean sometimes a mom wants to get 
some stuff off our chest, and that would be great to have like 
a journaling feature.

9

Social component
Maybe have like a forum where other pregnant moms from 
PAC can kind of you know put a message on there or a 
question we can answer it and help each other out but yeah.

6

Positive reinforcement
I think there needs to be rewards. . . Rewards for just engaging. 
And you know I think it’s whether it be kudos or coupons or 
anything but engagement needs to be rewarded in some way 
because people respond to that.

5

Providers 
Only
Information
App available in Spanish, 
other languages
. . .if in the app you could hit a button and if you’re Spanish 
speaking it’s in Spanish, if you’re Arabic, it says it in Arabic.
6

View all upcoming 
appointments at once
I feel like an appointment tab like in the library could be good. 
Like when your next appointments are.
2

Functional
Ability to have multiple goals 
at once
I mean it would be nice if you could have more than one goal at 
a time, too.
2

1130	

In addition, participants (N = 3 patients; N = 1 provider) 
voiced their desire for more specific information and tar-
geted suggestions within the follow-up content area of tips, 
motivation, and goals messages. Some participants felt that 
certain content was not specific enough; for example, one 
patient said:

So with this one, ‘Start a friendship with fiber’ tip message 
thing, it says ‘I would like more information,’ which is good, but 
I think this would be good to say okay, show me some recipes or 
something because . . . it’s like okay, well what can I make with 
beans?

Similarly, some patient participants desired a “newsfeed” 
within SweetMama that would display articles related to DM 
and pregnancy; it was perceived that this feature would help 
users remain current with DM information.
Finally, several functional features were desired. The 
most ubiquitous desire was for health maintenance support 
within the app. Both patients and providers envisioned a 
SweetMama feature where patients could log blood glucose 
readings, record insulin administrations, track meals and 
exercise, and set alarms and reminders. Some participants 
wanted SweetMama to display trends, such as graphical 
blood glucose results in conjunction with dietary informa-
tion input. This desired feature was commonly described 
in tandem with the request to have the ability to communi-
cate directly with providers; some participants wanted 
their health data to be accessible to providers, allowing 
providers to give personalized feedback to each patient. 
Interestingly, providers (N = 6) also desired such a feature 
but noted that it was time intensive and likely not feasible. 
Other patients desired a more automatic approach, that is, if 
a patient inputted a blood glucose level not within target, 
the system itself would provide tips accordingly. Participants 
desired this “all-in-one” functionality as it could ease the 
burden of daily DM tasks. Participants (N = 8 patients; 
N = 1 provider) also desired a feature within SweetMama 
that would act as a journal, which would allow patients to 
record their experiences, reasons for skipping meals, medi-
cation names, and/or what they ate during the day. 
Participants also desired a social component to share 
personal anecdotes, ask questions in a forum-like setting, 
and read others’ success stories regarding DM during 
pregnancy. Similarly, patients and providers recognized 
the importance of positive reinforcement in SweetMama. 
Though the app featured messages with strong words of 
encouragement, providers suggested gamifying certain 
aspects of the app, for example, with goal tallying, although 
patients did not request gamification.
Provider participants suggested additional improvements 
to SweetMama beyond those they had in common with 
patient participants. Encompassed by the theme of informa-
tion, providers cited the urgent need for health materials and 
mobile apps to be available in Spanish and other languages. 

Providers also desired a way for patients to be able to view 
all of their appointments at once. Finally, some providers 
believed SweetMama should give patients the option of hav-
ing multiple goals at once.

Discussion

Diabetes is the most common metabolic pregnancy compli-
cation and poses short- and long-term health risks to both the 
mother and fetus, and disproportionately affects low-income 
and minority women.8,9 Pregnancy is also a critical window 
for improving women’s long-term health51; thus, improving 
DM skills and outcomes during pregnancy may confer life-
long benefits. Yet, managing DM during pregnancy requires 
complex skills and greater engagement, motivation, and 
action than outside of pregnancy, placing burdens on women 
with lower health literacy or fewer resources.25,26,52 Patient-
centered behavioral interventions designed to support preg-
nant women with DM are limited. For this reason, we 
developed SweetMama, which was designed to enhance self-
efficacy, health literacy, and patient engagement, while also 
supporting barrier reduction in this high-risk population.
In the present study, we conducted patient and provider 
focus groups over a period of 15 months in order to gather 
feedback on our novel mHealth intervention. Participants 
approved of visual features such as the application’s aes-
thetic appeal, customizable features, and intuitive content 
organization. Participants valued SweetMama’s accessible 
language, practical content, and manageable content delivery 
schedule. Participants also approved of SweetMama’s goal-
setting activity and appointment reminders, as well as its 
user-friendly interface, ability to interact with messages, and 
ability to select favorites. Despite these positive reviews, 
participants were critical of some features, including certain 
aesthetic shortcomings and organizational features that were 
resolved with more streamlined prototypes. Participants also 
noted vague goal language, messages that could be more 
customized, and the limitations of a web-based app. While 
there was much concordance between patients’ and provid-
ers’ preferences, suggestions were not always identical 
between groups; however, addressing both patient and pro-
vider viewpoints allowed the SweetMama team to consider 
all aspects of the application’s design. Most importantly, par-
ticipants offered suggestions on improving the app, guiding 
its future development.
Other studies have utilized patient and/or provider feed-
back to ensure user-centered design for applications made for 
users with DM, though few have focused on pregnancy. 
Though most of these applications primarily aimed to provide 
blood glucose tracking support, many participant responses 
remain relevant to the development of SweetMama. A 
Norwegian group developing a GDM app, Pregnant+, identi-
fied the importance of an easy and intuitive interface,53 a 
commonly praised feature of SweetMama. However, the 
application lacks the active, regular delivery of motivational

1131

content, does not have customization options for women 
requiring insulin, and requires users to input appointments 
manually—all of which are popular SweetMama features. In 
assessment of the Pregnant+ app, women with GDM appre-
ciated the availability of reliable information in the app; in 
our study, women also desired more information with greater 
detail.54 Some Pregnant+ participants reported being dis-
couraged by viewing negative blood glucose trends within the 
app, underscoring the importance of delivering motivational 
content in SweetMama. Another app, GDm-Health, was 
designed to facilitate blood glucose monitoring management 
and real-time provider review of these data and demonstrates 
promising findings; however, this application similarly lacked 
the regular delivery of motivational and literacy-matched 
education materials—a critical gap in our patient popula-
tion.55,56 Theis et al analyzed the failed adoption of an app 
intended to support management of DM in a nonpregnant 
population, in which patient and provider interviews revealed 
the poor adoption was due to clinical providers having to 
toggle between internal and external platforms during patient 
visits, an unreimbursed activity that took time away from the 
provision of healthcare.57 These data support the self-con-
tained structure of SweetMama, which requires minimal pro-
vider interactivity aside from routine goal setting and does 
not ask providers to monitor or communicate with patients 
via SweetMama. Participants in the Theis et al study also 
reported being initially confused by the app because of inad-
equate orientation, which was also noted in our data and sup-
ports our creation of an introduction video.
Though some patient participants voiced their desire for 
SweetMama to include basic health maintenance support 
tools, such as blood glucose and fitness trackers, our team 
opted against implementing such features due to redundancy 
with existing technology. With the advent of downloadable 
blood glucose meters with smartscreen capabilities, well-
developed and free commercial nutrition tracking apps, and 
Android/iPhone-native step counters, as well as a mobile app 
for the electronic health record patient portal, our team’s 
focus remained on addressing the unmet need for education 
and motivation for lifestyle behavior change in this popula-
tion and less on creating a “do-all” mobile app that replicates 
existing technology. However, recognizing the need to curate 
web-based information for a low health literacy population 
and for the specific needs of low-income users, SweetMama 
content in the latest iteration does include reputable resources 
that assist with DM-specific health maintenance needs.
One design strength of this study was its iterative input 
from both patients and providers. By focusing on the target 
population, we ensured a user-centered design and identified 
feature improvements that may be particularly important to 
this population. Not only do no other pregnancy and DM 
mHealth applications specifically designed for low-income 
women exist, but SweetMama was also rooted in strong con-
ceptual frameworks and evidence for health behavior sup-
port. Additionally, by including providers with a wide range 

of professional backgrounds, we were able to consider vari-
ous issues that may have been apparent to some provider 
types and not others. However, a weakness in this study is its 
inclusion of participants from a single medical center, which 
may limit generalizability. Importantly, this study was lim-
ited to English-speaking women, and thus the majority of the 
patient population was non-Hispanic black; future work 
needs to be performed to incorporate the perspectives of 
Hispanic women. Additional limitations of our approach 
include the inherent drawbacks of the “Think Aloud” meth-
odology; for example, few providers commented on the aes-
thetic appeal subtheme, yet the lack of comment does not 
necessarily indicate negative opinions, but may instead sim-
ply indicate the absence of an overt query. Finally, the 
sequential nature of investigation means that an additional 
limitation is that patients did not experience the most up-to-
date version of SweetMama, and patients and providers did 
not participate in combined focus groups; however, we feel 
this limitation is acceptable given the importance of incorpo-
rating user perspectives in an iterative fashion, and future 
work will continue to focus on patient perspectives.
Future work by the SweetMama development team will 
continue addressing numerous participant requests, for 
example, more images, information, customization, and pos-
itive reinforcement. Building on provider feedback that 
SweetMama was user-friendly, the SweetMama team will 
continue investigating acceptability and usability of more 
advanced SweetMama prototypes. The iterative develop-
ment process that occurred in this phase was essential to cre-
ating a user-friendly, efficient app that will have a greater 
chance of diverse patient engagement and use. Next steps 
include both longitudinal usability testing and subsequent 
feasibility trials. A future randomized controlled trial of the 
SweetMama app in clinical settings will determine the effi-
cacy of supportive, longitudinal continued education and 
motivation to sustain lifestyle behavior change for DM via 
SweetMama to improve perinatal outcomes.

Conclusion

SweetMama, a novel educational and motivational mHealth 
tool for pregnancy with diabetes, was perceived to be a help-
ful and user-friendly educational tool by low-income women 
during a two-week usability trial. Future work will address 
SweetMama’s longitudinal utility in improving perinatal 
outcomes.

Declaration of Conflicting Interests

The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect 
to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.