Understanding Delay Awareness and Mitigation 
Mechanisms through an Iterative Design and Evaluation  
of a Prototype Alert System for Complex Teamwork 

KATHERINE A. ZELLNER, Drexel University, Philadelphia, PA USA  
ALEKSANDRA SARCEVIC, Drexel University, Philadelphia, PA USA 
MEGAN A. KRENTSA, Drexel University, Philadelphia, PA USA 
TRAVIS M. SULLIVAN, Children’s National Hospital, Washington D.C., USA  
RANDALL S. BURD, Children's National Hospital, Washington D.C., USA 

 
Almost half of the preventable deaths in emergency care can be associated with a medical delay. Understanding 
how clinicians experience delays can lead to improved alert designs to increase delay awareness and mitigation. 
In this paper, we present the findings from an iterative user-centered design process involving 48 clinicians to 
develop a prototype alert system for supporting delay awareness in complex medical teamwork such as trauma 
resuscitation. We used semi-structured interviews and card-sorting workshops to identify the most common 
delays and elicit design requirements for the prototype alert system. We then conducted a survey to refine the 
alert designs, followed by near-live, video-guided simulations to investigate clinicians’ reactions to the alerts. 
We contribute to CSCW by designing a prototype alert system to support delay awareness in time-critical, 
complex teamwork and identifying four mechanisms through which teams mitigate delays. 
 
CCS Concepts: • Human-centered computing → Collaborative and social computing theory, concepts, and 
paradigms → Computer-supported cooperative work 

Additional Key Words and Phrases: Alerts, alert fatigue, clinical decision support, complex teamwork, 
delay awareness, delay mitigation, trauma resuscitation 
 
ACM Reference format:  
Katherine A. Zellner, Aleksandra Sarcevic, Megan A. Krensta, Travis M. Sullivan, and Randall S. Burd. 2023. 
Understanding Delay Awareness and Mitigation Mechanisms through an Iterative Design and Evaluation of a 
Prototype Alert System for Complex Teamwork. Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact, 7, CSCW2, Article 260 (October 
2023), 28 pages, https://doi.org/10.1145/3610051. 

1 INTRODUCTION 

Trauma is one of the leading causes of death for individuals under 45 in the United States [60]. About 50% of 
deaths classified as “preventable” are associated with a delay or error during trauma resuscitation, the initial 
evaluation and management of critically injured patients [37]. 
 
This is work is supported by the National Science Foundation, under grant IIS-1763509 and IIS-1763355. 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee 
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the 
full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. 
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires 
prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org. 
2573-0142/2023/10-260… $15.00 
© Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3610051 

260

260:2 

Among severely injured adults with hypotension, the risk of death increases by 1% with every three 
minutes of delayed care [37]. Improved situational and temporal awareness during trauma 
resuscitation can improve patient outcomes by reducing medical errors and treatment delays 
[1][20]. 

Maintaining situational and temporal awareness during trauma resuscitation is challenging due to 
the complexity of the patient’s injuries and the multidisciplinary nature of the work. A recent study 
showed that teams responding to patients with traumatic injuries underestimate time by as much 
as 28% [47], delaying the next phase of care. Clinicians also misclassified non-critical patients as 
critical despite incoming patient data showing their accurate status [49], highlighting the 
importance of situational awareness in preventing delays. Information displays [59] and cognitive 
aids [35] have been evaluated in several medical settings to improve temporal and situational 
awareness. One low-tech intervention used non-traditional simulation to improve the team’s closed-
loop communication by blindfolding the team leader to tasks performed by the team [45]. Although 
these approaches helped improve user-reported situational awareness, few studies have addressed 
delay awareness through computerized support. Understanding delay awareness and response to 
delays in complex teamwork is necessary to inform the design of effective computerized support. 

This paper presents the findings from an iterative user-centered design process to develop a 
prototype alert system for supporting delay awareness in complex medical teamwork. Our goal in 
this paper was two-fold. First, we examined how trauma team members experience and manage 
delays during dynamic and safety-critical patient care. Although we have some understanding of 
delays and their effects on workflow in surgical settings [41][44][52], little is known about 
clinicians’ experiences and management of delays in dynamic medical teamwork. We sought to 
answer three research questions under this first subgoal: (1) What are the most common delays in 
emergency medical care? (2) How do clinicians experience these delays and become aware of them? 
(3) What are potential visual mechanisms for communicating delays to clinicians? Second, we 
designed a prototype system that supports team awareness of delays through visual alerts. We then 
used this prototype to understand the team’s response to delays. Here, we sought to answer our last 
two research questions: (4) How do clinicians perceive visual representations of delays? (5) How do 
clinicians react to and mitigate delays? To achieve our research goal and answer these questions, 
we conducted a series of research activities, including interviews, card-sorting workshops, a design 
survey, and near-live, video-guided simulations. Through this design and evaluation process, we 
identified (a) most common delays in emergency medical care, (b) alert design preferences for two 
major role types within the resuscitation team (activity leaders and activity performers), and 
(c) common team-based strategies for mitigating delays. 

We make two contributions to computer-supported cooperative work (CSCW) research: (1) a proof-
of-concept for a prototype alert system that triggers awareness of delays in complex teamwork and 
(2) a delay mitigation framework with four mechanisms through which teams mitigate delays: 
request information, report progress, request or perform an action, and request or perform a 
modification.  Understanding how teams in dynamic and complex work environments mitigate 
delays facilitates the design and development of computerized support for delay mitigation.

Understanding Delay Awareness 
260:3 
 

2 RELATED WORK 

2.1 Awareness in CSCW and Human Factors Literature 

Designing a system to improve delay awareness requires a clear understanding of how teams 
experience delays and how they act when they become aware of delays. Within CSCW, researchers 
have typically examined awareness needs in workplace settings [38][56][78]. For example, office-
based workers were observed using shared public information such as displays, employee manuals, 
and the actions of co-workers to make sense of their activities [57]. Although clinicians in 
emergency medical scenarios such as trauma resuscitation also use similar artifacts to support 
awareness [52], the nature of short-term, ad hoc events differs from long-term work performed in 
an office. Trauma teams are “loosely formed” [76], with team composition fluctuating both during 
and between resuscitations. Team members do not consistently work with each other and can be 
new to the institution. As a result, team members can lack adequate social and situational awareness 
during resuscitations. Team members can also enter and leave the room at various times. People 
arriving late interrupt ongoing work, often asking questions for already reported information, 
which leads to poor communication [76]. 

CSCW research on awareness in emergency medical settings has identified four critical facets of 
awareness at the team level [51]: temporal and elapsed time awareness, team member awareness, 
task awareness, and process awareness. Awareness of elapsed time is critical for coordinating work 
and scheduling. Kusunoki et al. [51] described elapsed time awareness as knowing the estimated 
time of the patient’s arrival, the time since the patient arrived, the time since certain tasks, and the 
time since changes in patient status. Team member awareness allows workers to effectively 
collaborate based on their knowledge of the location of other team members, their work status, and 
availability [8]. Social awareness in ad hoc contexts focuses on understanding who else is present 
and the status of other team member activities [52]. Task and process awareness were initially 
defined in research on articulation work as workers displaying their actions and monitoring the 
actions of others to determine the status of tasks [14][75]. Process awareness is also described as 
knowing the sequence of primary tasks, tasks due next, and the status of the process [14]. Because 
workers need to know the status of past, present, and future activities [52][46][71], task and process 
awareness enable workers to coordinate and manage future work. 

To our knowledge, delay awareness—a combination of temporal, situational, task, and process 
awareness—has received little attention in CSCW research. Few studies have investigated how 
complex teams experience and mitigate delays during time-sensitive tasks. Burian et al. [12] studied 
anesthetists’ responses to critical events like delays and errors, identifying four major factors that 
affected their response: the event type, the team members, the individual that is responding, and the 
environment and its resources. This analysis, however, focused on delay response by a single 
medical specialty conducting an individual task rather than delay response by an interdisciplinary 
team of different role types. Dismukes et al. [26] analyzed flight crews during challenging and 
stressful situations to identify the behaviors that lead to errors and delays, including inadequate 
communication, improvised task execution, poor decision making, and prioritization errors. 
Although this study highlighted critical behaviors leading to delays, it did not investigate how teams 
responded to or mitigated these delays. Webman et al. [81] found that teams respond to non-routine 
events during trauma resuscitation by “compensating” and “acknowledging” these events. In this 
paper, we extend this prior work by identifying and unpacking the mechanisms used by teams in 
dynamic work to mitigate delays once they become aware of them.

260:4 

Human factors research has also studied the concept of awareness, defining it as the ability to 
perceive, understand, and predict elements in specific environmental, temporal, and spatial contexts 
[31]. This awareness approach has been adopted in domains like air traffic control [65], healthcare 
[4][34], and recently in autonomous driving [33]. Healthcare practitioners have increasingly used 
frameworks from human factors research to improve teamwork efficiency and awareness, including 
frameworks focused on patient safety (e.g., SEIPS [43][83]), and personnel training and protocols 
[10][11][82]. For example, West et al. [82] showed that applying crew resource management (CRM) 
techniques during patient data collection at the beginning of each shift improved communication 
and reduced delays in nursing units. Because our research focuses on introducing computerized 
support at the team level rather than the work system level, we found that the CSCW approaches 
to awareness support were more appropriate for our work. 

2.2 CSCW Research on Supporting Awareness in the Medical Domain 

User-centered design (UCD) approaches have been successfully used for designing computerized 
support within clinical settings. UCD is an iterative design process that involves users through a 
series of research and design activities to create usable designs [79]. CSCW researchers have applied 
UCD methods such as interviews, surveys, and participant observation to design support tools for 
medical personnel in a range of settings. For example, UCD was used in designing MediSenseView 
[67], a clinical-data interface system for resuscitation teams; SMILY [17], a system that assists 
pathologists interpret medical images; and a Breast Screening-AI system that helps radiologists 
screen for breast cancer [19]. 

Previous CSCW research has proposed and implemented several types of computerized support to 
address the challenges of maintaining awareness in complex teamwork, including information 
displays, cognitive aids, alerts, and ambient displays. For example, the use of visual displays like 
AwareMedia [8] in operating rooms has successfully supported awareness of the team- and patient 
status, leading to better coordination of work. McGeorge et al. [59] similarly developed an 
emergency department information system that represented time in a timeline view, allowing 
clinicians to quickly see patient flow and waiting room times. Participants who used the new display 
showed improved situational awareness [59]. Parush et al. [68] developed a cognitive aid to support 
situational awareness during emergency department resuscitations. This cognitive aid featured 
patient vital signs, present staff members, a log of orders, alerts, medication actions and tests, and a 
visual timeline displaying key events [68]. Although this display supported temporal and situational 
awareness during resuscitations, its alerts did not reach all team members because not all team 
members could look at the display during patient care. 

Many studies designing and evaluating alerts in medical settings focus on improving actions such 
as prescribing medication [62] or accurately diagnosing patients [18][20]. To our knowledge, no 
alert systems have been developed that specifically support team delay awareness. A key challenge 
in designing an alert system for complex teams performing time-critical work is ensuring that alerts 
reach all team members. Complex teams include multiple members, each with different roles and 
responsibilities. In trauma teamwork, a surgical team leader may need one kind of information, 
while bedside nurses require another [12]. It is critical to understand the needs of each role through 
user-centered research activities. 

An additional challenge for the design of alert systems is alert fatigue. Clinicians in emergency 
medical settings are concerned that information displays will cause distraction and hinder 
situational awareness [45], while additional alarms will cause alert fatigue [38]. To address alert

Understanding Delay Awareness 
260:5 
 

fatigue, researchers have evaluated several methods to non-intrusively display information through 
ambient displays [24][38]. Guerra et al. [38] for example, evaluated the use of peripheral interaction 
to silence alarms via foot pedal or voice command in a neonatal intensive care unit. Other types of 
peripheral interaction, like ambient lights, can also serve as an alerting mechanism to convey 
information without perceived distraction [24]. Davis et al. [24] introduced a bidirectional ambient 
display to support activity awareness for the elderly and their caregivers. The ambient light speed 
and color changed based on the user’s activity level. For example, if the user began walking or 
moving between rooms, the flashing of the ambient light would accelerate, improving social and 
activity awareness between the parties. Wallbaum et al. [80] developed “SocialFlower,” a tangible 
display system that supports social and contextual awareness. The “SocialFlower” displayed 
different colors to represent activity levels and allow users to interact with each other via touch 
sensitivity. These prior studies have found that ambient displays can support users in a non-
distracting and pleasant manner. However, the use of ambient displays as a mechanism for 
improving temporal awareness in time-critical ad hoc teamwork has not been explored yet. 

In this paper, we iteratively designed and evaluated a prototype alert system that allows all team 
members to become aware of delays. This design and evaluation process has allowed us to better 
understand how teams in a complex work environment mitigate delays. We contribute a proof of 
concept for a prototype alert system to support delay awareness in complex teamwork and four 
mechanisms through which teams mitigate delays. 

3 STUDY OVERVIEW 

This mixed-methods study took place at the level I trauma center of an urban, pediatric teaching 
hospital in the mid-Atlantic region of the United States from October 2020 to June 2022. The study 
involved multiple data collection approaches. First, we interviewed seven clinicians to understand 
how teams experience delays. From these results, we derived the five most common delays during 
trauma resuscitation, the perceived causes, and how different roles on the trauma team experienced 
and managed delays. We then ran five card-sorting workshops with 11 participants to further 
discuss and prioritize delays. After prototyping the alert system, we evaluated its perceived 
usefulness in detecting delays using near-live, video-guided simulations. The hospital’s Institutional 
Review Board (IRB) approved this study. Below we describe the research setting and participants 
and present the results of user and design research and system evaluation. 

3.1 Research Setting 

Trauma resuscitations at our research site are performed by a medical team comprising multiple 
specialties, including surgery, emergency medicine, anesthesiology, nursing, respiratory therapy, 
pharmacy, social work, and child life. Each member performs a specified task to evaluate and 
manage the injured child or adolescent using the Advanced Trauma Life Support protocol [3]. The 
most experienced clinicians (e.g., surgical fellow/attending and emergency medicine 
fellow/attending) and the most experienced nurses (e.g., charge nurse, nurse shift coordinator) 
comprise the leadership team that receives and interprets the information from providers evaluating 
the patient (e.g., surgical resident, nurse practitioner, respiratory therapist, bedside nurses). We refer 
to team members who actively evaluate the patient as “activity performers.” Team members tasked 
with interpreting information and planning the next phase of care are referred to as “activity 
leaders.”  We did not study providers that assist the team in tasks (e.g., anesthesiology) or in the 
patient’s social needs (e.g., social work).

260:6 

Each trauma bay is equipped with medical tools, instruments, and other artifacts that support 
temporal, situational, and process awareness. Constantly changing vital sign monitors communicate 
patient status, and paper and digital checklists support protocol adherence. The rooms also have 
two types of clocks to support temporal awareness: traditional clocks and stop clocks. Traditional 
clocks display the absolute time, which requires team members to perform mental calculations to 
determine the duration of activities [52]. Stop clocks represent the time since the resuscitation 
started. At our research site, teams are instructed to manually start a stop clock by pressing a button 
at patient arrival and then turn it off at the end of the resuscitation. The main trauma bay is equipped 
with three video cameras set up at different angles to provide the top and side views of the patient 
and team. Recorded videos are used for quality improvement purposes and can also be reviewed for 
research purposes after consent is obtained from the patient’s parent or caregiver. 

3.2 Participant Recruitment and Demographics 

Study participants across all research activities were recruited to represent the core trauma team 
members. Recruiting research participants in this setting is challenging because clinicians have busy 
schedules and work across multiple units and shifts. The COVID-19 pandemic further exacerbated 
the recruitment challenges because it led to provider fatigue and patient overload, leaving little time 
and interest for participation in research. To overcome these challenges, we relied on research 
coordinators at our research site to reach out to potential participants in person and through internal 
mailing lists. User research involved 21 participants (Table 1) and design research involved 27 survey 

Table 1: Participant breakdown for user research activities: participant ID, team role, performer or leader, 
years of experience in trauma resuscitation, and user research sessions in which they participated.

Understanding Delay Awareness 
260:7 
 

participants (Table 2), for a total of 48 study participants whose trauma resuscitation experience 
ranged from several months to more than 10 years. All user sessions were conducted remotely over 
Zoom and recorded to facilitate the analyses. All participants in user research activities received 
monetary compensation for their time, while survey participants were entered in a drawing for one 
of three $30 Amazon gift cards. Several clinicians participated in multiple user research activities, 
allowing for a longitudinal perspective. Because the survey was anonymous, we could not determine 
if any of the survey participants took part in other research activities. 

4 USER RESEARCH TO INFORM THE DESIGN OF A PROTOTYPE SYSTEM 

4.1 Semi-Structured Interviews to Elicit Delay Experiences 

4.1.1 
Methods. To answer our first two research questions—“What are the most common delays 
in emergency medical care?” and “How clinicians experience these delays and become aware of 
them?”—we conducted hour-long interviews with seven clinicians who had participated in trauma 
resuscitations at least once a week. The interviews were designed as a combination of semi-
structured and stimulated recall interviews. The interview questions focused on discussing common 
delays, the communication mechanisms used during delays, delay management techniques, and 
alert preferences. For example: “What kinds of delays do you experience?” “How do you know there 
is a delay?” and “When and how do you communicate about the delay?” 

Table 2: Design survey participant breakdown: Participant ID, team role, role type (performer or leader), 
and years of experience in trauma resuscitation. 

ID 
Trauma Team Role 
Activity Performer (P) or Leader (L) Experience 
SP1 
Attending Physician 
L 
N/A 
SP2 
Attending Physician 
L 
4 years 
SP3 
Attending Physician 
L 
30 years 
SP4 
Attending Physician 
L 
3 years 
SP5 
Attending Physician 
L 
13 years 
SP6 
Attending Physician 
L 
3 years 
SP7 
Attending Physician 
L 
4 years 
SP8 
Attending Physician 
L 
12 years 
SP9 
Attending Physician 
L 
N/A 
SP10 Attending Physician 
L 
18 years 
SP11 Attending Physician 
L 
2 years 
SP12 Attending Physician 
L 
14 years 
SP13 Attending Physician 
L 
N/A 
SP14 Attending Physician 
L 
28 years 
SP15 Attending Physician 
L 
13 years 
SP16 Attending Physician 
L 
N/A 
SP17 Bedside Nurse 
P 
24 years 
SP18 Bedside Nurse 
P 
N/A 
SP19 Charge Nurse 
L 
3 years 
SP20 Charge Nurse 
L 
10 years 
SP21 Nurse - Shift Coordinator 
L 
6 years 
SP22 Nurse - Shift Coordinator 
L 
3.5 years 
SP23 Nurse Practitioner 
P 
4 years 
SP24 Pediatric Emergency Medicine Fellow 
L 
7 months 
SP25 Pediatric Emergency Medicine Fellow 
L 
2.5 years 
SP26 Pediatric Emergency Medicine Fellow 
L 
N/A 
SP27 Medication Nurse (Pharmacist) 
P 
4 years

260:8 

Stimulated recall helps participants retrieve memories of past experiences [25]. Because trauma 
team members may respond to multiple resuscitations in a single day while also taking part in other 
types of patient care, this approach helped our participants recall specific experiences. Previous 
studies in clinical contexts used videos of procedures for stimulated recall interviews [42]. At our 
research site, however, the approved IRB protocol does not allow individuals to watch recordings 
of prior procedures if they did not participate in those events. Instead, we developed a visual prompt 
based on an actual resuscitation case using timestamps of events, a narrative of the activities, team 
communications, and illustrations of the trauma bay. During the simulated recall activity, the 
interviewer narrated through the visual prompt and elicited participant reactions to non-routine 
events. As we narrated through the prompt, we asked the participants to tell us if they noticed 
anything atypical such as a delay or error (Figure 1). Once a participant noted any issues, we further 
probed about the frequency of the issue, what actions they would take, and what they would do 
differently. At the end of the simulated recall, we asked the participants to discuss their ideal 
solutions for reducing delays and the types of alerts they would prefer. 

Two doctoral researchers trained in HCI reviewed and corrected the Zoom-generated transcripts. 
Using a qualitative content analysis approach, we identified themes using NVivo, a qualitative data 
analysis software. Both researchers conducted open coding on the transcripts to identity common 
themes. The researchers then compared their codes and discussed the emerging themes until 
reaching a consensus. Inter-rater reliability was not used because it is not required in qualitative 
content analysis [66]. 

4.1.2  
Findings. From the interview sessions, we identified the five most common delays in 
emergency medical care: (1) delays in the initial intravenous (IV) access attempt and placement, (2) 
delays in obtaining the initial set of vital signs, (3) delays in obtaining an updated blood pressure, 
(4) activity delays because time is misperceived, and (5) delays in the time from a request to perform 

 

Figure 1: An example slide from the visual prompt used in situated recall interviews, showing a 
trauma team at minute three of the resuscitation when the leader requested the team to prepare for 
intubation.

Understanding Delay Awareness 
260:9 
 

a task to actual task performance. We also elicited perceived causes for these delays and how 
different roles on the trauma team experienced and managed delays. 

Common Delays during Trauma Resuscitation. The most frequently mentioned delay was in 
obtaining the initial intravenous (IV) access. Five participants described how they frequently 
experienced this delay during trauma resuscitation. The participants also emphasized the 
importance of this procedure because other activities such as intubation and medication 
administration depend on timely IV access [P4, P5, P6]. Of the five participants who described delays 
in obtaining IV access, four mentioned that the team should have switched to establishing 
intraosseous (IO) access—an alternative method to provide fluids, medications, and blood products 
directly into the bone marrow—to speed up the process [P2, P3, P4, P6]: 

“There is a hesitancy for placing faster IV access here. [We need to be] educating nurses if IVs are 
taking a long time, we need to switch to something that will give us access faster.” [P2] 

Four participants also discussed delays in obtaining vital signs. A shift coordinator described: 

“I have had delays in people waiting to get a BP (blood pressure). People will be in the bay and trying 
to get a manual BP… trying to get a pulse. I’ve seen people spending a lot of time trying to get that 
number when they should be treating hypotension… If you’re not getting a number, it’s probably not 
good.” [P5] 

Some participants described general delays, like activities taking longer than usual (3/7) and 
clinician requests taking long to complete (3/7). One surgical resident described a case where she 
urged the team to act faster: “We said CT scan seven minutes ago and we don’t have it yet. What can 
I do to speed that up?” [P2]. 

Perceived Causes for Delayed Activities. The participants described that a common cause for these 
delays is a lack of situational and temporal awareness. They discussed how activity performers often 
experience “tunnel vision” and lack awareness of how much time has passed, e.g., “People think in a 
black hole with blinders on and don’t realize how much time has passed” [P2]. Another surgical 
resident explained: 

“I never check the clock. Maybe I should. There’s just an order to how I was trained and that’s how I 
go by it… I don’t keep track of time.” [P1]. 

This lack of temporal awareness can also lead to the lack of awareness of delays. For instance, a 
clinician may attempt an activity for over five minutes without realizing how much time has 
elapsed. Instead, clinicians should stop the activity and ask for assistance or use a different method. 

While discussing tunnel vision, one participant brainstormed potential approaches for increasing 
temporal awareness: 

“Nurses can get tunnel vision and have no idea how long they’re taking to establish the access. Just 
by saying ‘Five minutes have gone by,’ ‘10 minutes have gone by,’ the team can re-evaluate 
themselves, ‘why hasn’t this happened yet?’ It’s really easy for time to just stop while you’re there. 
If you had a reminder of time elapsed, it cues people back in and maybe back on their toes.” [P5] 

The participants also discussed an incomplete activity alert. A charge nurse described: 

“Maybe like a loud alarm that would go off if something has been skipped. Something like ‘this 
activity has not been done.’ If you set a time alert and it was like ‘it’s been 10 minutes and the patient 
hasn’t been intubated,’ but what if the patient doesn’t need to be? It’s hard to make it a time alert. It’s 
more of an order thing.” [P7]

260:10 

This nurse felt that alerts sounding or appearing at a specified time interval may only be appropriate 
for some cases. Instead, they recommended a system that detects when an activity request is ignored 
or a step in the process is skipped and then alerts the team. 

Delay Experience and Management for Activity Performers vs. Activity Leaders. Activity leaders are 
not directly involved in hands-on patient care, which allows them to keep track of time, assist with 
estimating time for activity performers, and alert about incomplete or delayed activities. In contrast, 
activity performers are “heads down” and focus on evaluating the patient, which makes referrals to 
visual timekeeping artifacts more challenging. Illustrating this point, a participant stated: 

“I look at the clock on the wall 10 times before the patient arrives and then when the patient arrives, 
I never look at it unless we’re standing around waiting for something, like waiting for the blood 
pressure cuff” [P2]. 

Activity leaders in our interviews were aware that performers cannot monitor the timekeeping 
artifacts in the room. They shared a concern that another display for alerting the team to delays 
would not help draw the team’s attention. One of the nurse documenters explained, “No [activity 
performer] is looking on the wall in the middle of a bloody case” [P3]. Instead of looking up or around, 
activity performers focus on the task at hand and rely on the leaders to keep time, monitor progress, 
and provide alerts. A junior resident described: 

“I can’t say I look at it [the clock] that often, but I think those in the supervisory role are paying 
attention. The nurse who is keeping track of time will let us know how we are doing.” [P6] 

From participant experiences with the five most common delays, we identified seven possible alerts 
for further exploration: (1) IV access has not been established (after a certain amount of time), (2) IV 
access has been attempted multiple times – switch to IO?, (3) No blood pressure for over 3 minutes, 
(4) No vitals for over 3 minutes, (5) Current activity is taking more time than usual, (6) “X” activity 
was requested 5 minutes ago and has not yet begun, and (7) Time interval alert - an alert every five 
minutes after patient arrival. 

4.2 Card-sorting Workshops 

We conducted card-sorting workshops to determine if the interview findings generalized across 
team roles. We also used these workshops to answer our third research question: “What are 
potential visual mechanisms for communicating delays to clinicians?” 

4.2.1 
Methods. We conducted five hour-long card sorting workshops with a total of 11 
participants, each involving two to three different team roles. The workshops focused on 
(1) understanding how different team roles prioritize delays and alerts, and (2) eliciting design 
requirements for the prototype alert system. The workshops combined a card-sorting activity [72] 
and a semi-structured group discussion. Previous work on health information technology design 
has used card sorting experiments to understand user priorities and develop user interfaces [30][73]. 
In the context of our domain, the card sorting approach was helpful in visualizing the participants’ 
alert priorities before and after discussion with their colleagues. 

In addition to participants, each workshop involved three to five researchers. One researcher led the 
workshop, facilitating the introductions and group discussion, while the other researchers took 
notes and supported individual card-sorting activities during the breakout sessions. We started each 
workshop by introducing the study, obtaining consent to record the session, reviewing the results 
from the semi-structured interviews (five common delays and seven alerts), and asking for 
participant introductions. Each participant then entered a break-out room with a researcher to

Understanding Delay Awareness 
260:11 
 

complete an individual card-sorting activity. We used OptimalSort, an online card-sorting interface, 
to conduct card sorting (Figure 2). Each participant was asked to sort the seven alerts into three 
categories: “Yes,” meaning they preferred this alert, “No,” meaning they did not prefer the alert, and 
“Maybe,” meaning they were not certain, or it would depend on the design. The participants were 
instructed to talk aloud about their decision-making process and explain alert preferences. After 
completing the sorting activity, we asked the participants to rank the alerts in the “Yes” category 
and explain their reasoning.  

Next, the participants returned to the main Zoom room for a semi-structured group discussion about 
alert preferences based on team roles. We shared the results from individual card-sorting activities, 
with a similarity matrix showing where participants within each group agreed and disagreed. We 
then asked the participants to discuss why their opinions differed and how their role affected their 
decisions. The participants sorted and prioritized the alerts again, deciding as a team and reconciling 
individual differences. In the final portion of the workshop, we asked the participants to brainstorm 
design ideas for the alerts they had prioritized. The participants shared and discussed these design 
ideas and then shared feedback on each other’s ideas. 

We manually corrected Zoom-generated transcripts from all workshops. Two researchers on the 
team, a doctoral student studying HCI and a second-year medical student who had assisted in 
facilitating the workshops, performed qualitative content analysis. For each workshop, the 
researchers read through the transcript and used open coding to assign different themes. They 
compared their themes and reconciled them into a unified list through discussion. We also compiled 
the common design ideas into a list of design requirements for the prototype alert system. 

4.2.2 
Findings. We first present user priorities and preferences for the delay alerts, including the 
differences between individual and group priorities. We then describe the design requirements for 
the alerts. 

User Priorities and Preferences for Alert Types: The individual card-sorting activities showed that most 
participants found only two of the seven alerts useful: “No vitals for over 3 minutes” and “IV access 
has not been established.” These alert preferences were also confirmed during group discussions 
and group sorting activities: participants ranked the “No vitals for over 3 minutes” alert as the most 

 

Figure 2: A screen capture of the OptimalSort interface used during card sorting workshops, showing 
the results of the group sorting activity from Workshop # 4. The alerts on the left were preferred by all 
members of the group. The alerts in the middle were rejected by all group members. The alerts on the 
right were considered but no group member expressed strong preference for any of the alerts.

260:12 

important in three workshops, while “IV access has not been established” and “Activity was 
requested 5 minutes ago and has not begun” alerts were each ranked as most important in the other 
two workshops. 

A major area of disagreement across roles was around the vital sign alerts. Most nurses sorted the 
“No blood pressure value for over 3 minutes” alert into the “Yes” category, while most physicians 
and fellows sorted this alert into “Maybe” or “No” categories. During group discussions, the 
physicians acknowledged the importance of this alert for other roles but argued it should be 
combined with “No vitals for over 3 minutes” to avoid redundancy. Most participants also felt that 
“IV access has not been established” and “IV access has been attempted multiple times – switch to 
IO” were redundant and proposed combining the two. 

Five of the 11 participants sorted the time-interval alert into the “Yes” category and four participants 
sorted the alert into the “Maybe” category. Four of the five participants that preferred the alert were 
“activity performers” and thought that the alert would improve their temporal awareness during 
patient evaluation. Two participants that sorted the time-interval alert into the “No” category were 
attending physicians. After group discussion, most workshop groups sorted the time-interval alert 
into the “Maybe” category because they thought its usefulness would depend on the alert design: 

“I like the idea of the clock changing, because maybe then, like, yes, there is a clock in that room. 
However, I would say that I’d be interested to take a poll of the people who are in the room who 
actually pay attention to it” [P5]. 

The “Current activity is taking more time than usual” alert was least preferred. During individual 
sorting, most participants sorted it into the “Maybe” or “No” category. They felt this alert was like 
“X activity was requested 5 minutes ago and has not begun” and it was unclear what actions they 
would take with the alert information. This result held with the group sorting activity as it was the 
only alert not receiving a “Yes” during the group sorting. 

The group discussions helped us determine the similarities and differences in role preferences. If 
any participant voiced strong support for an alert, the others would acquiesce to their expertise, 
agreeing to have the alert and assuming the alert would remain unintrusive. For example, an 
attending physician said in response to a nurse supporting the “No vitals for over 3 minutes” alert: 
“I totally respect and appreciate [participant’s] input on all of this… I think if they would benefit from 
this alert – we should have it” [P18]. Overall, the participants preferred fewer and less frequent and 
agreed to combine or eliminate unnecessary alerts. For example, all workshops agreed to select 
either “No vitals for over 3 minutes” or “No blood pressure for over 3 minutes” as their highest 
priority, assuming the two would be combined. A similar agreement was made for “No IV access 
for over 5 minutes” and “Multiple IV attempts have been made – switch to IO?” alerts, where all 
workshop groups agreed that only one of these was needed. 

Design Requirements for Delay Awareness. Most participants (9/11) preferred visual alerts over 
audible or vibrating alerts because visual alerts were perceived as less interruptive than others. 
Three participants preferred visual cues such as a “quick pop up” or a banner on a room monitor to 
avoid blocking other information. One ED fellow explained: 

“A display won’t disrupt the flow of the team. But someone would be getting these alerts and then 
relaying them to the rest of the team” [P9]. 

Nine participants thought that audible alerts would be inappropriate for a dynamic medical setting 
such as trauma resuscitation. They were concerned that audible alerts would only contribute to the

Understanding Delay Awareness 
260:13 
 

room’s noise and overall sense of panic. A charge nurse explained, “I’m totally against audible 
alarms. Horns or anything like that wouldn’t do anything except irritate people” [P5]. Instead, the 
participants (three nurses and one fellow) agreed that audible alerts should only be used in high-
acuity scenarios where team members could not look away from the patient. Two participants 
indicated that audible alerts should be verbal or “personal” alarms. An ED physician described: 

“Something in a pocket that beeped just for me to hear or vibrate would be appropriate because I do 
not want it to be interrupting people who are in the middle of a task” [P8]. 

Six participants, including three charge nurses and three ED physicians, envisioned an information 
display that (1) provides enough information to convey that a delay is occurring and (2) makes the 
type of delay visible to all team members. A charge nurse explained:  

“I envision it being some sort of a screen device that all can see, and we’re not disturbing the rest of 
the room… It’ll turn a different color once that you see that request on the screen. It alerts us to bring 
the team in, figure out if there is a delay, and move on” [P6]. 

Four other participants, including three activity leaders, brainstormed color-changing displays with 
“a color changing on the clock” [P15] or “a screen that populated outstanding orders” [P9] with colors 
based on urgency. Each participant highlighted the need for a system that non-intrusively provides 
high-level information about delays to the whole team. 

Clinicians also expressed several concerns about alerts. Four participants, all attending physicians, 
were concerned that alerts would be a nuisance during procedures. One physician explained, “I have 
trouble thinking of activities that would be a useful alert as opposed to a nagging alert I would just want 
cleared” [P8]. Eight participants voiced concerns that another alerting system would add to alarm 
fatigue, a common concern in health information technology research [38]. When clinicians receive 
too many unhelpful alerts, “people start to ignore alerts” [P7]. The same ED attending continued: 

“I’m a minimalist, I don’t believe in having alerts unless they’re going to really add a lot and change 
how I clinically manage patients. I don’t believe in having more alerts, I think that just leads to more 
alarm fatigue. And at the end of the day, nobody is going to pay attention, or they become more of 
an annoyance.” [P7] 

The card-sorting workshops highlighted three major design requirements for our prototype alert 
system: (1) alert all team roles, (2) avoid alert fatigue through proper timing and frequency of alerts, 
and (3) rapidly convey information without too much detail. 

5 DESIGN RESEARCH: THE PROTOTYPE ALERT SYSTEM AND ALERT ICONS 

5.1 The Prototype Alert System: Design Process and System Overview 

Informed by the interviews and card-sorting workshops, we derived four alerts for prototyping: 
(1) “No IV Access,” (2) “Incomplete Request,” (3) “No Vital Signs or Blood Pressure,” and (4) the time 
interval alert. These final four alerts were adapted from the most prioritized alerts during the 
workshops and combined several alerts based on user feedback. 

We began an iterative sketching process for the alert system using the three design requirements. 
First, we used the 10x10 sketching technique [13] in which we sketched 10 different high-level 
concept ideas for an alerting system and then sketched 10 more ideas for each iteration. We 
discussed each design idea and compiled preferred features into five different ideas. These five ideas 
were discussed with the medical experts on our team before re-sketching based on their feedback.

260:14 

After three rounds of sketching and ideation, we arrived at a grid concept where multiple  alerts 
could be simultaneously displayed through icons (Figure 3). The central area of the grid displays a 
clock showing the elapsed time. When a new alert is triggered, the corresponding icon appears and 
lights up in one of three grid areas (Figure 3, right). To alert activity performers, we developed a 
concept of lights around the ceiling that light up with the grid (Figure 3, left).  

We repeated the 10x10 sketching exercise to design the icons that would accurately represent each 
type of delay and its corresponding alert. After presenting the ideas to the research team, we 
finalized three to eight icons per alert and solicited feedback through a design survey. 

5.2 Design Survey to Determine Icon Designs for Delays and Corresponding Alerts 

5.2.1. 
Methods. We administered an online survey to collect additional data for our third research 
question: “What are potential visual mechanisms for communicating delays to clinicians?” The 
survey participants were recruited from our research site via emails sent to listservs for nurses, ED 
attending physicians, and surgical residents. A total of 310 clinicians received the call for 
participation and 27 responded (Table 2). We piloted the survey with three medical experts on our 
team to ensure clarity of questions and appropriate duration. 

The survey was administered using Qualtrics and took about 10 minutes to complete. The survey 
was divided into four sections. First, the participants were asked about their team role and years of 
experience. Next, the survey summarized the four delays and associated alerts, and then showed 12 
icons representing three of the four alerts: “No IV Access,” “Incomplete Request,” and “No Vital 
Signs or Blood Pressure.” The participants were asked to type in what they thought each icon 
represented. The fourth timer alert was not included in the survey because it was not represented 
by an icon. Each alert was then explained in the following section, along with the correct icon. 
Participants were asked to select the icon that best represented the alert and explain their selections. 
The survey also asked about potential design improvements for each alert. Lastly, the survey 
presented an overview of the prototype alert system and asked for participant feedback. All 
questions were in a free-text format. The survey was anonymous and asked for the participant 
contact information in an unlinked question for the raffle. 

 
Figure 3: Components of the finalized prototype alert system. Left: A collage showing the system overlaid 
on top of a simulation video to illustrate the system (grid with alerts and ceiling lights] in the room. 
Right: A zoomed-in grid component showing the alerts for No IV access (upper left), No vital signs (upper 
right), Incomplete request (bottom), and Time interval (center).

Understanding Delay Awareness 
260:15 
 

5.2.2. 
Findings. The icons for the “No IV 
access” alert (Figure 4) had the highest 
recognizability. Forty percent (n=12) of the 
participants correctly identified Icon B, while 
36.6% (n=11) of the participants correctly 
identified Icon A. In contrast, when asked which 
icon best represented this alert, 60% (n=18) of the 
participants said they preferred Icon A because they did not like the large “X” across the fluid bag. 
Eight participants thought the bag looked like a blood bag rather than an IV fluid bag. Four 
participants recommended adding an “IV needle” or using the letters “IV” as part of the icon design. 
An ED attending wrote that “B looks more like the IV is not working” [SP6] and a bedside nurse wrote, 
“B looks like it’s a clinical instruction not to give blood [SP17]. 

The next most recognizable icons were for the “No vitals or blood pressure” alert (Figure 5). Icon A 
was the most recognizable, with 16.67% (n=5) of the participants correctly identifying the alert. Icon 
B was correctly identified by 10% (n=3) and Icon C by 13.33% (n=4) of the participants. When asked 
which of the three icons best represented the alert, 37% (n=11) of the respondents chose Icon B, 27% 
(n=8) chose Icon C, and 20% (n=6) chose Icon A. Two participants wrote “None.” The participants 
chose Icon B because it was the “cleanest” icon. An emergency attending wrote that “B is a clear 
visual,” but that, “The cross is confusing” [SP1]. Another attending wrote, “This actually looks like a 
vital sign monitor” [SP10]. When asked how they would redesign the icon for this alert, most 
proposed modifying Icon B by removing or increasing the size of the “X” sign.  

The icons for the “Incomplete request” alert were the least recognizable (Figure 6). This finding is 
not surprising because this alert represents the most abstract concept. Four participants correctly 
identified Icon D (13.33%), while Icons A, B, C, and E were each correctly identified by only one 
participant. No participant correctly identified Icons F and G. Forty-three percent (n=13) of the 
participants preferred Icon B, and 20% (n=6) preferred Icons C and G each. The participants who 
chose Icon B liked its simplicity. The participants who preferred Icon G felt it was the most intuitive. 
Several participants proposed an exclamation point and text specifying the delayed activity for Icon 
G. This idea combines the simplicity of Icon B and intuitiveness of Icon G. 

Across all alerts, the most preferred icons did not align with the most recognizable icons. Even after 
learning the correct meaning for all icons, the participants preferred icons with lower 
recognizability. This observation suggests that icon recognizability may not be the most critical 
factor for icon design in a dynamic medical setting. This implication will require clinicians to learn 
the alerts through training or on the job. 

The participants valued “clean” designs and simple icons with visual details and more text. For 
instance, the participants recommended adding the letters “IV” to the “No IV access” alert and an 

 

Figure 5: Icon designs for the “No Vitals or blood pressure” alert. 

 
Figure 4: Icon designs for the “No IV access” alert.

260:16 

activity label for the icons 
representing 
an 
incomplete 
request. 
Eight 
participants 
commented that adding an “X” 
sign to the icon design can add 
confusion. An attending wrote, 
“The small X seems to indicate 
something that has not been done; 
the large X seems like something 
should not be done” [SP10]. Other 
participants similarly thought the 
icon meant, “Do not connect the 
monitor” or “There is no monitor connected to the patient.” The presence of the simple vitals icon as 
an alert already informs clinicians that something is wrong. Adding “X” or “No” creates unnecessary 
confusion. 

Based on the findings from this survey, we re-designed the icons to reflect the feedback (Figure 3). 
We removed any “X” signs from the icons and clarified the IV icon by adding the letters “IV.” We 
selected Icon G for the “Incomplete request” alert but replaced the three lines with the specific text 
indicating the delayed activity. 

6 EVALUATION OF THE PROTOTYPE ALERT SYSTEM 

To answer our fourth and fifth research questions—“How do clinicians perceive visual 
representations of delays?” and “How do clinicians react to and mitigate delays?”—we conducted an 
evaluation study using video-guided, near-live simulations. We next describe our experiment 
design, metrics, approaches to data analysis, and findings. 

6.1 Methods 

6.1.1. 
Experiment Design. Our ultimate goal is to implement this alert system in real-world patient 
care. Before investing into further development, we needed an approach that could objectively 
assess the system’s perceived usefulness and elicit user reactions to delays. The constraints of the 
COVID-19 pandemic, limited resources, and recruitment challenges make the real-world 
simulations unfeasible without first validating the proof of concept. 

To provide evidence that our prototype alert system warrants further development and introduction 
into the resuscitation environment, we conducted near-live, video-guided simulations with 10 
clinicians (Table 1). This approach closely mimics clinical workflows by having participants watch 
video clips of clinical scenarios and simultaneously use systems to evaluate their usability [54]. 
Using a “think aloud” protocol, near-live scenarios can elicit rich information on the user’s thought 
process [54]. Unlike live simulations, near-live simulations allowed us to observe delay response 
and mitigation strategies because the participants were instructed to think aloud and verbalize their 
decision-making processes. Near-live simulations can also save resources and time by creating 
appropriate abstractions of environments and processes rather than exactly replicating them [63]. 
Prior research has shown that near-live simulations provided an immersive experience for the 
participants and achieved similar results as live simulations [54][73]. Our near-live simulations were 
also similar to “telesimulations,” remote medical training protocols used when teaching resources 

 

Figure 6: Icon designs for the “Incomplete request” alert.

Understanding Delay Awareness 
260:17 
 

are scarce [27][46]. A clinical trial has shown that “telesimulations” are as effective as live 
simulations and traditional training methods in achieving learning outcomes [46]. 

We used video recordings from a prior study at our research site to develop evaluation scenarios 
that used real-world simulations. We selected two simulations that were used as controls (i.e., 
trauma teams were directed to perform resuscitations as usual) and that involved several process 
delays. A medical expert on our team reviewed both videos, marking the start and end times for 
each delay and noting other attributes, such as types of delays and how long they lasted. We used 
this data to (1) set up our experimental and control scenarios and (2) as our ground truth in later 
analysis of participant performance. Both videos were 12-14 minutes long. In the first simulation 
video [Team E], the trauma team experienced one delay during patient intubation that would have 
triggered an “Incomplete request” alert for an incomplete intubation task. The team in the second 
simulation video [Team D] experienced two delays. The first delay was in establishing IV access 
that would have triggered the “No IV access” alert. The second delay was in administering blood 
that would have triggered an “Incomplete request” alert. We then edited both simulation videos 
with a functioning illustration of the prototype alert system (Figure 3, left). Using previously marked 
timestamps for each delay, we triggered the alerts in the grid display and ambient lights at those 
time points. The “Incomplete request” alert was activated five minutes after someone had requested 
an activity that was still pending. The “No IV access” alert was triggered after five minutes had 
elapsed and IV access was still missing or if five minutes had elapsed since an additional IV had been 
requested. The “No vitals or blood pressure” alert was triggered if five minutes had elapsed and vital 
signs were still missing. The “Time interval alert” lit up in yellow every five minutes following the 
patient’s arrival. 

During near-live simulations, the clinicians first watched the control version of the scenario (no 
intervention), followed by the experimental scenario (with the prototype alert system overlaid on 
top of the simulation video). Half of the clinicians had Team E video as the experimental scenario 
and Team D as the control scenario, while the other half had the Team D video as the experimental 
scenario and Team E as the control scenario. Each participant observed three delays that would have 
triggered an alert, leading to a total of 30 observations of delay experiences – 15 for the control 
scenario and 15 for the experimental scenario. 

6.1.2. 
Procedure. Each near-live simulation lasted an hour and was conducted over Zoom. We 
first introduced the study and asked the participant about their role and how often they referred to 
displays in the trauma bay. We then presented an overview of the prototype alert system and 
explained all alerts they could potentially see during the session. We instructed the participants to 
watch two simulation scenarios and think aloud about what was happening in the simulation room. 
We also asked them to explain what they would do in response to team actions they observed, what 
they would say to different team members if they were in the room, and anything that came to mind 
while watching the simulations. In the end, we asked questions about their experiences in both 
simulations, whether they thought the prototype system would help improve their awareness of 
delays, and what feedback they had for our design. All sessions were recorded after receiving the 
participant’s permission to record. The Zoom-generated transcripts were downloaded and manually 
corrected for analysis. 

6.1.3. 
Measures and Data Analysis. We reviewed the videos of the control and experimental 
scenarios for all 10 participants to analyze their reactions to visual representations of delays and 
delay response times. In the experimental scenarios, we marked when alerts had been triggered. In 
the control scenarios, we marked when alerts would have been triggered. We then marked the time

260:18 

when the participants detected a delay was occurring. Example phrases that indicated delay 
detection included, “Wow, this is taking a long time” [P13] or “Where’s the blood” [P21]. Two 
researchers independently marked the transcripts for delay detections and compared their results 
to ensure consistency. We calculated delay response time by subtracting the time when the 
participant noticed a delay from when the alert was or would have been triggered. In both scenarios, 
if a participant never voiced awareness of the delay, they received a time of “never,” treated as a 
maximum value to allow calculating a median. 

We also qualitatively analyzed the simulation transcripts using content analysis to understand how 
the participants responded to and mitigated delays. First, the two researchers independently 
reviewed each transcript, identifying themes about reactions to delays, alerts, and system design. 
The researchers then discussed the emerging themes and formalized a list of codes. Next, the 
researchers re-coded the transcripts using the formalized codes and then compared and compiled 
their results to finalize the themes. 

6.2 Findings 

6.2.2. 
Delay Awareness and Response Times. We found that the participants were more likely to 
detect delays in the scenarios with the prototype alert system than in the control scenarios (Table 3). 
The participants voiced awareness of delays in 86% (13 out of 15) of instances in the scenarios with 
the prototype alert system. In the control scenarios, participants voiced awareness of delays in just 
53% (8 out of 15) of instances. When voicing awareness of delays, the participants in the control 
scenarios took longer to respond than the participants in the experimental scenarios. The median 
response time to a delay was 23 seconds in the experimental scenarios and 107 seconds in the control 
scenarios. These findings suggest that a live alert system based on this prototype could improve 
awareness of the most commonly occurring delays during trauma resuscitation. 

6.2.3. 
Reactions to Delays. Our content analysis showed that the system’s alerts prompted one of 
four events from the participants: “Perform/Request Action,” “Perform/Request Modification,” 
“Request Information,” and “Report Progress” (Figure 7). The most common responses to a delay 
were requesting information (6/10) or reporting progress (6/10) shortly after a delay had been 
detected. A participant requested information when they needed more information before deciding 
on an action to mitigate a delay. For example, in response to the “No IV access” alert, an attending 

Table 3: The participants’ performance in detecting process delays with and without the prototype alert 
system and in responding to delays in scenarios with the system in place.

Understanding Delay Awareness 
260:19 
 

said, “If I saw the IV alert flash, I would have said ‘do we have a line, or do we only have our IO,’ which 
then would have clarified for the team… then I would refocus the team on that” [P18]. The attending 
explained that this alert would have triggered them to gather more information about the status of 
the activity and then move on to an action to mitigate the delay. Another attending explained they 
would ask the team “Is someone working on that?” [P7] to determine whether any team member was 
actively working on the task or whether a further intervention was needed. Similarly, a surgical 
resident said they would “want to know why it’s taking so long” [P13] and discuss any existing 
roadblocks with the team. A shift coordinator explained, “If we see these [alerts] are going off, I will 
circle back and ask where we are at with that” [P5]. 

Participants used the report progress event to inform the team about the patient’s status. An 
attending described how she would have “given another summary [to the team] about the patient” 
[P19]. A shift coordinator said that the time interval alert would have triggered them to “summarize 
[the activity so far], so this is where we’re at, we have this plan moving forward, and what are our 
impending actions” [P5]. Participants P7, P8, P10, P19, P20, and P21 stated they would share with the 
team that an alert indicating a delay had been triggered. 

Sometimes the participants immediately worked to mitigate the delay by performing or requesting 
an action or performing or requesting a modification for an existing action. A surgical resident 
explained that after noticing the “No IV access” alert, they would announce to the room, “We still 
don’t have a guy working on [task]… we need to work on getting it” [P13]. After noticing the 
“Incomplete request” alert about delayed blood transfusion, an attending said they would “redirect 
them to the primary low blood pressure at this point to try to focus on the hypotension” [P19]. A nurse 
practitioner described that if they were alerted of an IV access delay, they would “just jump right to 
an IO” [P10], a more invasive but quicker method for establishing IV access. 

Activity leaders most frequently requested information to receive status updates from activity 
performers (Table 4). Activity performers requested information less often because they were busy 
completing the activity. The frequency of the other two mitigation mechanisms was consistent 
between activity performers and leaders. The next most frequent mechanism was “Report progress,” 
followed by “Request action and modification” (Table 4). 

Eight out of 10 participants found the prototype alert system helpful in increasing their awareness 
of delays (Table 4). The participants thought that the time interval alert helped them keep track of 

 
Figure 7: Participant actions prompted by the prototype alert system while responding to process delays. 

• Requests status update on activity or patient status
Request Information

• Updates the team about the delay, time, or other 

team information
Report Progress

• Requests team member to perform an action to 

address the delay 
Perform/Request 

Action

• Requests team member to change how they are 

performing an activity
Perform/Request 

Modification

260:20 

time. A shift coordinator described, “In a critical patient, sometimes you can lose track of time easily 
… so I think these little cues could be helpful” [P5]. An attending said the timing mechanism was 
helpful since team leaders could say, “It’s been X number of minutes since the patient is in here, and 
that can also really help the team” [P19]. A surgical resident thought the time interval alert served a 
purpose for team leaders to say, “Oh, it’s been five minutes, and we still haven’t even moved to the 
secondary survey” [P13]. The time interval alert supported temporal awareness, reminding the 
participants of pending activities and to share information with the team. Participants P5, P8, P18, 
and P21 also commented that the time interval alert could support temporal awareness. 

The other alerts on the grid were also found helpful, including the “Incomplete request” and “No IV 
access” alerts. An attending said, “Especially from outside, watching the icons of what’s actually 
missing helped because I had mistakenly thought [the patient] had another IV” [P17]. Another 
attending thought the monitor alerts provided “clarity on tasks that have not been done without 
having to look down at any papers or ask someone” [P8]. A nurse practitioner similarly stated that the 
alerts would “help the team leader maintain situational awareness as to priorities and getting the 
patient what they need quickly” [P10]. 

All four participants in the activity performer roles favored the ambient lights that lit up alongside 
the alert grid. Two attending physicians were skeptical of this element [P7, P18], and a shift 
coordinator could not give an opinion because “you never know until you see it in person” [P5]. 
Activity performers perceived this element helpful. For example: 

“I like the idea of the light bar around the room because everyone else who’s not standing at the foot 
of the bed where we are will see it too. Not that they need to look at the monitor even but, just like 
share awareness of what’s going on” [P10]. 

This same participant later added, “It’s not just one person’s job, but the whole team needs to be alert” 
[P10]. A surgical resident shared similar thoughts: 

“At least for me as an evaluator, I don’t really pay attention to [monitors] because you’re focused on 
what’s going on in front of you, however, if I could see it in the periphery, I would know what’s 
going on” [P13]. 

Four participants, all in “activity leader” roles, found at least one element of the prototype alert 
system not useful, unclear, or distracting. A nurse practitioner thought the icon alerts were 

Table 4: The frequency of four delay response mechanisms across activity leaders vs. performers, and 

whether they perceived the prototype alert system useful or not.

Understanding Delay Awareness 
260:21 
 

distracting because it took more mental effort to interpret an icon than to interpret the light, “I guess 
just seeing it in the corner of my eye and trying to understand it versus the light” [P5]. A charge nurse 
thought the lights and icons were both too general, stating “The reminder doesn’t really help if you 
don’t know what the criteria is or what is missing” and “For someone to say it’s been five minutes or 10 
minutes, that doesn’t really mean anything to me” [P20]. However, following this statement, this 
same participant added, “Well… I suppose it has been nine minutes and we’re not at the secondary 
survey yet” [P20]. Rather than prompting these participants to give summaries or check status 
updates, the alerts added confusion. One attending physician thought that the prototype alert 
system did not give enough information, “Honestly, I was expecting more help out of that prompt 
thing… it didn’t actually give me any information” [P17]. Another concern from an attending 
physician was that the alerts would “anchor the team leader to addressing those alerts over other 
sources of information they’re getting” [P8]. 

7 DISCUSSION 

Our study has several implications for CSCW research and system design, including how 
computerized support can be designed to increase delay awareness in complex teamwork, as well 
as how complex teams respond to and mitigate delays. 

7.1 Implications for CSCW Research 

In this study, we aimed to design a prototype alert system to support delay awareness among 
clinicians working in a dynamic medical setting. By conducting user research with multiple roles, 
we were able to understand the information and alerting needs for different role types. A major 
challenge in designing technology for complex teamwork is ensuring that needs of all team 
members are met [8][52] . To design our system, we relied on two overarching role types found in 
both medical and non-medical team settings: activity performers (in our case, the clinicians who 
actively evaluate and treat the patient) and activity leaders (in our case, the clinicians charged with 
leading the team and/or documenting the team's progress). 

Our findings suggest that activity performers require an alerting system that can quickly impart the 
minimum amount of information required to understand that a specific delay is occurring. In 
contrast, activity leaders require non-intrusive, but more detailed alerts that help inform the leader 
how best to mitigate an occurring delay. The debates during the card-sorting workshops on alert 
prioritization and alert format helped us determine the similarities and differences in how each role 
wanted information presented and then reach a preliminary design that addressed most of the needs 
of both role types. While we considered these two role types from a medical perspective, leaders 
and performers can be found in other collocated and distributed team-based domains such as search 
and rescue operations [47] and air traffic control [48]. For example, search and rescue operations 
are also high-stakes, time-sensitive events, while wilderness search and rescue teams (WSAR) are 
collaborative teams with performer and leader roles requiring different alert mechanisms from an 
alerting system [47]. WSAR performers—team members on the ground performing the search 
operations—may be more susceptible to time blindness like our activity performers in trauma 
resuscitation. Using an alert like our time-interval alert could improve their delay awareness. 
Additionally, alerts indicating that crucial steps of WSAR protocols have yet to be completed can 
trigger delay awareness among WSAR leaders and expedite mitigation strategies.

260:22 

Our approach to understanding how complex teams mitigate delays could apply to WSAR and yield 
insights on how to improve teamwork and collaboration in this critical domain. Similarly, 
conducting near-live simulations that trigger delay detection in the domain of air traffic control 
could help researchers identify the mechanisms for delay mitigation used by different roles, further 
informing the technological or training needs. 

We also found that leveraging icons could help meet the needs of both role types. These simplistic 
illustrations conveying complex information were appropriate for alerting clinicians of delays 
because the participants could quickly absorb the presented information with a glance. In addition, 
the ambient lights surrounding the workspace allowed for alerting activity performers of delays 
without requiring them to look up or take their eyes off the patient. We observed that icon 
recognizability was not the most critical factor when designing icons and that clinicians preferred 
cleaner and more simplistic designs, even if that meant more training. These findings suggest that 
icon simplicity may be preferred over its immediate recognizability in time-critical and team-based 
work settings. 

Overall, our participants were more likely to detect a delay using our alert system in the 
experimental scenarios compared to their delay detection rates in the control scenarios. Both role 
types perceived the prototype alert system useful and thought the system would have made a 
meaningful clinical difference during actual resuscitations. These results, however, need to be 
considered against several study limitations. First, the user research components had small sample 
sizes that limited our ability to evaluate our findings and statistically generalize the results. Second, 
this study was conducted at one research site and the cultures and practices at other institutions 
could show different trends. For example, our prototype alert system focused on addressing the five 
most common delays we identified by interviewing clinicians at our research site. Other sites may 
manage other types of delays. Even so, the delays we identified are common in a range of dynamic 
medical settings, including the ICU and neonatal resuscitation, suggesting a broader medical 
applicability of our system [69]. 

In future work, we will evaluate a higher fidelity alert system in live simulations to measure the 
effects of the system on team performance and whether the alerts lead to faster delay mitigation. 
Observing the entire teams using the system in real time will yield more data about how teams work 
together to mitigate delays, as well as the effects of the system on their performance. Our delay 
response metric in this study depended on the participants consistently thinking aloud to capture 
their awareness of delays. While this approach allowed for insights into clinicians’ thought 
processes and decision-making surrounding delays, a more realistic simulation would also allow for 
a more precise measurement of delay response times and awareness levels. Live simulations would 
also allow for better evaluation of the ambient light component. Now that we have shown the 
potential of this prototype alert system, we can use the insights and findings to further improve 
upon the alert designs and overall system design.

Understanding Delay Awareness 
260:23 
 

7.2 Delay Mitigation Framework and Mechanisms for Delay Mitigation 

By designing and introducing our prototype alert system to support delay awareness, we could 
pinpoint the moment a clinician detected the delay and then observe the actions they took once 
they attained awareness. Through analysis of the participants’ reactions, we identified four 
mechanisms for delay mitigation in team-based dynamic work organized into a delay mitigation 
framework (Figure 8). The participants responded to delay awareness with one of four actions: 
request information, report progress, request/perform action, and request/perform modification. 
After detecting a delay, the participants would most frequently request information from activity 
performers or report progress on what has been achieved so far to gather information about patient 
and team status, or any roadblocks preventing the team from completing the activity. After the 
participants established sufficient situational awareness to understand what needed to be done to 
mitigate the delay, they would request or perform a new action or modify an existing action. 
Sometimes, the participants already had sufficient situational awareness after the alert to decide 
what actions to take to address the delay. In that case, they would immediately instruct the team to 
mitigate delay.  

Previous research has described how trauma resuscitation teams respond to delays and other non-
routine events by “compensating” and “acknowledging” the events [81]. Our mechanisms of delay 
mitigation further unpack how complex teams “acknowledge” and “compensate” delays by showing 
the specific actions they take. This overall framework for delay mitigation can now be used to 
further inform the design of computerized support for complex teamwork. Although we focused on 
designing a series of alerts to communicate different delay types, other approaches could provide 
support at the level of information integration at the critical junctures of the framework. For 
example, a system that continuously provides the updates about current team activity could support 
activity leaders in the information gathering step. Similarly, a system that recommends alternative 
steps to achieving an activity when a common route is not feasible could support activity performers 
when modifying an action. 

The four mechanisms of delay mitigation can also be generalized to other complex teams, such as 
flight crews [26], air traffic controllers [48], and online role-playing game teams [55][64]. For 
example, we could see these mechanisms applying to Dismukes’ [26] work on flight crew responses 

 
Figure 8: A graphical representation of the delay mitigation framework and the four mechanisms for 
delay mitigation. 

Delay 
Awareness

Gather 
Information
Mitigate

Delay

Action

Modification

Request 
Information

Report 
Progress

260:24 

to challenging and stressful events. While Dismukes et al. studied how flight crew behaviors lead to 
delays and errors [26], identifying when and how flight crew use the four delay mitigation 
mechanisms could yield a better understanding of how to support flight crews and decrease the 
number of critical events. Another domain where delay mitigation mechanisms could be applied is 
online role-playing game (PRG) teams. Recently, CSCW researchers have studied how online game 
players work together to achieve game goals, focusing on the social behavior patterns [55][64]. As 
these teams also experience and mitigate delays during encounters, applying our delay mitigation 
framework may lead to new insights into players’ social behaviors as they engage in online play.  
These examples illustrate the need for studying these mechanisms across domains to allow for a 
better understanding of how best to support complex teams and decrease critical delays and errors. 

8 CONCLUSION 

In this paper, we presented the findings from an iterative user-centered design process to develop a 
prototype alert system to support delay awareness in complex teamwork such as trauma 
resuscitation. We investigated (a) how different trauma team members experience delays, (b) 
differences in design preferences for an alerting system by team role, (c) clinicians’ perceptions of 
icon designs representing delays, and (d) clinicians’ responses to delays. To gain this understanding, 
we conducted a series of research activities, including interviews, a card-sorting workshop, an icon 
design survey, and video-guided, near-live simulations. As part of our contributions to awareness 
research, we created a proof-of-concept for a prototype alert system that triggers the detection of 
delays in complex teamwork and a framework with four mechanisms through which teams mitigate 
delays. Our future work will focus on developing a high-fidelity prototype that can be evaluated in 
real-world simulations and then implemented in patient care.