Vol.:(0123456789)

https://doi.org/10.1007/s00520-021-06347-x

ORIGINAL ARTICLE

A hybrid method of healthcare delivery research and human‑centered 
design to develop technology‑enabled support for caregivers 
of hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients

Lauren R. Bangerter1   · Monica Looze2 · Barbara Barry2 · Kathleen Harder3 · Joan Griffin2 · Meredith Dezutter2 · 
Nandita Khera4 · Sikander Ailawadhi5 · Karen Schaepe2 · Kristin Fischer2

Received: 15 December 2020 / Accepted: 6 June 2021 
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature 2021

Abstract
Health information technology (HIT) is a widely recognized strategy to encourage cancer patients and caregivers to partici-
pate in healthcare delivery in a sustainable and cost-effective way. In the context of autologous hematopoietic cell transplant 
(HSCT), HIT-enabled tools have the potential to effectively engage, educate, support, and optimize outcomes of patients 
and caregivers in the outpatient setting. This study sought to leverage human-centered design to develop a high-fidelity pro-
totype of a HIT-enabled psychoeducational tool for HSCT caregivers. Phase 1 focuses on breadth and depth of information 
gathering through a systematic review and semi-structured interviews to determine optimal tool use. Phase 2 engages in 
human-centered design synthesis and visualization methods to identify key opportunities for the HIT design. Phase 3 employs 
human-centered design evaluation, engaging caregivers to respond to low-fidelity concepts and scenarios to help co-design 
an optimal tool for HSCT. This study outlines a hybrid method of healthcare delivery research and human-centered design to 
develop technology-enabled support for HSCT caregivers. Herein, we present a design methodology for developing a proto-
type of HIT-enabled psychoeducational tool which can be leveraged to develop future eHealth innovations to optimize HSCT.

Keywords  Design methodology · Health information technology · Caregivers

Background

Health information technology (HIT) enables and encour-
ages cancer patients and their family caregivers to build 
knowledge, gain practical training, and receive social 
support throughout the cancer continuum [1, 2]. National 

experts have called for research to develop technology-
driven tools to support caregivers of persons with cancer [1, 
3]. Hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT) is one of sev-
eral treatments that has gravitated to the outpatient setting, 
and with this shift, care responsibilities are placed on family 
caregivers who must strictly monitor infection, medication, 
and activity [4]. While innovative work in pediatric HSCT 
has leveraged HIT to support caregivers [5, 6], less work 
has leveraged HIT to optimize adult HSCT caregiver psych-
oeducation (e.g., offering education and support through a 
technology-based platform instead of in-person); thus, little 
is known about the feasibility of developing HIT-enabled 
tools with this caregiver population [5].
Healthcare innovations often languish, never crossing 
the chasm between an innovative idea and relevance to the 
everyday needs of patients, caregivers, and providers. While 
human-centered design is a promising method to engage 
consumers, ensure relevance, and drive implementation of 
healthcare interventions [7, 8], few studies have reconciled 
tensions between human-centered design methods and evi-
dence-based research [9]. In this study, we employ a novel 

 *	 Lauren R. Bangerter 
	

1	
UnitedHealth Group Research and Development, 
Minnetonka, MN, USA

2	
Mayo Clinic Robert D. and Patricia E Kern Center 
for the Science of Healthcare Delivery, Mayo Clinic, 
Rochester, MN, USA

3	
Center for Design in Health, University of Minnesota, 
Minneapolis, MN, USA

4	
Division of Hematology, Mayo Clinic Arizona, Scottsdale, 
AZ, USA

5	
Division of Hematology, Mayo Clinic Florida, Jacksonville, 
FL, USA

/ Published online: 13 July 2021

hybrid method of healthcare delivery research and human-
centered design to articulate effective and human-centered 
HIT support for HSCT caregivers (Figure 1). The objec-
tive of this study was to leverage human-centered design to 
develop a high-fidelity prototype of a HIT-enabled psych-
oeducational tool for HSCT caregivers. Phase 1 focused on 
breadth and depth of information gathering to determine the 
optimal use of the tool. Phase 2 engaged in human-centered 
design methodology to design a tool that would be mean-
ingful to the end-user and user-friendly. Phase 3 focused on 
evaluative design research, where caregivers responded to 
low-fidelity concepts and scenarios to help co-design opti-
mal interventions. Future phases include a feasibility study 
of the tool using a small sample of caregivers and a rand-
omized control trial to assess how utilization of the tool is 
linked to caregiver and recipient outcomes.

Methods

Phase 1: information gathering

Systematic review

Phase 1 began with a systematic review of interventions 
for caregivers of adult HSCT recipients. We found that 
few interventions for HSCT caregivers leverage HIT [10]. 
Our review indicated that nearly all caregiver interventions 
were delivered in-person. Only one study used a technology-
enabled intervention. Moreover, several studies included in 
our review suggested that feasibility could be improved by 
alternative intervention delivery platforms, such as smart 
phones or web-based platforms.

Caregiver survey

This study (PR17-009030-01) obtained institutional review 
board approval and took place from June 2018 to October 
2018 across three transplant centers in Minnesota, Arizona, 
and Florida. HSCT recipients were identified through medi-
cal records as having received an autologous HSCT within 
the past year. HSCT recipients (n = 384) were emailed an 
electronic survey inquiring about their experience during 
HSCT, use of HIT, and seeking health information. Recipi-
ents who completed the survey (n = 134) were asked to 
identify and provide contact information for the caregiver 
who provided care during their transplant; 76 recipients 
identified a caregiver. Caregivers were then invited by email 
to complete an online survey focused on their caregiving 
experience, well-being, and health information–seeking 
behaviors. The survey also asked questions about their use 
of the Internet to find cancer-related health information. The 
survey was developed by the lead author in collaboration 
with the Mayo Clinic Survey Research Center. The survey 
assessed demographic information, relationship to the care 
recipient. The survey included the National Comprehensive 
Cancer Network’s (NCCN) distress thermometer which 
measures distress over the past week on a 10-point scale (0 
= no distress to 10 = extreme distress) and a checklist of 35 
practical, physical, family, emotional, and spiritual concerns 
in the past week that are perceived causes of distress [11, 
12]. Several survey questions were adapted from the Health 
Information National Trends Survey (HINTS) including a 
series of yes/no questions to assess Internet use to find health 
information as well as health information–seeking behavior. 
Caregivers (n = 63) completed the online survey and, at 
the end of the survey, indicated whether they would like to 
participate in an interview.

Fig. 1   Phases of study

228

Caregiver interviews

Caregivers who agreed to future contact (n = 33) were 
contacted by a study coordinator to participate in a semi-
structured phone interview about their caregiving experi-
ences. Caregivers provided oral consent prior to beginning 
the interview. Semi-structured interviews were conducted 
by phone with 10 caregivers. Interview questions focused 
on the experience of providing care leading up to and dur-
ing HSCT as well as the emotional impact following HSCT. 
Caregivers were also asked to describe their experience 
finding information about HSCT and what aspects of the 
HSCT experience they felt most prepared and underprepared 
for. Caregivers were also asked to describe what informa-
tion, service, or support would have been most helpful to 
them during their HSCT caregiving experience. Theoretical 
saturation was established after 10 interviews. The inter-
views were conducted by a doctoral-level qualitative analyst, 
audio-recorded, and transcribed verbatim for content analy-
sis. The interviews ranged from 20 to 70 minutes, averaging 
45 min.

Provider group conversations

At three transplant centers, we moderated group conversa-
tions with transplant providers (nurses, physicians, nurse 
coordinators, social workers, and support staff). Two groups 
participated in a virtual discussion through videoconferenc-
ing and one group participated in-person. The goal for these 
group conversations was to elicit a provider view on how the 
team members think about and address problems raised by 
HSCT caregivers. The conversations with providers from 
three transplant centers ranged from 15 to 25 min, and group 
size was n = 7, n = 16, and n = 40, respectively. Conversa-
tions were moderated by a doctoral-level qualitative analyst.

Phase 1: information gathering results

Caregiver survey  A total of 63 caregivers completed the sur-
vey (mean age=59; SD=11). Most caregivers were women 
(76.2%) and white (93%). No caregivers in our study were 
employed full-time, 42% had taken a leave of absence from 
work, 39% were retired, 10% were employed full-time, and 
8% were unemployed. Nearly all caregivers (90%) were mar-
ried, 6% were single, and 3% were divorced. Caregivers in 
our sample were highly educated; 19% had a masters, doc-
toral, or professional degree, 39% had a bachelor degree, 
17% had an associate degree, 15% had some college, and 
8% had a high school diploma.
Most (98%) caregivers were Internet users, and the 
majority of respondents (84%) gained access to the Internet 
through a wireless network. Most caregivers (95%) were 
smartphone users, and 71% were tablet users. The most 

common uses of the Internet were to look up health or medi-
cal information for someone else (88%), look up medical/
test results (85%), look up health or medical information for 
themselves (82%), and communicate with a doctor’s office 
(71%). When asked about seeking information about cancer, 
28% of caregivers agreed that it took a lot of effort to find 
information, 36% reported feeling frustrated while search-
ing for information, and 60% of caregivers were concerned 
about the quality of the information.

Caregiver interviews  The team used content analysis, affin-
ity diagramming, and a journey map framework to uncover 
themes from semi-structured interviews. Four themes 
emerged: (1) points of tension between the caregiver’s needs, 
the HSCT recipient’s need, and the healthcare system, (2) 
educational resources that caregivers use throughout trans-
plant: (3) caregiver roles throughout the transplant trajec-
tory including advocate, researcher, and community seeker; 
and (4)caregiver goals they wish to achieve while providing 
care.

Points of tension  Results identified points of tension 
between the caregiver’s needs, the needs of the HSCT recipi-
ent, and the healthcare system. Tensions arose when there 
were discrepancies between the expectations of the HSCT 
experience vs. what actually happened with the recipient. 
Tensions arose when caregiver needs conflicted with recipi-
ent needs or when information they received was incorrect 
or confusing. In other cases, conflict arose when caregivers 
took on the role of “bad cop,” enforcing regulations and 
restrictions on the recipient.

Educational resources  Caregivers explained that they looked 
for “reputable” sources, trusted their providers, and were 
prolific consumers of online health information. Caregiv-
ers got their information from providers (physicians, nurses, 
social workers), health system provided paper, websites, and 
patient portal, support groups, and general Internet searches.

Caregiver roles  Caregivers played an advocate role when 
the healthcare system seemed to be failing, the recipient 
had severe symptoms, or they did not feel heard. Another 
role was that of community seeker. Seeking and establish-
ing a supportive community were essential for nearly all 
caregivers. Community was sought through digital chan-
nels, support groups, or informal conversations and friend-
ships formed in clinic. While the timing of community 
seeking behaviors varies, all caregivers who sought com-
munity found it helpful. Caregivers also took on the role of 
researcher, particularly during diagnosis and the pre-trans-
plant preparation phase.

229

Caregiver goals  Caregivers displayed a range of goals 
including giving the recipient the best care possible, gath-
ering as much reputable information as possible, seeking a 
range of opinions, finding support from the clinical team, 
and seeking social support.

Input from providers

From the views of providers, caregivers seem to have more 
trepidation about early discharge than recipients or clini-
cal providers. All three transplant centers admit they have 
little insight about burden on caregivers after discharge, as 
much of the interaction with caregivers is pre- and during 
the HSCT. Providers expressed that the biggest periods of 
anxiety and need for caregivers occur immediately after 
diagnosis and shortly before discharge. From the provider 
view, caregivers focus on the logistics of the outpatient 
environment. Providers highlighted the difficulty of pre-
paring families for an experience that is “hard to describe.” 
Each team discussed the need to improving education for 
caregivers at discharge, noting that after the HSCT recipi-
ent returns home, communication with clinic is limited 
or less consistent outside of scheduled follow-up visits. 
Providers recognize the need to support caregivers and 
had accurate perceptions about where such opportunities 
were but acknowledged barriers to providing this support.

Phase 2: human‑centered design

Phase 2 built on information gathered during Phase 1, using 
human-centered design methods that would inform concept 
development in Phase 3. We created a journey map to visu-
alize the user experience holistically [8]. Journey mapping 
is a mechanism to understand phases, events involved in the 
healthcare experiences [13, 14]. Next, through a 3-h brain-
storming workshop with the research team, we developed 
early service concepts to test with caregivers. The final pur-
pose of this phase was to develop storyboards that illustrated 
potential future state vignettes to share with caregivers as 
provocations for feedback during concept development in 
Phase 3.

Analysis

Using the journey map, we created a framework to catego-
rize data gathered during Phase 1 into positive and negative 
experiences, including sentiments, quotes, and thoughts at 
each stage of the HSCT experience (Figure 2). This approach 
illuminated opportunities for intervention through visualiz-
ing the density of experience at different phases of HSCT.

Synthesis

Journey mapping synthesis illustrated the lived experience 
of the HSCT caregivers in a visual format, allowing the team 

Fig. 2   Analysis framework for Phase 2

230

to develop shared understanding of the findings. Current 
state pain points were identified as actionable opportunities 
to meet caregiver needs in the future, quotes illustrated the 
sentiments and feelings of caregivers, a timeline of phases 
and locations indicated variability in caregiver journeys, and 
it acted as a generalizable framework for understanding how 
to intervene appropriately with a HIT tool at a given point 
in time (Figure 3).

Concept development

The research team engaged in a 3-h interdisciplinary brain-
storming workshop. The team reviewed the opportunities 
from the journey map; engaged with specific illustrative 
quotes and scenarios; and considered “what if” statements 
and advanced technologies, such as machine learning and 
wearable technology to push the concepts toward innovat-
ing the HIT within the overall experience of caregivers. The 
designers combined ideas to create six future state prototype 
storyboards to evaluate with users in Phase 3.

Phase 2: human‑centered design results

Transition  Transitional periods caused the most stress, anxi-
ety, and burden for caregivers. These transitions emerged as 
(1.) spatial transitions, such as changes in location that occur 
several times throughout the experience (i.e., relocating for 

several weeks); (2.) temporal transitions or how patient sta-
tus and caregiver roles change over time; and (3.) emotional 
transitions which often correlate with the severity of recipi-
ent side effects. We therefore see an opportunity to optimize 
caregiver preparation by delivering information in anticipa-
tion of key transitions.

Preparation  Caregivers expressed a desire for high-level 
information about HSCT but also the more nuanced and 
logistical aspects of the process. Caregivers are actively 
engaged in health information seeking to become better 
prepared, but a significant proportion of caregivers in Phase 
1 reported that seeking health information was frustrating, 
and most were concerned about the quality of information. 
Therefore, there is an opportunity for HIT-enabled tools to 
make health information easier to find, more manageable, 
and more credible in the eyes of caregivers.

Symptom assessment  Evaluating the severity of symp-
toms in the outpatient setting was difficult for caregivers. 
Caregivers felt uncertain about their abilities to accurately 
determine whether the symptoms are sufficiently severe to 
warrant a call to the transplant center or a trip to the emer-
gency department. We found that the severity of caregiver 
anxiety was correlated with the severity of the recipient’s 
symptoms. Therefore, there is an opportunity for the HIT 

Fig. 3   Journey mapping to synthesize the lived experience of the 
HSCT caregivers. Notes: We used journey mapping to synthesize the 
lived experience of the HSCT caregivers. Journey maps function as 

visual narratives of an experience of a service or activities over time. 
The purpose of journey mapping is to visualize the experience and 
create consensus in transdisciplinary teams

231

solution to support caregivers to confidently detect and inter-
pret symptoms.

Social support  Caregivers expressed the value they got from 
social support or lamented the fact that they felt isolated 
because they didn’t have social support. These findings indi-
cate an opportunity to build social support and community 
for caregivers.

Concept development

The design team synthesized ideas from the workshop into 
the following future state concept storyboards (Fig. 4):

1.	 Personalization: HSCT caregiver experience is per-
sonalized based on medical, psychosocial, and other 
extraneous factors to personalize the experience to each 
caregiver.
2.	 Transparency and engagement: A visual timeline indi-
cating future steps and decisions in the transplant pro-
cess. The scenario also illustrates an educational module 
that includes advice on how to be an advocate for the 
recipient.
3.	 Educational delivery: A future including an educational 
video library with flexible viewing options. The library 
includes medical videos, how-to videos, and prompts to 
reflect in a journal and record relevant questions to ask 
their clinicians.

4.	 Symptom assessment support: Videos and discussion 
prompts designed to prepare caregivers to assess symp-
toms in the outpatient setting. The recipient is shown 
wearing wearable technology to monitor fever and other 
symptoms, with visualized trend lines that provide a 
prompt for the caregiver to proactively call the hospital 
before symptoms become life-threatening.
5.	 Care for the caregiver: A caregiver needs assessment 
with questions (ranging from sleep and exercise to 
stress and mental health) to be administered periodically 
through the transplant and provide recommendations.
6.	 Caregiver–recipient relationship: Strategies to help the 
caregiver and recipient communicate with one another 
and anticipate relational changes that may arise during 
transplant.

Phase 3: human‑centered design evaluation

Concept evaluation

During Phase 1, caregivers who indicated interest in further 
study participation were contacted by a research coordinator 
to participate in the concept evaluation. Using the individual 
future state scenarios described above, we conducted con-
cept evaluation exercises during interviews with caregivers 
(n = 5) recruited from the same pool of participants from 
Phase 1 to share the scenarios and elicit feedback through 
semi-structured interviews. Modest sample sizes are stand-
ard in human-centered design methodology especially 

Fig. 4   Concept storyboards. Notes: Concept storyboards are used to 
illustrate future state scenarios, with known problems solved with 
innovative solutions. These function as a low-fidelity way for partici-

pants to respond to early ideas without spending resources developing 
a HIT tool that does not resonate with users

232

during the formative phase of product development [15]. 
During this phase, feedback from participants contributes 
to the iterative nature of design.
First, we asked each participant to broadly describe their 
stem cell transplant experience, beginning with the earliest 
memories of diagnosis until present day. Next, we began the 
affinity diagraming process by asking participants to sponta-
neously respond to six future state scenarios which elicited 
discussion and suggestions on how to improve some of our 
hypothetical solutions and offered affirmations of others. 
Affinity diagramming is a widely used technique to organ-
ize large amounts of data and encourage new patterns of 
thinking and design direction [16, 17]. This process entailed 
two researchers collecting data from participants, indepen-
dently writing affinity notes, and jointly analyzing the data 
by creating a single paper-based affinity diagram to organize 
participant responses into groups or themes [16, 18].
Finally, participants were asked to sort ~30 cards into 
a framework of known stages of the HSCT process (e.g., 
“pre-transplant preparation”), as well as information they 
would find useful during each stage of HSCT, where each 
card contained a specific piece of education, information, or 
other content that the team hypothesized would be useful to 
caregivers. These content cards ranged from hotel recom-
mendations to symptom assessment to caregiver wellness 
suggestions. Participants were also provided with blank 
cards to elicit information. The feedback was used to “iter-
ate” on the concepts in a cycle of continuous improvement 
and optimization for potential users.

Phase 3: human‑centered design evaluation results

The scenario evaluation revealed 4 overarching themes 
(personalization, preparation, self-care, and attitudes 
toward HIT) to prioritize future recommendations, features, 
and design parameters of HIT-enabled tools for HSCT 
caregivers.

Personalization

There is great value in the potential for HIT-enabled tools to 
be tailored to HSCT caregiver needs. This personalization 
should not manifest as a one-time assessment at the begin-
ning of the journey; instead, it is an on-going need that must 
integrate with the entire journey, changing and evolving as 
necessary, through context-specific clues, and easy-to-adjust 
features. HIT-enabled tools should support continued choice 
and personalization for users and, ideally, learn from their 
choices over time. As the technology matures, machine 
learning capabilities and predictive analytics will allow such 
applications to become more intelligent, understanding user 
profiles, different journey paths, and past selection choices to 
proactively personalize the application. This personalization 

could also be based on the HSCT recipient’s health and side 
effects. Some caregivers in our study dealing with severely 
ill recipients were worried they could not adequately care for 
the recipient and felt they needed far more post-transplant 
medical support. We concluded that HIT-enabled tools could 
support caregivers of recipients that experience moderate 
side effects but could be supplemented with additional sup-
port in symptom assessment.

Preparation

Specifically, caregivers wanted to understand the “big pic-
ture,” have their questions answered in a timely manner, 
feel prepared, and understand the treatment timeline. More 
granular suggestions around treatment (e.g., a shopping list, 
home-care guides) would have demonstrable impact on car-
egiver preparation.

Self‑care

Caregivers did not see value in a HIT-enabled tool to address 
their own health. Four out of five participants noted that they 
would have found suggestions for self-care (e.g., a weekly 
reminder to exercise) “inappropriate” or “annoying.” Car-
egivers talked at length about engaging in self-care by con-
necting to others as the transplant process unfolded. The 
design implications for these findings shift our interpreta-
tion of self-care for the caregiver; HIT-enabled tools must 
assess and promote self-care that is appropriate for cancer 
caregivers, recognizing that this may fall outside of common 
definitions of self-care.

Attitudes toward HIT

Caregivers had different responses to some of the functional-
ity of the scenario storyboards, but in all cases, caregivers 
expressed a positive attitude toward HIT and that they would 
like to have this, or a similar HIT-enabled tool, available to 
them.
Participants felt comfortable using a digital applica-
tion but noted that they still value face-to-face human 
interactions.

Content card sort

The team used the card sort to prioritize content that should 
be universal to every user as well as pieces of information 
that could be considered in a tailored intervention. High-
priority content is defined as content that was chosen as 
important by every user (n = 5). This content included social 
support, education, and recovery information, contact infor-
mation for the clinical team, understanding the HSCT pro-
cess, and logistical information and supplies list. (This was 

233

suggested to us by all participants but not included in our 
card sort.) Personalized content was defined by less homog-
enous responses that would be useful to different types of 
caregivers from different contexts.

Clinical implications

HIT-enabled applications in HSCT should support user 
choice and preferences and potentially use machine learning 
to personalize the application. Another implication is that 
while these technologies are promising, they have limita-
tions, and some caregivers need support beyond what can 
be provided by even the most well-designed HIT-enabled 
tool. It is critical to identify risk factors for caregivers who 
will need heightened support. Another implication is that 
a primary use of the tool should be to optimize caregiver 
preparation including large-scale aspects of treatment as 
well as practical preparation.

Study limitations

Our study has several limitations. First, although we col-
lected data from three different transplant centers, our 
sample sizes are not representative of the larger HSCT 
caregiver population. Future work should include large, 
diverse samples of caregivers with varying levels of health 
literacy. Second, our study did not include HSCT recipients. 
A future direction of our work is to build knowledge of how 
HIT-enabled tools can dually benefit caregivers and HSCT 
recipients.

Conclusions

Integrating human-centered design methodologies can 
uncover unmet human needs to ensure HIT-enabled tools can 
advance psycho-oncology by meeting the needs of HSCT 
recipients and their caregivers. This work demonstrates a 
robust, multidisciplinary approach to engaging in human-
centered design processes in the cancer context. Further 
development of this work can facilitate the calls of national 
experts and stakeholders to develop technology-driven inter-
ventions to support cancer caregivers [1].

Author contribution  All authors contributed to the study conception 
and design.

Funding  This study was supported by The Eagles Fifth District Cancer 
Telethon pilot grant.

Data availability  Data are available upon request from the correspond-
ing author.

Code availability  N/A.

Declarations 

Ethics approval  This study was performed in accordance with the ethi-
cal standards of the Institutional Research Board of Mayo Clinic.

Consent to participate  Informed consent was obtained from all indi-
vidual participants included in the study.

Consent to publish  The authors affirm that human research participants 
provided informed consent for publication.