Original Paper

A Closed-Loop Falls Monitoring and Prevention App for Multiple
Sclerosis Clinical Practice:Human-Centered Design of the Multiple
Sclerosis Falls InsightTrack

Valerie J Block1,2, PT, DPTSc; Kanishka Koshal1, BDS, MSc; Jaeleene Wijangco1, BS; Nicolette Miller1, BS; Narender
Sara1, MBA, MS; Kyra Henderson1, BA; Jennifer Reihm1, MPA; Arpita Gopal2, DPT, PhD; Sonam D Mohan1, MD,
PhD; Jeffrey M Gelfand1, MAS, MD; Chu-Yueh Guo1, MD; Lauren Oommen1, DO; Alyssa Nylander1, MD, PhD;
James A Rowson1, PhD; Ethan Brown1, MD; Stephen Sanders1, PhD; Katherine Rankin1, PhD; Courtney R Lyles3,4,
PhD; Ida Sim5, MD, PhD; Riley Bove1, MMSc, MD

1Department of Neurology, University of California San Francisco Weill Institute, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, United
States
2Department of Physical Therapy and Rehabilitation Science, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, United States
3University of California San Francisco Division of General Internal Medicine, Zuckerberg San Francisco General Hospital, San Francisco, CA, United
States
4Center for Vulnerable Populations, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, United States
5Department of Medicine, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, United States

Riley Bove, MMSc, MD
Department of Neurology
University of California San Francisco Weill Institute
University of California San Francisco
Box 3126 1651 4th St
Room 612A
San Francisco, CA, 94143
United States
Phone: 1 (415) 353 2069

Abstract

Background: Falls are common in people with multiple sclerosis (MS), causing injuries, fear of falling, and loss of independence.
Although targeted interventions (physical therapy) can help, patients underreport and clinicians undertreat this issue.
Patient-generated data, combined with clinical data, can support the prediction of falls and lead to timely intervention (including
referral to specialized physical therapy). To be actionable, such data must be efficiently delivered to clinicians, with care customized
to the patient’s specific context.
Objective: This study aims to describe the iterative process of the design and development of Multiple Sclerosis Falls InsightTrack
(MS-FIT), identifying the clinical and technological features of this closed-loop app designed to support streamlined falls reporting,
timely falls evaluation, and comprehensive and sustained falls prevention efforts.
Methods: Stakeholders were engaged in a double diamond process of human-centered design to ensure that technological
features aligned with users’ needs. Patient and clinician interviews were designed to elicit insight around ability blockers and
boosters using the capability, opportunity, motivation, and behavior (COM-B) framework to facilitate subsequent mapping to
the Behavior Change Wheel. To support generalizability, patients and experts from other clinical conditions associated with falls
(geriatrics, orthopedics, and Parkinson disease) were also engaged. Designs were iterated based on each round of feedback, and
final mock-ups were tested during routine clinical visits.
Results: A sample of 30 patients and 14 clinicians provided at least 1 round of feedback. To support falls reporting, patients
favored a simple biweekly survey built using REDCap (Research Electronic Data Capture; Vanderbilt University) to support
bring-your-own-device accessibility—with optional additional context (the severity and location of falls). To support the evaluation
and prevention of falls, clinicians favored a clinical dashboard featuring several key visualization widgets: a longitudinal falls

JMIR Hum Factors 2024 | vol. 11 | e49331 | p. 1

display coded by the time of data capture, severity, and context; a comprehensive, multidisciplinary, and evidence-based checklist
of actions intended to evaluate and prevent falls; and MS resources local to a patient’s community. In-basket messaging alerts
clinicians of severe falls. The tool scored highly for usability, likability, usefulness, and perceived effectiveness (based on the
Health IT Usability Evaluation Model scoring).
Conclusions: To our knowledge, this is the first falls app designed using human-centered design to prioritize behavior change
and, while being accessible at home for patients, to deliver actionable data to clinicians at the point of care. MS-FIT streamlines
data delivery to clinicians via an electronic health record–embedded window, aligning with the 5 rights approach. Leveraging
MS-FIT for data processing and algorithms minimizes clinician load while boosting care quality. Our innovation seamlessly
integrates real-world patient-generated data as well as clinical and community-level factors, empowering self-care and addressing
the impact of falls in people with MS. Preliminary findings indicate wider relevance, extending to other neurological conditions
associated with falls and their consequences.

(JMIR Hum Factors 2024;11:e49331) doi: 10.2196/49331

KEYWORDS
digital health; mobile tools; falls; prevention; behavioral medicine; implementation science; closed-loop monitoring; multiple
sclerosis; mobile phone

Introduction

Background

Falls are common in patients with multiple sclerosis (MS),
occurring in 50% to 70% of published cohorts, a rate similar to
that of older adults [1]. Falls often lead to injury, result in
significant health care costs [2-5], and increase thefear of falling
[6,7]; furthermore, they lead to a decline in physical activity
and participation in daily life as well as cause loss of
independence [8,9]. Targeted interventions such as physical
therapy (PT) can reduce falls and the fear of falling [10-12], but
patients often underreport and clinicians undertreat this issue.
Indeed, fewer than half of the people with MS who report falls
receive falls prevention information from their clinician [13],
and there is a lack of self-management apps to engage and
empower people with MS about falls prevention [14-16].

To address this gap, multimodal closed-loop tools hold promise.
Closed-loop 
tools 
can 
use 
real-time 
feedback 
and
patient-generated data (PGD; such as those already validated
in MS [17-22]) to continuously monitor and adjust interventions
to improve outcomes. Such an approach has been used in
biological functions and symptoms, such as insulin delivery or
depression [23-25]. Unfortunately, in MS, apps on the
commercial market exist outside of the health system, that is,
away from the point of care. To close these gaps in care, a tool
should close the loop of information flow from the patient to
the appropriate clinician (depending on the diagnosis and
symptoms being treated, ie, neurologist) at the point of care and
back to the patient to support patient-centered care. Furthermore,
the tool must address the behavioral barriers to change to
promote the behaviors (eg, reporting, screening, treatment
recommendations, and follow-up with timely refills or referral
scheduling) likely to lead to falls prevention. From previous
work, real-time PGD such as prospective near-falls reports,
patient-reported outcomes, and changes in step count captured
by wearable sensors all provide useful input for the closed-loop
models [26,27]. The integration of these in a multimodal tool
would enhance falls prediction accuracy and could act as an
early warning system for timely PT referrals, reducing falls risk
and related injuries [28,29]. However, challenges lie in

delivering PGD to the point of care, granting access for prompt
intervention, and active self-management. To be actionable,
these PGD, generated from remote devices or patient-reported
outcomes, must be delivered according to the 5 rights [30]: the
right information, to the right person, in the right format, through
the right channel, at the right time in the workflow. This is a
hurdle that health systems have for the most part not yet
overcome, and PGD are not typically integrated into care
systems.

To address these challenges, we developed Multiple Sclerosis
Falls InsightTrack (MS-FIT), a closed-loop falls monitoring
and prevention app. MS-FIT enables seamless information
exchange between patients and clinicians, driven by stakeholder
input and human-centered design (HCD) principles [31,32]. It
empowers individuals with MS to track falls, enhances clinician
decision-making by providing real-world insights, and fills a
crucial gap in self-management for falls monitoring and
prevention.

Objectives

This paper describes the iterative process of the design and
development of MS-FIT. MS-FIT is designed to integrate
various data types to personalize falls risk assessments and
interventions for individuals with MS. To achieve this, a planned
process of engagement of patients and clinicians (ie,
neurologists) was performed to ensure that MS-FIT aligns with
user needs, whereas usability evaluations validated its potential
impact on falls prevention. Subsequently, we will test the
feasibility of implementation and effectiveness of MS-FIT in a
larger clinical trial.

Methods

Study Setting

The primary clinical setting is the University of California San
Francisco (UCSF) Multiple Sclerosis and Neuroinflammation
Center, which provides specialized care to >6000 adults with
MS annually. Clinician stakeholders were approached via email
or in person and invited to participate in the study. Patients who
had given permission to be contacted for research participation

JMIR Hum Factors 2024 | vol. 11 | e49331 | p. 2

or who had sustained falls in the past year were invited via
secure email to participate as stakeholders.

Ethical Considerations

The University of California San Francisco Institutional Review
Board approved all study activities (22-36680). Informed
consent forms and Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act documents were signed by each study
participant (patients, clinicians, and other interviewees). Patients
received US $50 (1-time compensation) for their participation
in the study.

Study Design

The overarching approach was grounded in the principles and
phases of HCD [31]. This process focuses on the usability and
needs of those whom the tool is meant to serve, in this case,
patients and clinicians. The development protocols included (1)
thorough engagement from a comprehensive range of
stakeholders, (2) models based on HCD approaches to ensure
alignment with the needs of the intended users (patients and
clinicians), (3) an evaluation of the tool’s usability using an
established framework: the Health IT Usability Evaluation
Model (Health-ITUEM) [33], and (4) plans to support the
generalizability and scalability of the tool to other clinical
settings associated with falls.

HCD involves a series of steps, articulated initially in the context
of design [34] and expanded to health care [35]: inspire
(empathize with all stakeholders), ideate (define the problem

and conceptualize in an open-minded manner), implement
(prototype solutions and test), and iterate. Figure 1 illustrates
these phases in a modified double diamond approach as they
were undertaken in the current project, depicting the iterative
broadening and narrowing of content and layout throughout the
phases [36]. Figure 2 shows the trajectory of MS-FIT and the
assimilation of insights obtained from user interviews (involving
patients and clinicians) throughout the phases of discover,
define, develop (iterative), and deliver.

The initial prototype (prediscover) was developed based on
feedback from extensive HCD of the BRIDGE point-of-care
clinical dashboard (refer to the Technological Building Blocks
subsection) summarized elsewhere [37,38], where both patients
and clinicians expressed a desire for the integrations of features
and episodes of falls to be incorporated into the design. The
study team initially identified key elements for MS-FIT through
a combination of clinical expertise and literature review [39,40]
(Figure 3). These elements were then amalgamated into mock
app screens using PowerPoint (Microsoft Corp) for the first
round of patient interviews. Figure 3 illustrates the inaugural
prototype, which was informed by valuable insights from
observational [41] and interventional [39] studies that used PGD
to monitor walking and falls in individuals with MS. In addition,
the prototype draws inspiration from clinician-facing [42] and
patient-facing [43] apps designed using HCD principles to
promote shared decision-making and evidence-based practice
in MS.

Figure 1. Modified double diamond approach: phases of development and stakeholder engagement. The double diamond depicts the human-centered
design principles and framework, with iterations through the discover, define, develop, and delivery phases. The timeline and workflow of the
human-centered design phases depict corresponding interviews and products. The curved arrows between “Define” and “Develop” indicate an iterative
process between these 2 phases. MS: multiple sclerosis; MS-FIT: Multiple Sclerosis Falls InsightTrack; MVP: minimum viable product; PD: Parkinson
disease; REDCap: Research Electronic Data Capture.

JMIR Hum Factors 2024 | vol. 11 | e49331 | p. 3

Figure 2. The trajectory of Multiple Sclerosis Falls InsightTrack (MS-FIT) though the phases of development and stakeholder engagement. The final
tool components include a patient survey (MS-FIT patient survey) and a clinical dashboard (MS-FIT BRIDGE). The trajectory integrates feedback from
user (patient and clinician) interviews through the phases of discover, define, develop (iterative), and deliver. The version numbers indicate a revised
version of the patient- or clinician-facing prototype. “Other patients” refers to patients with Parkinson disease as well as orthopedics, neurorecovery,
and geriatrics populations. “Full test” refers to the prototype testing in the contextual environment. MS: multiple sclerosis.

Figure 3. Initial proposal for Multiple Sclerosis Falls InsightTrack (MS-FIT), which involved designing a closed-loop integrated MS-FIT personal
health library. MS-FIT is designed to enable patients to track their falls in the context of their lived experience, report them to their care team, and gain
insight into multimodal contributors to falls, falls’ impact on daily life participation, and interventions likely to prevent falls. Clinicians, by using
BRIDGE, can gain insight into which patients are falling between clinical encounters and how best to personalize risk reduction interventions for the
individual patient. This prototype was generated from a number of insights from observational and interventional studies that used patient-generated
data to monitor walking and falls in people with multiple sclerosis (MS) and from clinician-facing [42] and patient-facing [43] apps designed using
human-centered design to facilitate shared decision-making and evidence-based practice in MS. (A) Patient facing app; (B) Live communication with
clinician inbox; (C) Clinical dashboard: BRIDGE launches from the EHR using SMART or FHIR. API: application programming interface; EHR:
electronic health record; EMR: electronic medical record; FHIR: Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resources; MS-FIT: Multiple Sclerosis Falls InsightTrack;
SMART: Substitutable Medical Apps and Reusable Technologies.

Framework for Tool Evaluation

The Health-ITUEM framework appraises both subjective and
objective outcomes that inform a tool’s usability [44]. In the
design phases described herein, the subjective outcomes
(satisfaction measured by the perceived ease of use and
perceived usefulness) were primarily evaluated. Furthermore,
the 4 key variables proposed by Mathews et al [45] to determine
both (1) whether the tool (MS-FIT) reflects HCD principles and

(2) whether it is likely to engage patients were applied. These
four domains encompass (1) usefulness, (2) ease of use or
learnability, (3) likability, and (4) effectiveness. These
frameworks were used to categorize critical data and
visualization elements, as well as the technological and clinical
workflow aspects of MS-FIT [46].

JMIR Hum Factors 2024 | vol. 11 | e49331 | p. 4

Technological Building Blocks

The architecture of the tool was built leveraging existing tools,
primarily BRIDGE and REDCap (Research Electronic Data
Capture; Vanderbilt University).

BRIDGE

The BRIDGE precision medicine platform at UCSF is an
application programming interface (API) that assembles clinical
and research data from a variety of sources into a dashboard
customized for a given clinical context, displaying a series of
digestible, actionable visualizations [38]. BRIDGE is integrated
with the Epic electronic health record (EHR; Epic Systems
Corporation), launches from Epic using Substitutable Medical
Apps and Reusable Technologies (SMART) on Fast Healthcare
Interoperability Resources (FHIR; a standard approach for
building reusable and extendable EHR-integrated apps), and is
integrated with Epic FHIR APIs and other data integrations.
The back-end of BRIDGE is built using Python, the flask
framework, and PostgreSQL to store configuration data.
Although individual-level data will populate the tool,
cohort-level data can become the reference cohort against which
an individual’s data can be contextualized. BRIDGE pulls data
not only from the EHR but also from a range of custom research
databases as well as other APIs, such as REDCap [38]. BRIDGE
was developed based on extensive HCD processes both within
the field of MS [42,43] and beyond [37]. The data visualizations
can be developed using HTML, cascading style sheets (CSS),
JavaScript, Data-Driven Documents–JavaScript, and other
front-end libraries. Each front-end visualization is modular,
allowing for asynchronous loading, and is a parameterized
JavaScript component, allowing us to extend the code to
additional platforms and data sources. Data formatting standards
are also applied to make all visualizations and data inputs
modular. All API calls are made in real time; BRIDGE does
not store patient data, but there is an option to write back to the
EHR by pasting the visuals into a clinical note. Furthermore,
the development team follows universal design principles,
influenced by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality
Toolkit for Designing Consumer Health IT [47].

REDCap Tool

REDCap [38] includes editable or annotatable functions to
enable patients to keep track of, and annotate, their PGD. Design
choices reflect digital health literacy principles and feedback
provided from diverse patients. Together, these enhancements
make the data understandable and actionable.

Investigator Team

The core team included an MS neurologist with HCD expertise
(RB), software engineers (NM and NS), a health literacy and
patient engagement expert (JR), and an MS physical therapist
with remote ambulatory and falls monitoring expertise (VJB).
Additional key scientific input was provided by a digital health
cloud infrastructure expert (IS), an implementation science
expert (CL), a health disparities and population health expert
(CL), and an expert in large-scale mobile health (IS). Patient
stakeholders included National Multiple Sclerosis Society
advocates (LG) and patients (3 core stakeholders). Research
team members included a program manager (KK) and clinical

coordinators (JW and KH). Before starting the project, this team
met to determine the phases of research and design an initial
mock-up of the tool that could be used during the discover
phase. Volunteer consultants included a software engineer (JR)
and user interface or user experience experts.

Phases of Design

Phase 1: Discover

Stakeholder Advisory Team
An initial stakeholder meeting took place, during which the
goals and phases of the project were outlined. Next, the core
team met biweekly as a group or as subgroups to discuss an
agenda that included the development of patient and clinician
interview guides, interview coding schemes and thematic
analysis, the practical aspects of the technological lift, the
workflow integration of MS-FIT, and the visualization types
and customizations. The iterations of mock-ups were revised
based on patient and clinician interview feedback.

Interviews
One-on-one interviews were conducted by the health literacy
and patient engagement expert (hereinafter referred to as the
interviewer) with patients (round 1) and clinicians. Because of
ongoing COVID-19 restrictions on in-person engagements,
interviews were conducted via the UCSF Zoom video platform
(Zoom Video Communications, Inc) using interview guides
developed for each audience to elucidate how a tool might be
designed to promote behavior change around falls ascertainment,
reporting, and prevention. All questions were administered
verbally, and interviews lasted between 45 and 60 minutes.
With participant consent, interviews were simultaneously
recorded and transcribed using Zoom’s video transcription
feature.

Interview guides included qualitative and quantitative
components. Open-ended questions probed around the domains
of the capability, opportunity, motivation, and behavior
(COM-B) framework to facilitate subsequent mapping to the
Behavioral Change Wheel (BCW) proposed by Michie et al
[48]. Quantitative questions with Likert-style responses (ranging
from 1=lowest to 5=highest) were administered verbally
throughout each interview to assess specific aspects of patient
and clinician experience related to capability, opportunity, and
motivation, as well as the perceived usefulness of mock screen
views and workflows. Participants were asked to comment on
their Likert-style responses.

Patient interviews were semistructured around 2 key thematic
topics: patient experience with (1) falls and activity, including
ability to be active, knowledge, communication with care team,
experience, feelings, and expectations; and (2) use of
technology, including smartphone, tracking devices, apps, and
communication with care team. To complement qualitative
insights, patients were asked to use a Likert scale to rate the
perceived usefulness of each of 3 app screen views featuring
different design elements.

Semistructured interviews with clinicians started with a review
of the activity blockers and boosters identified during the
discover phase interviews with patients. With this insight,

JMIR Hum Factors 2024 | vol. 11 | e49331 | p. 5

clinicians were asked a series of open-ended qualitative
questions to elicit their perspectives on whether a falls reporting
tool might promote sustainable falls prevention, as well as gather
feedback on the initial closed-loop design (Figure 3) intended
to support falls treatment and clinical decision support. To assess
each design feature, clinicians were asked to rate perceived
usefulness on a Likert scale.

Analysis
After all interviews were concluded for each audience, the
interviewer reviewed each transcript and used inductive coding
to develop a coding scheme on the basis of responses to the
open-ended questions [46]. Frequently occurring topics were
assigned a unique thematic category, and less frequent topics
were coded other. Categories were defined by the interviewer,
and quotations from the transcript were used to illustrate the
type of text coded into the category. Although the interviewer
was the sole coder, the stakeholder advisory team provided
ongoing consultation on the coding scheme and how to code
less frequently occurring responses.

The interviewer transferred Likert-style response data to a
spreadsheet to calculate means and SDs for each question. To
analyze questions designed to map to the COM-B framework,
the interviewer created a data grid where the rows were COM-B
categories with subthemes of ability blocker and booster types,
and the columns were evidence (quotes) of specific blockers or
boosters [49]. Evidence of blockers or boosters that spanned
>1 category were placed in all relevant categories to ensure that
they would be represented when considering BCW-guided
interventions.

After developing the initial COM-B data grid, the interviewer,
in consultation with the stakeholder advisory group, expanded
the grid to include (1) BCW intervention functions to help users
overcome barriers to performing target behaviors and (2)
potential intervention solution features designed to be effective
for each corresponding blocker category. Intervention solution
features were subsequently added to the design road map for
immediate or future implementation.

Phases 2 and 3: Define and Develop (Iterative)

Stakeholder Advisory Team
In these phases, the team reviewed qualitative and quantitative
findings from additional patient (2 rounds) and clinician (1
round) interviews and used this feedback to further refine
MS-FIT tool functionality, including design and technological
features. Changes were prioritized according to the strength of
feedback (occurrence of themes and usability scores) and
technical feasibility.

Interviews
The define and develop phases encompassed a second round of
patient interviews, followed by 2 rounds of interviews with
clinicians 
and 
patients 
designed 
to 
assess 
MS-FIT
generalizability to other high-risk clinical contexts. The same
process was followed as that described in phase 1 (discover).
One-on-one interviews were conducted by the interviewer via
the UCSF Zoom video platform using interview guides. All
questions were administered verbally, and interviews lasted

between 45 and 60 minutes. With participant consent, interviews
were simultaneously recorded and transcribed using Zoom’s
video transcription feature.

Patient Interviews (Round 2)
Interview guides included qualitative and quantitative
components. In an effort to validate the patient experience
findings from round 1 interviews, patients interviewed during
round 2 were similarly asked to share qualitative feedback
around personal experiences with falls, falls and near-falls
reporting, perceived benefits and concerns around using a falls
tracking app, and thoughts on what supports would be helpful
between appointments. Quantitative questions with Likert-style
responses (ranging from 1=lowest to 5=highest) were used to
rate 9 mock screens for usefulness, understandability, and
importance for each view. Mock screens had been iterated after
the discover phase; therefore, patient feedback during this
second round further validated and helped refine the designs.

Generalizability to Other High-Risk Clinical Contexts
To ensure that the technological build was not overdesigned for
MS and to support the scalability of the tool to other clinical
settings, interviews were expanded to intended users in other
clinical specialties associated with falls, including geriatrics,
orthopedics, neurorecovery (after stroke or traumatic brain
injury), and Parkinson disease (PD). Clinicians from each
discipline and patients with PD were interviewed. Interview
protocols used during the discover phase were adapted to
reference specific disciplines and diseases, whereas the questions
(qualitative and quantitative) remained the same to yield a
parallel assessment of each audience’s experiences, preferences,
capabilities, opportunities, and motivations.

Analysis
Qualitative and quantitative interview analysis used the same
inductive coding and calculation techniques, respectively, used
during the discover phase. The results were analyzed by the
interviewer, with ongoing thematic consultation with the
stakeholder advisory team, and used to inform and prioritize
design and content iterations.

Phase 4: Deliver

Stakeholder Advisory Team
The core team met with stakeholders on an ad hoc small-group
basis during this phase to plan observation and tool-scoring
protocols, specifically to identify a subset of questions from the
Health IT Usability Evaluation Scale (Health-ITUES) derived
from the Health-ITUEM to assess the 2 subjective components
of usability—usefulness and ease of use [33]—as well as the
Patient Education Materials Assessment Tool for Audiovisual
Materials to assess understandability and actionability [50]. As
recommended for digital tool validation [45], a single survey
question—Net Promoter Score (NPS)—was asked regarding
the likelihood that users (patients and clinicians) would
recommend the MS-FIT to colleagues or friends. Additional
conversations focused on the scalability of the tool, as well as
the qualitative and quantitative feedback received.

JMIR Hum Factors 2024 | vol. 11 | e49331 | p. 6

Observations and Scoring
Observations and scoring for the patient-facing falls assessment
survey took place with 2 audiences: people with MS and people
with PD. Patients scheduled for a routine upcoming in-person
clinical visit with their neurologist were contacted and invited
to participate in testing and evaluating the tool. After providing
informed written consent, and while being observed by the
interviewer, participants were asked to engage with the MS-FIT
minimum viable product consisting of the falls assessment
survey and accompanying patient instructions while being
observed by the interviewer. Patients were specifically asked
to complete the falls assessment survey by entering up to 5 falls
(real or hypothetical) that had occurred in the prior 2 weeks and
responding to on-screen prompts to provide context about each
reported fall. Patients could ask questions of the interviewer, if
needed. After survey submission, each patient was asked to
complete an 18-item survey about their experience to assess
usability, 
usefulness 
and 
ease 
of 
use, 
likability,
understandability, actionability, and NPS. Patients were
subsequently asked if they had any feedback about their
experience. Feedback was documented in field notes captured
contemporaneously.

Clinicians seeing people with MS and those with PD who had
just been observed entering data in the falls assessment survey
were asked to launch the MS-FIT BRIDGE app in real-time
clinical encounters with these patients to review the falls and
contextual data the patient had entered and to engage with the
various widgets designed to help evaluate and address reported
falls. The interviewer met with the clinicians immediately after
the encounters to conduct in-person exit interviews and
administer a 9-item survey to assess usability, usefulness and
ease of use, likability, understandability, actionability, and NPS.
Clinicians were subsequently asked whether they had any
feedback about their experience, including any barriers to use
and functionality challenges. Feedback was documented in
contemporaneous field notes.

Analysis
Qualitative feedback, although limited, was analyzed by the
interviewer using the same inductive coding technique used
during the previous 2 interview phases. Quantitative questions
with Likert-style responses (ranging from 1=lowest to 5=highest)
were used to score likability, usability, usefulness, and ease of
use. Understandability and actionability were assessed using a
binary agree or disagree scale. Another member of the research

team entered quantitative responses into REDCap, which was
used to calculate means and SDs for all Likert-style responses
and total binary responses. NPS responses (0-10 scale) were
calculated by the interviewer by subtracting the percentage who
were detractors (those who scored 0 to 6) from the percentage
who were promoters (those who scored 9 or 10). An NPS >0
was considered good, >20 was considered favorable, and >50
was considered excellent.

Development Action Items
Once the tool was live, the developer was able to debug MS-FIT;
iterate based on patient, clinician, and stakeholder feedback;
and redebug as needed.

Results

Overview

Demographic information about each interview panel is shown
in Multimedia Appendix 1 [42]. Altogether, 30 patients of
diverse ages, disability levels, and technological literacy as well
as 14 clinicians provided at least 1 round of feedback. The level
of involvement from the users ranged from testers to informants
[32]. Feedback from both rounds of interviews with people with
MS, MS clinician comments, and feedback from other high-risk
clinical context patient and clinician interviews were integrated
into the final MS-FIT design. Iterative interview feedback was
categorized into activity blockers (what keeps people from
performing a behavior) and boosters (what is already working
well that we can build on) in the COM-B model. Examples of
how interview feedback findings fit into the COM-B and BCW,
along with intervention function solution features integrated
into MS-FIT, are shown in Figure 4. Details are provided in
Table 1. Further discussions with clinicians and patients in other
high-risk clinical contexts confirmed the findings from the MS
context. Across these specialties, the main barriers to falls
prevention efforts included access to specialized PT (availability
and physical ability to access it), insurance coverage, ability to
adapt the home to improve safety, the adequate use of assistive
devices, and COVID-19–related restrictions to community
exercise areas.

The overview of findings from interviews with clinicians and
participants with MS, highlighting areas that block or boost
patient and clinician behavior change with regard to falls and
falls prevention, are shown in Multimedia Appendix 2.

JMIR Hum Factors 2024 | vol. 11 | e49331 | p. 7

Figure 4. Example of mapping blockers and boosters relating to falls prevention (findings from interviews with patients with multiple sclerosis [MS])
to the Behavioral Change Wheel [49] and associated behaviorally informed intervention solution features. Examples for each of the sections of the
capability, opportunity, motivation, and behavior (COM-B) model are highlighted, showing how these integrate into the Behavioral Change Wheel.
The examples provided relate to patients’ reported goals, blockers (features that block falls prevention behavior), and boosters (features that boost
behaviors related to falls prevention).

Table 1. Scoring of the final University of California San Francisco Multiple Sclerosis Falls InsightTrack app (REDCap [Research Electronic Data
Capture]) by patients with multiple sclerosis: usability, ease of use, and likability (n=10).

Score <4 out of 5, n (%)
Score, mean (SD)
Health-ITUESa–based questions for usability, ease of use, and likability

0 (0)
4.80 (0.42)
“It is useful to report if I’ve had any falls or near falls every 2 weeks”

0 (0)
4.90 (0.32)
“It is useful to have my survey answers sent to my care team”

0 (0)
4.70 (0.48)
“The survey asks about important topics”

0 (0)
4.80 (0.42)
“I am comfortable with my ability to complete the survey”

0 (0)
4.80 (0.42)
“I find the survey easy to use”

1 (10)
4.60 (0.70)
“I can easily remember how to access the survey through my email”

0 (0)
4.80 (0.42)
“I like the survey”

aHealth-ITUES: Health IT Usability Evaluation Scale (scores range from 1=strongly disagree to 5=strongly agree).

Tool Components

Thematic saturation was reached after 5 patient interviews
(round 1), and we incorporated these insights into prototypes
for an additional 5 patient interviews (round 2), which were
then iteratively reviewed.

UCSF Support Self-Monitoring: A Patient-Facing Tool
to Track Falls and Self-Monitor

Tool Architecture

One key and consistent theme emerging from patient interviews
was a preference for a simpler design for the patient-facing tool

than had been initially conceived. Combined with a goal of
maintaining confidentiality and keeping personal information
within our university firewall, the study team opted for a tailored
REDCap app rather than a custom new app.

Tool Components

Key features informed by patient and clinician feedback are
detailed in Figure 5. Key features mapping to the COM-B
framework (Multimedia Appendix 2 and Figure 4) are denoted
by a red number and described in Textbox 1.

JMIR Hum Factors 2024 | vol. 11 | e49331 | p. 8

Figure 5. University of California San Francisco (UCSF) Multiple Sclerosis (MS) Falls Tracker: a patient-facing tool to track falls and support
self-monitoring. This is the “MS-FIT [Multiple Sclerosis Falls InsightTrack] patient survey V2.0,” sent via email to patients with a REDCap (Research
Electronic Data Capture) survey link. Key features mapping to user-generated perspectives and feedback and to the capability, opportunity, motivation,
and behavior (COM-B) framework are denoted by a red number and described in Textbox 1.

JMIR Hum Factors 2024 | vol. 11 | e49331 | p. 9

Textbox 1. University of California San Francisco Multiple Sclerosis Falls InsightTrack: key features. The numbers correspond to the red numbers in
Figure 5, which denote key features mapping to the capability, opportunity, motivation, and behavior (COM-B) framework.

Concise and precise falls screening

1.
Clear definitions were preferred to distinguish between a fall and a near fall to support the reporting of meaningful data.

2.
An easy-to-use and simple 1-question tool that could be completed frequently (every 2 wk) was preferred to relying on “flawed memory” to
report falls during sporadic clinic visits: if “No,” then the survey ends at this point; if “Yes,” then branching logic continues.

3.
The ability to easily report each fall or near fall separately was preferred. The ability to edit (return later) was important for reducing burden.

4.
Simple reporting for near falls (yes or no and overall number) was preferred, given the large volume of near falls experienced by some patients
and the potential burden and time commitment of providing details.

5.
The 2-wk epoch between reporting was determined feasible (balance between memory and overburdening).

6.
The ability to report activity limitations was preferred because these pertain to primary goals with regard to the “ability to continue independence
for activities of daily living” and to “stay active.”

7.
Because of the heterogeneity in answers, a free-text option would allow patients to add further details regarding activity limitations.

8.
Indicating whether the patient has seen a neurorehabilitation specialist could help clinicians triage the continued plan of care.

Detailed context of falls (optional)

1.
Recording the date of the fall using a simple button allows the tool to display each fall into the longitudinal representation (refer to Textbox 2;
Figure 6).

2.
The time of falls can also inform falls context (eg, in the dark or when fatigued). The 24-h day was divided into time blocks for clarity and to
reduce recall error of exact time.

3.
Information regarding the medical consequences of a fall can inform both its severity and the clinical follow-up needed.

4.
Injury after a fall is considered distinct from seeking and receiving medical attention.

5.
Fall location can inform prevention efforts, including home safety; “some falls inside the home can be avoided through modifications such as
removing a rug, better lighting etc.”

6.
Other details of the fall location can also inform home safety and prevention (eg, curb, stairs, and poor lighting).

7.
Specifying whether falls occur because of factors related to multiple sclerosis or other factors (obstacle, etc) is important owing to the heterogeneity
of fall triggers and of clinical responses.

8.
The question “If you have a mobility aid, were you using it when you fell?” can remind patients to use the assistive device and can cue clinicians
of the need to modify or change the current assistive device.

9.
A falls log is provided to patients and shows the reported falls over time.

Closing the loop: real-time in-basket messaging

1.
Enabling the reporting (patient) and ascertainment (clinician) of falls at regular intervals optimizes timeliness (vs periodic visits) while maintaining
low burden (vs daily or “at time of fall”). If a severe fall is reported on the biweekly survey, an in-basket message to the electronic medical record
alerts the care team in a manner integrated into the clinical workflow (Figure 6, #15).

JMIR Hum Factors 2024 | vol. 11 | e49331 | p. 10

Textbox 2. Multiple Sclerosis Falls InsightTrack clinical management dashboard integrated into the Epic electronic health record: key features. The
numbers correspond to the red numbers in Figure 6, which denote key features mapping to the capability, opportunity, motivation, and behavior (COM-B)
framework.

Longitudinal multiple sclerosis trajectory widget (visualizes patients’ disease and medication trajectory over time with integrated normative ranges)

1.
Ability to toggle through disability measures (eg, Expanded Disability Status Scale [EDSS] and Timed 25-Foot Walk)

2.
Succinct overview of patient’s longitudinal MS trajectory, including relapses, disability, medications, and normative data

Longitudinal falls widget (visualizes falls reported every 2 wk by the patient using their patient-facing app [Figure 5] data regarding date, time, and
severity of each fall on 1 display)

1.
Fall severity visualized by color shade (grading falls by severity considered important to trigger an alert to the care team and to inform type of
clinical response)

2.
Ability to include a way to visualize the falls log with falls over time

3.
Estimated time of day of the fall can inform further interventions needed, including vision check, home safety evaluation, and medication review
(especially for Parkinson disease)

4.
Time of day visualized with colors for daytime (lighter: yellow) and nighttime (darker: blue) preferred by all stakeholders

Community resources widget (map automatically displays the patient’s home community and allows for web-based identification of MS health care
professionals in their community)

1.
Automated display of MS professionals (physical therapist, occupational therapist, and talk therapist) in the patient’s community, which reduces
barriers for patient to identify local recourses once physical therapy or other referrals have been placed

2.
Contact information and driving navigations between the patient’s home and the resources automated, can be pasted into the patient’s after-visit
summary or the clinician’s note

Cross-sectional widget (summary display with 2 tabs displaying clinical disability outcomes and patient-reported outcomes [PROs]; clinician can
toggle between time points)

1.
Clinic-based performance measures (walking speed, hand function, and cognition) and disability outcomes (EDSS with separate functional system
scores) as well as PROs can inform a more global assessment of the patient at given time point

2.
Color-coded normative ranges can provide rapid assessment of whether patient’s given function is within “normal” range

Falls treatment– and action-prompt widget (tabulates core data needed for a comprehensive assessment of falls risk and prevention; for each category,
patient’s score is colored according to severity, and possible action prompts are displayed)

JMIR Hum Factors 2024 | vol. 11 | e49331 | p. 11

Figure 6. Multiple Sclerosis Falls InsightTrack (MS-FIT) clinical management dashboard, integrated into the Epic electronic health record (Epic
Systems Corporation). This is the “MS-FIT BRIDGE version 3.0,” which is viewable from Epic in the electronic health record at the time of the clinic
visit. Key features mapping to user-generated perspectives and feedback and to the capability, opportunity, motivation, and behavior (COM-B) framework
are denoted by a red number and described in Textbox 2.

Phase 4: Deliver

Altogether, 15 patients (10 with MS and 5 with PD) with an
age range of 34 to 79 years and 6 MS clinicians with a clinical
experience range of 2 to 22 years (Multimedia Appendix 1)
launched the tool components live and provided feedback.

Patient-Facing UCSF MS-FIT

People With MS
Of the 15 patients, 10 (67%) had been diagnosed with MS; they
had a mean age of 48.8 (SD 8.8; range 34-60) years, with
disability level (EDSS score) ranging from 1.5 to 6.0 and a
median disease duration of 14.5 (IQR 6.3-24; range 2-27) years.
The feedback from people with MS was overwhelmingly
positive (Table 1). Likability scores were all NPS≥100 (all
promoters). The survey was found to be brief and clear. Patients
appreciated the benefit of the closed-loop system and the overall
impact on clinical encounters.

Patients With PD
Of the 15 patients, 5 (33%) had been diagnosed with PD; they
had a mean age of 60.6 (SD 13.2; range 46-79) years, with a
median disability level (Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating

Scale score) of 31 (IQR 30.3-8.5; range 17-42) and a median
disease duration of 4 (IQR 1.5-8.5, range 1-10) years. Overall,
the NPS was found to be 0 (20%-20%, with 1/5, 20% detractor,
1/5, 20% promoter, and 3/5, 60% passive scores that trended
toward promoters), indicating that patients with PD could be
easily swayed to use MS-FIT. The mean scores on the
Health-ITUES questions were all >4 (ie, agree or strongly
agree), and only 1 score was <3 out of 5 (Table 2).

Qualitative insights from the interviews revealed that falling,
fear of falling, and thinking about falling were “not at the top
of their list,” in contrast to people with MS. Nevertheless,
patients with PD found the tracker “easy to fill out,” and they
“liked the idea of reporting falls and reporting if [they]
experienced fear of falling.” Patients with PD felt that it was
important to have the ability to increase the font size
(incorporated into MS-FIT patient survey v 2.0; Figure 5).

For future use in PD, patients reported that it would be important
for ease of use and usability to have the ability to report motor
vehicle accidents and specific PD symptoms as they relate to
falls risk. Patients with PD also reported greater issues with
using an iPad (motor or tremor issues).

JMIR Hum Factors 2024 | vol. 11 | e49331 | p. 12

Table 2. Scoring of the final University of California San Francisco Multiple Sclerosis Falls Tracker (REDCap [Research Electronic Data Capture])
by patients with Parkinson disease: usability, ease of use, and likability (n=5).

Score <4 out of 5, n (%)
Score, mean (SD)
Health-ITUESa–based questions for usability, ease of use, and likability

1 (20)
4.40 (0.89)
“It is useful to report if I’ve had any falls or near falls every 2 weeks”

1 (20)
4.20 (1.22)
“It is useful to have my survey answers sent to my care team”

2 (40)
4.00 (1.00)
“The survey asks about important topics”

1 (20)
4.60 (0.89)
“I am comfortable with my ability to complete the survey”

1 (20)
4.60 (0.89)
“I find the survey easy to use”

2 (40)
4.20 (1.10)
“I can easily remember how to access the survey through my email”

2 (40)
4.20 (1.10)
“I like the survey”

aHealth-ITUES: Health IT Usability Evaluation Scale (scores range from 1=strongly disagree to 5=strongly agree).

MS-FIT Clinical Management Dashboard

Overall, the MS clinicians (n=6) rated the dashboard highly
(NPS=16.67; Table 3):

I like that [the app] summarizes important clinical
information in an easily digestible format, and the
new widget that includes an MS [multiple
sclerosis]-specific review of systems and actionable
items seems like it will help ensure well-rounded MS
care! [Clinician 1]
With regard to reporting falls and near falls, the MS clinicians
noted multiple benefits to aiding with patient care:

You can infer a lot from [fall data] in terms of disease
activity, disease course, changes in a patient’s life,

their living setting, their support. If you see a jump
in falls or the onset of falls in a patient who wasn’t
falling—it is worthy of clinical attention and needs
to be addressed. It would give us an objective way to
know if interventions are helping to reduce falls.
[Clinician 2]
Near falls are particularly underscreened, so any
granularity on near falls would be helpful. [Clinician
3]
For some patients, near falls may not be worth
reporting—may just be part of life. But other patients
it could make sense for. Any change from baseline
has potential to be significant. Near falls can be [a]
canary in a coal mine. [Clinician 5]

Table 3. Scoring of the final University of California San Francisco Multiple Sclerosis Falls BRIDGE dashboard by multiple sclerosis clinicians:
usability, ease of use, and likability.

Score <4 out of 5, n (%)
Score, mean (SD)
Health-ITUESa–based questions for usability, ease of use, and likability

0 (0)
4.80 (0.41)
“The information that appears in BRIDGE is useful to me.”

1 (17)
4.50 (0.84)
“It is useful to be updated on my patient’s significant fall activity between appointments.”

1 (20)
4.20 (0.75)
“I find BRIDGE easy to use.”

1 (20)
4.00 (1.10)
“I can always remember how to access BRIDGE.”

0 (0)
4.50 (0.55)
“I like BRIDGE.”

aHealth-ITUES: Health IT Usability Evaluation Scale (scores range from 1=strongly disagree to 5=strongly agree).

Discussion

Principal Findings

To our knowledge, this is the first tool designed using the HCD
framework, anchored in the COM-B approach to behavior
change, and capable of delivering relevant information at the
point of care in line with the 5 rights with the aim of preventing
falls in people with MS. Other apps have been developed,
although the focus has mainly been on 1 component of falls (eg,
evaluating falls risk [51]) at a time. In addition, many large-scale
clinical research projects, such as those conducted at the
Stanford Center for Digital Health and the Remote Assessment
of Disease and Relapse–Central Nervous System program, are
exploring applications of wearable data. However, most of the
collected wearable data remain inaccessible for visualization

or integration within a clinic’s EHR. This limitation can impede
the effective use of PGD by clinicians and compromise
patient-physician collaboration related to PGD [52]. MS-FIT
fills a critical gap in multimodal closed-loop self-management
apps for falls monitoring and prevention.

Through extensive stakeholder engagement, MS-FIT offers
novel aspects of customization, generalizability, and scalability,
integrating multiple data streams relevant to reducing falls. It
provides rapid personalized in-basket notifications, limited to
severe falls, and digitally displays PGD through the EHR,
increasing the likelihood of adoption by patients and clinicians.

Designed in collaboration with patients and clinicians, MS-FIT
has emerged as a well-received closed-loop tool for tracking
falls and reducing falls risk in individuals with MS. Patients

JMIR Hum Factors 2024 | vol. 11 | e49331 | p. 13

liked its brevity, simplicity, and overall utility, recognizing its
potential to enhance clinical discussions. The utility of
between-visit reporting and contextualized information for
identifying modifiable falls risks was acknowledged by both
patients and clinicians. The trial phase aims to validate its
low-burden design in practice. Clinicians welcomed the
closed-loop system, foreseeing proactive interventions and
streamlined implementation. Longitudinal falls visualization,
incorporating time and severity, along with clinician prompts
targeting MS symptoms and medication effects, was favored
for its ability to capture often overlooked components during
regular visits.

Another noteworthy finding was the minimal number of
interviews required to attain thematic saturation in our initial
discover phase, indicating that some clear guidance for
potentially high-value initial design features was achieved with
a minimal sample size. This could be due to the fact that MS-FIT
was based on an initial prototype developed during a prediscover
phase using patient and clinician feedback. It could also be
attributed to homogeneous samples of study participants
consulted throughout the discover and design phases. Overall
design efficiency was likely aided by the experience and regular
input of interprofessional teams.

The ongoing process involves testing MS-FIT in a prospective
longitudinal study in a cohort of 100 adults with MS over 12
months. The primary objectives of this larger study include
assessing the adoption rate of the tool, evaluating the level of
sustained use of the tool, monitoring adherence to falls reporting,
and assessing study retention over the 12-month period.
Secondary and exploratory analyses will center around the
prediction of adoption, sustained use, adherence to action
prompts, and study retention. To determine effectiveness, the
study will compare in-study falls with a prior falls data set (Fitbit
remote monitoring in MS) [41], and patient satisfaction will be
assessed during an exit interview.

Scalability

Our approach, characterized by the selection of key
technological and clinical features, allows for the scalability
and generalizability of the tool’s modular infrastructure to
various symptoms, conditions, and clinical settings for other
high fall-risk diseases as well as other symptoms within MS

(eg, bladder dysfunction). Technological factors for scalability
include (1) high-quality, widely shareable static visualizations;
and (2) optimized industry standards for code sharing with
clinicians in other health care settings, such as other MS centers
using Epic EHR. However, successful integration into other
health systems depends on the internal governance and
motivation within each system.

Limitations

All interviews were conducted remotely, using the UCSF Zoom
video platform, which may have biased the patient stakeholders
to people who are technologically literate and have access to
the internet. However, 92% of people in the United States have
access to the internet [53], and given that MS-FIT is an app,
users (patients or caregivers) are expected to possess a certain
level of technical proficiency. Only clinicians at UCSF and
patients seen by this (broad) group of clinicians were
interviewed; therefore, we may have missed important feedback
from a wider cohort of users. Although HCD is favored for
user-driven eHealth innovations, certain limitations exist [32],
including a narrow focus; thus, exploring alternatives such as
value-sensitive design, citizen science, and more-than-human
design could enhance inclusivity and impact within eHealth
innovation [54]. Finally, having the interviewer serve as the
primary coder could have introduced bias into the qualitative
analysis process. Stakeholder advisory group engagement in
the coding process was an effort to reduce any potential bias.

Conclusions

MS-FIT delivers relevant data to clinicians through an embedded
window within the EHR, following the 5 rights approach. By
using MS-FIT for data processing and algorithms, we reduce
clinician burden while enhancing care. Our innovation extends
to enabling and integrating real-world PGD as well as clinical
and community-level factors, providing actionable information
to empower self-care and addressing the impact of falls in people
with MS. Our preliminary data indicate that this tool and design
extend beyond MS and can be applied to other conditions
associated with falls as well as the fear of falls and their
associated consequences. To test the feasibility and effectiveness
of the app, a clinical trial is ongoing (University of California
San Francisco Clinical Trials identifier: NCT05837949).