Original Paper

Digital Cognitive Behavioral- and Mindfulness-Based
Stress-Management Interventions for Survivors of Breast Cancer:
Development Study

Elin Børøsund1,2, PhD; Anders Meland3, PhD; Hege R Eriksen4, PhD; Christine M Rygg1, BSc; Giske Ursin5,6,7, PhD;
Lise Solberg Nes1,8,9, PhD

1Department of Digital Health Research, Division of Medicine, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway
2Department of Nursing and Health Sciences, Faculty of Health and Social Sciences, University of South-Eastern Norway, Drammen, Norway
3Department of Sport and Social Sciences, School of Sport Sciences, Oslo, Norway
4Department of Sport, Food and Natural Sciences, Western Norway University of Applied Sciences, Bergen, Norway
5Cancer Registry of Norway, Oslo, Norway
6Department of Preventive Medicine, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, United States
7Department of Nutrition, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway
8Institute of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway
9Department of Psychiatry and Psychology, College of Medicine and Science, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States

Elin Børøsund, PhD
Department of Digital Health Research
Division of Medicine
Oslo University Hospital
Pb 4950 Nydalen
Oslo, 0424
Norway
Phone: 47 92667161

Abstract

Background: Psychosocial stress-management interventions can reduce stress and distress and improve the quality of life for
survivors of cancer. As these in-person interventions are not always offered or accessible, evidence-informed digital
stress-management interventions may have the potential to improve outreach of psychosocial support for survivors of cancer.
Few such digital interventions exist so far, few if any have been developed specifically for survivors of breast cancer, and few if
any have attempted to explore more than 1 distinct type of intervention framework.
Objective: This study aimed to develop 2 digital psychosocial stress-management interventions for survivors of breast cancer;
1 cognitive behavioral therapy-based intervention (CBI), and 1 mindfulness-based intervention (MBI).
Methods: The development of the CBI and MBI interventions originated from the existing StressProffen program, a digital
stress-management intervention program for survivors of cancer, based on a primarily cognitive behavioral therapeutic concept.
Development processes entailed a multidisciplinary design approach and were iteratively conducted in close collaboration between
key stakeholders, including experts within psychosocial oncology, cancer epidemiology, stress-management, and eHealth as well
as survivors of breast cancer and health care providers. Core psychosocial oncology stress-management and cancer epidemiology
experts first conducted a series of workshops to identify cognitive behavioral and mindfulness specific StressProffen content,
overlapping psychoeducational content, and areas where development and incorporation of new material were needed. Following
the program content adaptation and development phase, phases related to user testing of new content and technical, privacy,
security, and ethical aspects and adjustments ensued. Intervention content for the distinct CBI and MBI interventions was refined
in iterative user-centered design processes and adjusted to electronic format through stakeholder-centered iterations.
Results: For the CBI version, the mindfulness-based content of the original StressProffen was removed, and for the MBI version,
cognitive behavioral content was removed. Varying degrees of new content were created for both versions, using a similar layout
as for the original StressProffen program. New content and new exercises in particular were tested by survivors of breast cancer

JMIR Form Res 2023 | vol. 7 | e48719 | p. 1

and a project-related editorial team, resulting in subsequent user centered adjustments, including ensuring auditory versions and
adequate explanations before less intuitive sections. Other improvements included implementing a standard closing sentence to
round off every exercise, and allowing participants to choose the length of some of the mindfulness exercises. A legal disclaimer
and a description of data collection, user rights and study contact information were included to meet ethical, privacy, and security
requirements.
Conclusions: This study shows how theory specific (ie, CBI and MBI) digital stress-management interventions for survivors
of breast cancer can be developed through extensive collaborations between key stakeholders, including scientists, health care
providers, and survivors of breast cancer. Offering a variety of evidence-informed stress-management approaches may potentially
increase interest for outreach and impact of psychosocial interventions for survivors of cancer.
International Registered Report Identifier (IRRID): RR2-10.2196/47195

(JMIR Form Res 2023;7:e48719) doi: 10.2196/48719

KEYWORDS
cancer; stress management; mindfulness; cognitive behavioral therapy; digital; eHealth; mHealth; app; user-driven development;
usability

Introduction

Background

Survivors of cancer encounter a multitude of physical and
psychosocial challenges and demands, naturally impacting
well-being and quality of life (QoL) [1-3]. Coping can be
difficult 
[2,4], 
and 
psychosocial 
stress-management
interventions, such as cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT)
[1,5-9] and more recently also mindfulness-based interventions
(MBIs) [10-13] for survivors of cancer have shown to be of
benefit, for example, in terms of reducing distress, stress,
anxiety, and depression as well as improving QoL [1,5-13].
Such in-person interventions are however not always available,
and many access barriers exist, including geographical distance,
issues with transportation or finances, and survivors of cancer
may not always feel well enough to attend in-person
interventions [14]. Digital solutions may therefore be 1 way to
improve access and outreach of evidence-informed psychosocial
support for survivors of cancer.

eHealth interventions for survivors of cancer exist, but findings
are still somewhat mixed and inconclusive [15-21]. Theoretically
based, end user (ie, survivors of cancer) and other key
stakeholders (eg, health care providers) involved development,
with feasibility as well as efficacy testing through randomized
controlled trials, are therefore needed [15-19].

A recently developed user-centered, feasibility- and efficacy
tested digital stress-management intervention for survivors of
cancer, StressProffen [22], has been described by survivors of
cancer 
as 
an 
appreciated 
and 
easily 
accessible
stress-management tool [23]. A randomized controlled trial
(RCT) showed survivors of cancer (ie, 48% survivors of breast
cancer) receiving StressProffen over 12 months, compared to
usual care controls, to experience reduced anxiety, depression
and self-regulatory fatigue, and improved health related QoL
[24,25]. StressProffen is considered a cognitive-behavioral
stress-management intervention [22-25], but does, as with other
established 
cognitive 
behavioral 
stress-management
interventions [26], also include aspects of additional theoretical
psychosocial approaches, including mindfulness.

While both CBT and mindfulness have indications of being
effective psychosocial interventions for survivors of cancer,
reviews examining interventions to improve psychological
well-being and QoL in patients with cancer have pointed to
CBT as the gold standard intervention with evidence of effect,
and the evidence of MBIs being more mixed [27], with existing
mindfulness-based 
studies 
potentially 
experiencing
methodological limitations [27,28]. For example, a systematic
review of systematic reviews examining a number of
rehabilitation interventions following breast cancer, found
convincing material (ie, several meta-analyses and systematic
reviews) of CBT interventions having positive impact on
anxiety, depression, QoL, mood disturbance, body image, sleep
disturbances, and self-esteem. However, only 1 meta-analysis
indicated that mindfulness-based stress reduction could also
improve anxiety, depression, stress, and overall QoL [29]. Other
reviews, for example, examining impact of CBT and
mindfulness on sleep disturbances in survivors of cancer, have
found both CBT and mindfulness for insomnia to be effective
[30], although with CBT often being pointed to as having the
strongest effect and the findings for MBIs being somewhat more
inconsistent [28]. There are however studies pointing to MBIs
as effective in coping with chronic health disorders including
cancer [11,12,31], and a recent systematic review found
mindfulness-based stress reduction interventions to be less costly
and more effective when compared with the usual care of CBT
among patients with health challenges including breast cancer
[32].

To date, digital self-management interventions examining and
comparing asynchronous cognitive behavioral and mindfulness
intervention approaches for survivors of cancer are at best
scarce, even though the preference and suitability of these
interventions may vary for the potential end users.

Objectives

This study aimed to develop 2 distinct asynchronous digital
psychosocial stress-management intervention programs for
survivors of breast cancer, based on the existing StressProffen
intervention; 
one 
cognitive 
behavioral 
therapy-based
intervention (CBI) and one MBI.

JMIR Form Res 2023 | vol. 7 | e48719 | p. 2

Methods

Study Design

The development process contained a multidisciplinary design
approach with elements from user-centered design.

The Original StressProffen Intervention Program

StressProffen is a digital evidence-based stress-management
intervention program for survivors of cancer, delivered as an
app, developed by the Department of Digital Health Research
at Oslo University Hospital. The original StressProffen program
was designed, developed, and tested (ie, feasibility and efficacy)
in close collaboration between researchers, eHealth experts,
privacy and security experts, psychosocial-oncology health care
providers, and survivors of cancer [22-25]. The program
contains 10 primarily cognitive-behavioral stress-management
based modules, with aspects from mindfulness. For details on
design, development, and usability testing, please see Børøsund
et al [22] in 2018.

The original StressProffen program modules cover a variety of
themes, including (1) what is stress; (2) stress, QoL, and
planning; (3) thoughts, feelings, and self-care; (4) mindfulness,
rational thought replacement, and guided imagery; (5) stress
and coping; (6) social support, humor, and meditation; (7) anger
management and conflict style awareness; (8) assertiveness and
communication; (9) health behaviors and setting goals; and
(10) review and summary. Each module consist of separate steps
(ie, 9 to 14 steps), and contains a combination of
psychoeducational material, suggestions, words of wisdom and
exercises (eg, diaphragmatic breathing, mindfulness, progressive
muscle relaxation, and thought challenges). Users of the program
can at any point choose between reading or listening (ie, written
content spoken verbatim). To encourage reflection and practice
there is a 3-day delay after the user has completed 1 module
before being able to access the next module. To provide structure
and allow for individualization, the 4 first modules are
sequential, while the order of modules 5-9 can be individually
chosen. Module 10 provides a review and suggestions for “the
road ahead.”

Adaptation and Development of 2 Distinct Digital
Interventions—StressProffen CBI and MBI

Overview

Aiming to use the existing StressProffen as a basis to develop
2 interventions, the goal was for the content of the interventions
to be the main differing characteristic, developing and delivering
the CBI and MBI versions in an identical format with relatively
similar complexity. The core content development group (LSN,
AM, HRE, and GU) met in biweekly to monthly workshops to
examine and decide on specific content to include or exclude
in the development of the new StressProffen versions. An
expanded content development team (GU, LSN, AM, HRE,
EB, and CMR) then continued to meet in biweekly to monthly
workshops during the next phase to discuss content and
adjustments needed for the new CBI- and MBI-versions. In
addition, the larger project group, consisting of the expanded
project content group, breast cancer experts, national and

international 
psychosocial 
oncology-, 
CBT- 
and
mindfulness-experts, a user representative (ie, representing
women with breast cancer) and eHealth experts met twice and
discussed aspects of the new interventions. The development
process consisted of the steps described below.

Program Content—Adaptation and Development

To ease the comparison of the content of each section, the
StressProffen original content was first transferred to a Word
(Microsoft Corp) document with the pages split in 2 separate
columns. Identical text was included for each section in each
column to allow for easy comparison of content. Further, 4
experts within stress-management, CBT, mindfulness, and
cancer epidemiology (LSN, AM, HRE, and GU), the core
content development group, first independently reviewed the
text and placed the content in the CBI or MBI columns based
on their personal evaluation of the content. All members of the
group used the “track changes” function in Microsoft Word,
and then met to discuss steps for further project progress.
General psychoeducational content was discussed and primarily
kept in both versions (ie, CBI and MBI). For the distinct
CBI-version, mindfulness-based content was identified and
discussed for potential deletion or adjustment. For the
MBI-version, CBT-based content was identified and discussed
for potential deletion or adjustment. Need for additional
modifications or new material for either of the 2 distinct versions
was also identified and a detailed plan for further development
formed.

To ensure harmonized interventions related to module length,
number of intervention or module steps and number of exercises,
new 
material 
was 
developed 
(eg, 
when 
deleting
mindfulness-based content from CBI or vice versa) by the 4
core experts (LSN, AM, HRE, and GU). The adjustment of
existing and development of new CBI-based content was led
by LSN and HRE, while the adjustment of existing and
development of new mindfulness-based content was led by AM.
To ensure easily understandable language and fit with the
original StressProffen program, any new content was reviewed
by members of the content editorial team at the Department of
Digital Health Research, and uncertainties discussed within the
expanded content development team (LSN, AM, HRE, GU,
EB, and CMR) and with user representatives when deemed
necessary. To calculate proportion of content retained, adjusted,
or removed, module steps in the new versions were compared
with module steps in the original StressProffen program.

User Testing of New Exercises

As the original StressProffen content has already been user
tested by survivors of cancer as well as health care providers
[22], only new, developed content was user tested in the 2 new
versions. To ensure user-friendliness of particularly new
exercises, women with breast cancer were invited to test any
new exercises developed for the 2 distinct versions. The project
user representative invited women in breast cancer groups (eg,
local organizations) to participate in user testing, and women
interested in participating were given oral and written
information and provided written informed consent prior to
participation. In addition, a project-related editorial team at the

JMIR Form Res 2023 | vol. 7 | e48719 | p. 3

Department of Digital Health Research conducted testing of
new content and particularly exercises.

Technical and Static Aspects and Adjustments

The original StressProffen program also contains static pages
with reminders, “quotes of the day,” and privacy and security
information. To ensure that these static pages were in line with
what is to be expected in the more “pure” CBI and MBI
interventions, the core content development group (LSN, AM,
HRE, and GU) reviewed the static text independently, applied
the “track changes” function in Microsoft Word, met to discuss
findings, and then reached decisions regarding removal,
modification, or addition of content for the 2 versions.

Ethics Approval

The most recent version of the StressProffen technical platform,
already approved by the hospital privacy and security protection
committee, was used for the development of the StressProffen
CBI- and MBI-versions, and the 2 new program versions were
subsequently approved through the existing organizational
StressProffen risk assessment. All user testing procedures were
approved by the hospital privacy and security protection
committee (18/13312). The participating women with breast
cancer provided written informed consent prior to user testing,
and received a gift card equivalent of US $30 as compensation
for their time and for travel expenses involved. Data from user
testing (written notes) were stored deidentified at a secure server
at the hospital.

Results

Program Content—Adaptation and Development

General psychoeducational content was discussed and primarily
kept in both versions (ie, CBI and MBI), with the MBI-version
incorporating additional material for more mindfulness-based
psychoeducational 
content. 
Of 
total 
content 
(ie,
psychoeducational material, exercises, suggestions, and words
of wisdom), 69% (76/110 steps) of the original StressProffen
content were retained in the StressProffen CBI-version and 23%
(28/123 steps) in the StressProffen MBI-version. Minor

therapeutic language adjustments were conducted to adhere to
the distinct style commonly used by CBT and mindfulness
practitioners, respectively 25% (27/110 steps) for the
CBI-version and 44% (54/123 steps) for the MBI-version. In
addition, 6% (7/110 steps) of the original content was removed
for the new CBI-version and 33% (41/123 steps) removed for
the MBI-version. Adhering to the structure of the original
StressProffen
intervention, 
development 
of 
new
mindfulness-based content was led by AM in collaboration with
the core content development group. In this context, some
content and exercises from Carlson and Speca’s MBIs [33] for
coping with cancer was translated into Norwegian, adapted to
the app format, and incorporated with permission from Carlson.
Please see Figures 1 and 2 for an overview of program content
adaptation and development.

To enable future program comparisons, both program versions
were developed using the exact same StressProffen set-up and
layout. The 2 final interventions therefore had the same basic
structure and contained 10 modules with 9 to 16 steps each.
While the MBI-version contained slightly more words (ie, total
33,020 vs total 30,134 for CBI) and lasted longer (approximately
6 hours compared to approximately 5 hours for CBI), the
CBI-version contained more exercises (38 vs 30). These slight
variances were deemed necessary for proper content presentation
of each version and adhering to the basic tenants of CBT and
mindfulness. MBIs typically revolve around fewer exercises
than CBT, as excess variation could inhibit the development of
mindfulness [31]. The reason for including some more text in
the MBI was related to the need to explain some of the
mindfulness exercises. For example, user tests (see next section)
indicated that mindfulness exercises involving sitting in silence
needed more explanations than CBI exercises.

The team otherwise strived to balance the number and length
of modules and subsections, exercises, and figures as much as
possible, and both versions allowed for setting reminders,
marking favorite exercises and educational content, and for
choosing between reading or listening. Please see Table 1 for
a detailed overview of modules and steps in the 2 program
versions.

JMIR Form Res 2023 | vol. 7 | e48719 | p. 4

Figure 1. Overview—StressProffen CBI. Program content adaptation and development. CBI: cognitive behavioral therapy-based intervention; M:
module.

JMIR Form Res 2023 | vol. 7 | e48719 | p. 5

Figure 2. Overview—StressProffen MBI. Program content adaptation and development. CBT: cognitive behavioral therapy; M: module; MBI:
mindfulness-based intervention.

JMIR Form Res 2023 | vol. 7 | e48719 | p. 6

Table 1. Overview of modules and steps in the CBIa and MBIb programs.

MBI
CBI
Mod-
ule

Auditory
(hh:mm:ss)
Words, n
Exercis-
es, n
Steps,
n
Auditory
(hh:mm:ss)
Words, n
Exercis-
es, n
Steps,
n

Exercises
Educational
text
Total
Exercises
Educational
text
Total

00:32:47
1534
2459
3993
3
15
00:21:28
1096
2049
3145
2
11
1

00:52:23
1662
2304
3966
4
13
00:25:10
1093
1356
2457
3
10
2

00:52:17
1724
2754
4478
3
16
00:25:34
754
1861
2624
3
11
3

00:22:49
547
2110
2657
2
9
00:34:48
1985
1208
3199
5
10
4

01:04:15c
1367
1713
3080
4
13c
00:31:04
1292
1217
2513
5
12
5

00:31:51
1244
2327
3575
3
13
00:28:42
1638
1292
2934
3
10
6

00:35:23
1782
1280
3062
3
9
00:37:09
2384
963
3353
4
9
7

00:21:07
861
1746
2611
3
10
00:32:31
1788
1548
3340
5
11
8

00:29:31
690
2433
3125
2
12
00:32:08
898
2132
3032
4
12
9

00:23:14
811
1658
2473
3
13
00:35:12
1820
1713
3537
4
14
10

06:05:37
12,222
20,784
33,020
30
123
05:03:46
14,748
15,339
30,134
38
110
Total

aCBI: cognitive behavioral therapy-based intervention.
bMBI: mindfulness-based intervention.
cIn 1 exercise, the participants could choose between spending 10 or 20 minutes on the exercise. This summary is based on a 10 minute exercise.

User Testing of New Exercises

The newly developed exercises were audio-recorded prior to
testing. User representatives (ie, 4 women with breast cancer)
and 3 members of a project-related editorial team tested the new
exercises in iterations. The user representatives stated that the
opportunity to listen to the exercises, not only having to read,
would be considered important, and that the type of voice (eg,
calm and engaging) would be crucial for maintaining their
interest for further program use. As the new mindfulness-based
exercises also had silence (ie, quiet time) incorporated into the
exercises, some of the users expressed experiencing some
frustration with the silence, describing “loosing the flow” in the
exercise when not hearing anything. Even a 5 second break was
experienced as a long time for the users, and they stated that
the silence could make thoughts occur related to their illness or
situation. Silence is regarded an essential ingredient to receive
the long term benefits of mindfulness, and could not be
completely removed from the MBI version. However, this
feedback from participants resulted in a more extended
explanation before the exercises involving silence, and a
shortening of some of the silent sections in the new mindfulness
exercises. The users did describe silence in exercises focusing
on bodily sensations (eg, “Silent body scan” and “Body scan”)
as easier to accept, and the silence parts of these exercises were
kept. The participating end users also stated that some of the
new mindfulness-based exercises appeared to have abrupt
endings. This feedback resulted in both versions (ie, CBI and
MBI) incorporating the original StressProffen “closing sentence”
(eg, “The exercise is now completed, and you are ready to move
on to the next part”) at the end of all exercises.

Technical and Static Aspects and Adjustments

The original StressProffen has an option for reading a “quote
of the day” (ie, 55 different quotes) through using a specific
button when opening the app. In the CBI-version, all quotes of
the day were kept and 1 additional quote (ie, “We can easily
manage if we will only take, each day, the burden appointed to
it. But the load will be too heavy for us if we carry yesterday’s
burden over again today, and then add the burden of the morrow
before we are required to bear it”—John Newton) included.
This quote was also added to the MBI-version. In the
MBI-version, 11 original StressProffen quotes were removed,
for example, to limit indications of self-judgement (eg, “Don’t
underestimate yourself by comparing yourself to others. It’s
our differences that make us unique” [Unknown]).

The original StressProffen also has 33 quotes or words of
wisdom used as “additional reminders.” Of these, 8 were
removed from the CBI-version due to mindfulness-related
content, (eg, “To be mindful is to be grateful,” “To be mindful
is to focus on the here and now”), and 5 were added (eg, “Don’t
let the past or the future guide you, concentrate on the here and
now”; “Allow yourself to smile or laugh, even when things are
difficult”; “Think about it, what are you grateful for?”). In the
MBI-version, 13 of the “additional reminders” were removed
(eg, “Think of something that you can do before the day is over
that gives meaning,” “To live your life the way you want to can
make you stronger in body, mind and soul”) and 5 added (eg,
“Can you observe your thoughts without evaluating them?”;
“Take time to relax, or do something you like”; “Do things you
like doing”).

JMIR Form Res 2023 | vol. 7 | e48719 | p. 7

A functionality to allow participants to choose the length of a
mindfulness exercise (ie, 10 or 20 minutes) was also included
in the MBI-version. Finally, to ensure the new app versions met
with all ethical, privacy, and security requirements (eg, General
Data Protection Regulation and Apple or Google requirements),

a legal disclaimer and privacy protection details was developed
and included aspects such as description of data collection,
storage, user rights, and study contact information in case of
questions or technical issues. See Figure 3 for screenshots from
the CBI- and MBI-versions.

Figure 3. Examples of screenshots—StressProffen CBI- and MBI-versions. CBI: cognitive behavioral therapy-based intervention; MBI: mindfulness-based
intervention.

Discussion

Principal Findings

This study shows how theory specific digital stress-management
interventions for survivors of breast cancer can be developed
combining existing evidence and key stakeholder (eg, scientists,
health care providers, and end user) input, centering around
content adaptation and development, user testing and adjustment
of technical, static, and privacy and security aspects. Findings
show how the original StressProffen content was examined,
overlapping content (ie, non-CBT or mindfulness specific)
identified and retained. Mindfulness-based content was removed
from the CBI-version, and cognitive behavioral content removed
from the MBI-version, with varying degrees of new or adjusted
content created for both versions, resulting in 2 distinct CBI
and MBI interventions.

Providing Options for Personal Stress-Management
Preferences

CBT as well as MBIs may provide effective psychosocial
support for survivors of cancer [11,12,27,29]. Studies comparing

these types of digital self-management interventions are at best
scarce, and this study provides a basis for conducting such
comparisons. Presentation of content, controlling for format,
display, content, and length, may as such allow for a true
comparison of theoretical approaches (ie, CBT vs mindfulness).

Whether being able to choose between types of self-management
interventions can in fact impact outcome remains to be seen,
but people’s preference for treatment type, for example, type
of psychotherapy vary [34,35], and user input does suggest that
personal choice can increase motivation to engage in
self-management, strengthening adherence, and potentially also
impacting outcome. Studies matching patients’ treatment
preferences with the intervention received, do not consistently
impact treatment outcome however [36]. For example, a study
examining the outcome of CBT versus MBIs in an RCT with
participants diagnosed with social anxiety disorder did not find
being assigned to personally preferred treatment, or not, to
significantly impact treatment outcome [37]. Other studies have
found the opposite to be the case. For example, 1 study
comparing treatment program preferences in distressed survivors
of breast cancer found a mindfulness-based cancer recovery
intervention to be preferred over supportive expressive therapy

JMIR Form Res 2023 | vol. 7 | e48719 | p. 8

or a 1-day stress-management seminar, and in an RCT found
matching preference to treatment option, regardless of
intervention received, to be effective when related to QoL and
spiritual well-being [38]. Distinguishing between having a
choice and actually making a choice may also be of interest, as
1 study found having a choice to be associated with more
positive patient outcomes in terms of mood, patient satisfaction,
perceived control, and less desire to seek further information
than if having only 1 choice [39]. In the same study, actually
making a choice appeared to have no impact on patient outcomes
[39].

While CBT is often considered the “gold standard” for
psychosocial stress-management interventions in cancer [27],
a growing body of evidence supports the use of mindfulness
for patients with cancer as well [11,12]. Which types of
interventions work the best for which types of people,
demographic variables, or cancer groups, however, remains to
be seen. For people already having knowledge of, or known
preference for, 1 theoretical approach (eg, preference for
mindfulness or preference for CBT), actually being able to
engage in this type of intervention could be of benefit for
motivation, engagement, and intervention adherence, and
subsequently also for future impact and outcome.

Potential Impact for Future Research

The adaptation and development processes in this study strived
to design the interventions in a way that the only differing factor
would be whether a patient would be exposed to the active
ingredients of CBT or mindfulness. Findings show how this
goal was primarily achieved, despite the final MBI-version
being slightly longer, with more steps and total words and
auditory length compared to the final CBI-version, and the
CBI-version having more exercises compared to the
MBI-version. These variations are however minor, and could
be justified in the differences of methodology (eg, necessity for
more explanatory, guided exercises in CBT, and necessity for
more elaborate wording related to “being present and
nonjudgmental”—and the need for incorporating sections of
silence in exercises—in mindfulness). Consequently, any future
differential effects across the 2 interventions during comparison
studies would likely be due to the mechanisms driving the
effects of cognitive behavioral- and mindfulness-based
methodology in survivors of cancer, rather than confounding
factors such as design, layout, textual, or auditory length or
other nontheoretical factors. Future research might also aim to
incorporate other clinical therapeutic approaches in cancer, such
as, for example, acceptance and commitment therapy [40], for
exploration in digital interventions. Analysis of usage patterns
could also add to knowledge about how the different programs
are implemented and used over time. As various formats and
visual presentations created across study teams could impact
interest in, and actual use of, interventions, comparing result
across studies and research teams might prove difficult,
however. Future studies embarking on a similar challenge should
nevertheless keep striving to make the interventions as similar
as possible while retaining the differences in mechanisms.

The original StressProffen intervention is primarily CBT-based,
but also contains options for reminders in the form of

inspirational quotes, as well as the choice of sequence between
modules 5 to 9, the possibility to register daily stress levels, and
the option to mark favorite exercises in a “my page” section
[22]. These options were retained in both new versions, offering
additional choices in support of personal preferences.
Stakeholder input in this study, including from survivors of
breast cancer and oncology health care providers, supported
previous research underlining the importance of being able to
choose between reading or listening [22,23]. Findings also
pointed to a need for clear explanations for sections that might
not be self-explanatory, such as, for example, areas of silence
in the mindfulness-based version, underlining the need for
interventions to be tailored to the patients’ needs [41].

Posttesting the asynchronous CBI and MBI versions in a clinical
trial, 
future 
research 
could 
also 
consider 
building
therapist-guided aspects into the interventions. As such,
including synchronous components to asynchronous platforms
could potentially enhance the effect and make the intervention
more known to patients. Given the importance of health
economic aspects in health care and health care research, health
economy should also be evaluated to inform future
implementation into regular practice.

Limitations

This study has a number of limitations. First, user testing was
performed by only 4 survivors of breast cancer. However, the
original StressProffen intervention was developed with user
input, enabling user testing of primarily new exercises in the 2
new versions. In addition, project team members, including
health care providers, also conducted extensive testing of the
new CBI and MBI versions.

Second, although striving to keep the 2 interventions equal in
structure and length, the MBI version ended up including
somewhat more extensive content, with more steps and words,
and the audio files subsequently lasting longer than those in the
CBI version. Some of this can be explained by the nature of
MBI, with more silence in the audio-files needing explanations,
but a potential impact of this difference in length should be
examined in future studies comparing the 2 distinct intervention
versions.

Third, some of the adaption and development of program content
were conducted during the COVID-19 pandemic, meaning that
several workshops had to be conducted digitally due to pandemic
restrictions. This could potentially have impacted the
development process. However, the core and expanded content
development groups had met in person several times prior to
the pandemic, making the productivity and ease of digital
meetings acceptable. Collaborating on text evaluation and
progress was also easily conducted first through email and
subsequently through digital discussions.

Future Directions

This study sought to describe a method for developing distinct
digital psychosocial stress-management interventions based on
an existing evidence-based, user-centered intervention. Future
studies should examine whether distinct interventions based on
CBT and mindfulness can have positive impact for survivors
of breast cancer, and an RCT exploring such impact (ie, through

JMIR Form Res 2023 | vol. 7 | e48719 | p. 9

the research project Coping After Breast Cancer, Principal
Investigator Giske Ursin of the Norwegian Cancer Registry) is
currently underway [42]. In the future, if found to be of
equivalent usefulness, potential, and impact, patients with cancer
could opt to choose between CBT and mindfulness-based digital
psychosocial 
stress-management 
programs, 
based 
on
preferences. Potential impact of receiving the preferred
intervention or not should however also be explored.

Conclusions

This study shows how theory specific digital stress-management
interventions for survivors of breast cancer can be developed
through extensive collaborations between key stakeholders with
the right expertise. In this case, including scientists, health care
providers, and survivors of breast cancer. Offering a variety of
digital evidence-informed stress-management approaches may
increase interest for, as well as outreach of, and potentially also
impact of, psychosocial interventions for survivors of cancer.