Envisioning the (In)Visibility of Discreet
and Wearable AAC Devices

Humphrey Curtis
Department of Informatics
King’s College London
London, UK

Zihao You
Department of Informatics
King’s College London
London, UK

William Deary
Department of Informatics
King’s College London
London, UK

Miruna-Ioana Tudoreanu
Department of Informatics
King’s College London
London, UK

Timothy Neate
Department of Informatics
King’s College London
London, UK

ABSTRACT

High-tech augmentative and alternative communication (AAC) de-
vices can offer vital communication support for those with complex
communication needs (CCNs). Unfortunately, these devices are
rarely adopted. Abandonment has been linked to many factors –
commonly, stigma resulting from the visibility of the device and
its intrusion into other essential modes of communication like
body language. However, visible AAC is strategically useful for
setting conversational expectations. In this work, we explore how
we might envision AAC to address these tensions directly. We con-
duct user-centred design activities to build three high-fidelity AAC
prototypes with different communities with CCNs, specialists and
stakeholders. The prototypes demonstrate different form factors,
visibility and modes of input/output. Subsequently, we conduct two
qualitative focus groups using convergent and divergent co-design
methods with people with the language impairment aphasia – sup-
porting ideation of seven discreet and wearable low-fidelity AAC
prototypes and critique of the three high-fidelity prototypes.

CCS CONCEPTS

• Human-centered computing →Accessibility technologies.

KEYWORDS

AAC, Alternative and Augmentative Communication, Accessibility,
Discreet and Wearable Devices, Focus Groups

ACM Reference Format:
Humphrey Curtis, Zihao You, William Deary, Miruna-Ioana Tudoreanu,
and Timothy Neate. 2023. Envisioning the (In)Visibility of Discreet and Wear-
able AAC Devices. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Fac-
tors in Computing Systems (CHI ’23), April 23–28, 2023, Hamburg, Germany.
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 19 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3544548.3580936

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
© 2023 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-9421-5/23/04...$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3544548.3580936

1
INTRODUCTION

With an ageing Western population and increased incidence of some
disabilities – there are greater numbers of individuals worldwide
who live with complex communication needs (CCNs) [37, 38]. CCNs
can be onset from a wide range of developmental, acquired and de-
generative conditions including populations that are deaf or hard of
hearing (DHH), have autism spectrum disorder (ASD), intellectual
developmental disabilities (IDD), motor impairments, other cogni-
tive impairments such as dementia and language impairments such
as aphasia. People living with CCNs are at a significantly greater
risk of employment challenges [63], reduced education access [17],
social isolation [46], emotional distress [12] and depression [2]. Ad-
ditionally, people with CCNs could face barriers to long-term speech
and language therapy as global health systems face mounting pres-
sure and unrelenting service demands [18, 30, 45, 81]. Augmentative
and alternative communication (AAC) encapsulates a broad set of
strategies, techniques, and tools that support individuals with CCNs
in expressing thoughts, desires, feelings, and ideas1 [29, 48]. Re-
search has even found that people with CCNs can effectively use
high-tech AAC to support their communication and live more in-
dependently [35, 72]. Yet overall, adoption of AAC still remains
low amongst many communities with CCNs [71, 76, 82]. Subse-
quent investigations have established complications concerning
high-tech AAC interventions – culminating in frequent short-term
and long-term abandonment [55, 76]. Some of these core reasons
include: the inability of high-tech AAC devices to support real-time
communication in a timely manner [53], devices being unreliable
in diverse settings [32], hard to program [6] and inconsiderate of
cultural factors [36]. In particular, AAC devices are typically de-
signed with large awkward form factors [6, 32, 65] and face limited
social acceptance due to stigmas [47, 49, 50, 56].
Against this context, over the last two decades, technologies
which afford discreetness, such as wearables, have grown in com-
mercial prominence as consumers increasingly adopt and integrate
them into their everyday lives [33]. There is a nascent area of
research exploring discreet and wearable technologies to assist
communities with disabilities and CCNs. Three recent examples

1For further information, we have previously systematically reviewed high-tech aided
AAC devices such as speech generating devices (SGDs) or voice output communication
aids (VOCAs) [14].

Figure 1: Research chronology from start to results: initial user-centered design cycles in Section 3 for the three high-fidelity
prototypes then Section 4’s complementary divergent and convergent focus groups with people with aphasia.

include: the successful deployment of a smartwatch app to support
sound awareness for DHH users [34], enhanced non-verbal com-
munication through peripheral expressive robotic objects [70] and
a head-worn display enabling glanceable vocabulary support for
people living with aphasia [82]. Yet critically, this previous research
has not directly considered the nuanced challenge of visibility – the
social perceptions of the assistive technology and its subsequent
ramifications for supporting communication interactions within
different public contexts [19, 24, 75]. In this work, we investigate
the present challenges of visibility in everyday communication.
We envision discreet and wearable AAC technologies, which af-
ford varying levels of visibility with people living with CCNs, and
aim to understand their acceptability. We begin through three ex-
ploratory discreet and wearable high-fidelity AAC prototypes built
with user-centred design techniques – that traverse different form
factors, areas of placement on/around the body and input/output
modalities – thereby affording different amounts of visibility. We
present an ‘earable’ [62] technology – Prompt Me Out, which dis-
creetly prompts users pre-prepared dialogues directly to the ear, a
smartwatch AAC – My Speech OS, which enables symbolic com-
munication from a smartwatch, and a badge technology – STT
Badge, which supports live transcription of face-to-face dialogue
on a device not worn by the intended AAC user. Following this de-
velopment process, we held two complementary focus groups with
people living with aphasia to understand their feasibility, and more
completely consider the opportunities and challenges for discreet
and wearable AAC.
From the complementary focus groups, we report communica-
tion challenges, subsequent ideation through divergent discussion
with video prompts, low-fidelity prototyping and participants’ con-
vergent evaluation of the three high-fidelity AAC prototypes. We

discuss a range of users’ perspectives and ideas concerning dis-
creet and wearable AAC technology – especially the significance
of control over AAC visibility dependent on context and communi-
cation partner. An outline of the research chronology is illustrated
in Figure 1 and cumulatively this work makes three contributions:

(1) Proposal of three high-fidelity discreet and wearable AAC
prototypes, designed with communities which afford dif-
ferent levels of (in)visibility [19]. These were designed in
collaboration with communities with CCNs, specialists and
stakeholders – specifically, speech and language therapists
(SLTs) for people living with aphasia, specialists from a Cen-
tre for children with IDD and ASD and members of the DHH
community.
(2) Findings from two complementary focus groups with people
with aphasia and SLTs on discreet and wearable AAC. Focus
group one utilised divergent co-design methods. In contrast,
focus group two favoured convergent co-design methods.
Results include qualitative thematic data and low-fidelity dis-
creet and wearable AAC prototypes that let the user control
their (in)visibility.
(3) Guidance regarding the (in)visibility of discreet and wear-
able AAC devices and an evaluation of the methods and
participatory design techniques used within this research.

2
RELATED WORK
2.1
Wearable and Discreet Assistive
Technologies

Weiser’s conception of ubiquitous, discreet and wearable forms
of computing enabling seamless and discreet human-computer in-
teractions presents a novel conception of future technologies and
applications [78, 79]. However, as contemporary computers evolve

towards this paradigm it is essential to support accessibility – there-
fore communities with disabilities and CCNs must be at the fore-
front of the development of these technologies [16, 23, 64]. In light
of this, we strongly advocate Bennett et al.’s interdependence frame
of assistive technology – meaning all collectively interact with the
assistive technology – helping mitigate the systemic marginalisa-
tion of people with disabilities [4, 64]. Adding to this, if the assistive
technology itself is discreet or even wearable – this can offer the ben-
efit of supporting disabilities such as CCNs unobtrusively [19]. As
Bennett et al. note, very visible assistive devices can often portray
users as vulnerable or incapable leading to awkward social interac-
tions and minimal use – even if the device grants the user greater
autonomy and supports their communication [4]. Furthermore,
Parette et al. have found that visible assistive technology usage can
potentially perpetuate stigma and unwanted attention – forcing
people with disabilities to experience social isolation and marginal-
isation [43, 56]. Indeed, this research into the social perceptions of
assistive technology is especially significant, if the technology is
AAC and deployed to improve access to face-to-face forms of human
communication2. However, it is essential to caveat with Faucett et
al.’s argument of highly visible assistive technology adding credi-
bility and supporting accessibility – for example, visible AAC can
serve as a social indicator that a person could need extra support
and communication assistance [19]. Indeed, people with disabilities
can face day-to-day disbelief, minimisation, denial and illegitimacy
– especially if the disability is not outwardly visible [19, 67, 80].
Therefore, it is significant to enable the end user to have control
over the visibility of their assistive technology dependent on cir-
cumstance or setting [19].
Previous research has experimented with the form factor of AAC
and re-conceptualised AAC as a wearable, discreet and less visible
assistive technology – developing successful and effective interven-
tions for different communities with CCNs. For instance, Voss et
al. devised a Google Glass application, which discreetly delivers
real-time social cues to the wearer – the AAC is designed to sup-
port the communication of children with autism spectrum disorder
(ASD) [77]. From minimally visible hardware, the child with ASD
receives real-time social cues and can learn to recognise facial ex-
pressions – improving their overall ability to communicate [77]. A
similar high-tech AAC application was developed by Williams et
al. on Google Glass to provide real-time conversational vocabulary
prompts for people living with aphasia [82]. In a different form
factor but similar vein of thinking, Schlosser et al. utilised discreet
and wearable smartwatch technology (i.e., an Apple Watch) to pro-
vide just-in-time supports for children with ASD and intellectual
disabilities (ID) – enabling discreet, naturalistic and unobtrusive
communication support amongst their peers. Whilst for a different
community, Fleury et al. developed a fabric and tactile wearable
speech generating device (SGD) to support spontaneous interac-
tions for a nonverbal paediatric user with vision impairment [21].
Promising advantages include the persistent availability of the wear-
able SGD and personalisation of the device fabric aesthetics (i.e.,
colours and textures) [21]. In contrast, Valencia et al.’s physical ex-
pressive objects offer discreet support of non-verbal gestures using

2The power dynamics and interactions between two interlocutors in conversation can
certainly be impacted by inhibiting AAC technologies [31, 32].

motion-based AAC for a user with cerebral palsy. Indeed, these
discreet AAC Sidekicks support the user’s autonomy by enhancing
their non-verbal communication during conversations [70].

2.2
Current High-tech AAC Interventions for
People Living with CCNs

With respect to commercially available AAC technologies, dedi-
cated hardware and apps remain the most common intervention
strategies3. Indeed, commercial AAC devices for people with CCNs
are either typically external and standalone high-tech AAC de-
vices or increasingly subscription-based apps to be downloaded
on mobile, tablet, computer and even smartwatch [26, 53]. Starting
with dedicated external high-tech AAC devices, there is a myr-
iad of options – in our previous work, we found DynaVox models
most mentioned within the AAC literature [14]. However, three es-
tablished commercial manufacturers: DynaVox, Liberator Ltd. and
Lingraphica Ltd. – all have a number of purpose-built symbol-based
AAC devices that receive indiscreet and often slow input from the
touchscreen, eye-gaze modalities or manual switches [1, 41, 42].
Devices from these companies present libraries of images, sym-
bols and text navigable via grids and output audio of constructed
sentences [1, 41, 42]. Benefits accrued from these standalone AAC
commercial devices include that they afford high visibility and
credibility – making any potential communication partners aware
of the users disability during communication [19]. Yet, these de-
vices also have several key design problems. In particular, they are
not discreet causing potentially debilitating stigmas [19, 56] whilst
the underlying form factor of these devices is rigid – preventing
adaptability and personalisation [6]. Furthermore, these devices
physically block/obstruct pathways for users non-verbal communi-
cation [32] and can be a burden to carry daily if the user has motor
impairments/paralysis – instead they are typically mounted to a
wheelchair [32]. Further problems include that these devices are
very expensive4, provide audio output, which replaces the user’s
own natural voice and are often not designed for a specific commu-
nity of focus [53, 82].
In terms of commercial mobile applications available on con-
sumer platforms such as iOS and Android there are many options –
the Tavistock Trust for Aphasia offers an extensive public library
of downloadable AAC software and apps [22]. AAC apps afford
the user more discreetness, less visibility and consequently limit
stigma but at the expense of credibility and raising awareness of
the user’s disability in social settings [19]. For example, Faucett et
al. note that an iPad configured with an AAC app for children with
disabilities could be potentially mistaken for a toy – preventing
access to assistive services and downplaying the significance of the
disability [19]. Within our previous research and systematic review,
we found Proloquo2Go the most mentioned AAC app5 – it offers

3Of note, Moffat et al., provide useful data from a web survey of adopted AAC tech-
nology answered by 70 respondents with aphasia [49].
4Although there is governmental device funding available, access to this high-tech
AAC technology comes at a premium cost. At the time of writing, Dynavox Ltd. high-
tech AAC devices require a quote, yet the PC Eye Model starts at $1249.00. In a similar
vein, Lingraphica Ltd. models require a consultation. Lastly, Liberator Ltd. high-tech
AAC devices start at $999.99 up to $7000.00 and above.
5We equally found tactile inputs the second most mentioned modality with 32.7% and
Audio the most mentioned output modality 62.8% [14].

portability via the smartphone, extensive customisation, progres-
sive language features and can even be deployed on a wearable
smartwatch [14]. Other popular mobile app offerings for people
living with CCNs include the Lingraphica suite of apps, which offer
both AAC support and video speech exercises for daily language
therapy [42]. Despite the advantage of less visibility from these
apps – they often cost subscription fees6, undesirably replace the
user’s own natural voice, commonly are not co-designed with their
community of focus and have been found to slow communication
rates [6, 49].

2.3
Creativity and Participatory Design
Techniques

Accessibility scholarship has emphasised the significance of inte-
grating and involving end-users and stakeholders directly within the
design process as essential for developing innovative technologies
that will effectively support individuals with disabilities [60, 64].
Consequently, in this study, we used the contrasting approaches of
divergent and convergent design thinking directly with end-users
and stakeholders across two distinct and complementary focus
groups [27]. Our approach involved using the contrasting meth-
ods of divergent and convergent thinking to support focus group
activities on (in)visible discreet and wearable AAC devices [13].
Expanding on this, focus group one instigated divergent thinking
and co-design methods, which focus on the generation of multiple
different ideas and strands of thought – building in essence, a web
of associative knowledge [13, 27]. In particular, divergent thinking
encourages creative risks and ideating potentially unfeasible solu-
tions [13]. In contrast, focus group two transitioned to co-design
methods focused on convergent thinking. Specifically, convergent
thinking is more analytical, honing in on the single best answer
and sticking to a more narrow range of information – resulting in
more realistic, recognisable and safe solutions [13, 27].
Much of this paper involved collaboration and co-design with
people living with aphasia. Aphasia is most commonly caused by a
stroke, which causes damage to the parts of the brain responsible for
language [5]. Notably, people living with aphasia experience differ-
ing difficulties with reading, writing, speaking and language [5, 69].
Recruiting, designing and directly engaging people with aphasia
can be particularly challenging as people with aphasia can poten-
tially find it hard to communicate, provide consent, communicate
cooperatively in groups and easily suffer from fatigue [3, 83]. Ad-
ditionally, participatory design methods can be very cognitively
exerting and language-based – resulting in fatigue for research
participants with aphasia [83]. However, to effectively co-design
(in)visible discreet and wearable AAC devices we were influenced
by the following participatory design techniques to maximise in-
clusion for our collaborators with aphasia. Upholding the social
model for disability, Wilson et al., advocate the use of tangible
design languages supporting participants with aphasia’s voice in
design – examples include: short, direct tasks and the frequent us-
age of tangible physical artefacts [83]. Other engaging techniques
for collaboration with people with aphasia include Neate et al.’s
empowering use of co-created personas – this enhanced the ease

6At the time of writing, Proloquo2Go costs $249.99. Whilst, Lingraphica Ltd. offers
SmallTalk, TalkPath Therapy and TalkPath News all for free.

of communication and supported critiquing during the co-design
process [51]. In other projects, Neate et al., co-designed with peo-
ple with aphasia using resource-constrained creation – to enhance
further versatility and creativity7 [51, 52, 69]. Whilst, more broadly
amongst older adults, Lindsay et al.’s OASIS approach employed
playful video prompt creation and invisible design artefacts fol-
lowed by exploratory meetings and low-fidelity prototyping – to
effortlessly communicate the very purposes of the technology [39].

3
DESIGNING THREE DISCREET AND
WEARABLE AAC PROTOTYPES

We developed the three high-fidelity discreet and wearable AAC
prototypes harnessing user-centred design activities with a broad
demographic of communities with CCNs, specialists and stakehold-
ers – the prototypes explore and afford the user differing levels of
public visibility and areas of placement on the body [7]. Specifically,
we built the three high-fidelity prototypes to initially explore the
potential benefits of (in)visible, discreet and wearable AAC for a
wide range of communities with CCNs. During the user-centred de-
sign process, we collaborated with SLTs that work with people with
aphasia, specialists from a Center for Children with Behavioural
Disorders and ASD and members of the DHH community. Eventu-
ally, we would also use the three high-fidelity prototypes to serve
as a tangible medium for our participants with aphasia to analyti-
cally evaluate via tangible design languages during the convergent
second focus group in Section 4.6 [83].

3.1
Prototype 1: Prompt Me Out - An AAC
Prompter to Assist Public Speaking

Prompt Me Out is a discreet application developed for people with
aphasia that experience challenges with public speaking and illus-
trated in Figure 2. The Prompt Me Out prototype was iterated on
the basis of feedback solicited from two SLTs during the develop-
ment process and a supplementary graphical user interface (GUI)
developed. The design of the GUI and program was influenced
by previous research from Ghai et al., which explored providing
prompts for people who stutter [25]. In much the same way, Prompt
Me Out supports users with aphasia if they get stuck in specific
parts of their dialogue and struggle to proceed. On command, it
will prompt the next word of any prepared dialogue via leveraging
speech recognition libraries8 and Google’s text-to-speech API9. Ini-
tially, the prototype is computer-based and accessed via an almost
invisible10 Bluetooth connected earable [62] – the word prompt
is received discreetly to the user’s ear unbeknownst to the con-
versation partner. During operation of this AAC prototype, users
must pre-prepare dialogue, click for a prompt, utter the current
word reached and then receive an immediate prompt for the very
next word. The goal was to encourage and support people with
aphasia’s dialogue and expression when public speaking. Much like
previous research from Boyd-Graber et al. [7], the prototype was

7This methodology assisted the development of a variety of accessible creative tech-
nologies including: Comic Spin, the MakeWrite and CreaTable.
8https://pypi.org/project/SpeechRecognition/
9https://cloud.google.com/text-to-speech
10We should note, here, that during testing using this as an ‘earable’ was not always
practical as we wished for multiple people to experience the technology for demon-
stration purposes. In this case, we used laptop speakers.

I have a dream that one day even the state of Mississippi, a

state sweltering with the heat of injustice, sweltering with

the heat of oppression, will be transformed into an oasis of

freedom and justice.

Last word spoken
Stuck word

*Squeeze*

Mississippi

A
B
C

Figure 2: Prompt Me Out conceptualisation: (a) the graphical GUI is depicted, (b) the associated almost invisible earable hardware
interacted with squeeze gesture and (c) the final discreet verbal prompt.

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)

Figure 3: My Speech OS conceptualised and deployed: (a) the homepage, (b) the page for requesting food and drink, (c) the page
for personal care requests and (d) My Speech OS deployed on two Apple Smart Watches during focus group two detailed in
Subsection 4.6.

built in collaboration with two experienced SLTs who work with
people with aphasia. Initially, a proof of concept was built and this
prototype was iterated on the basis of feedback solicited from the
SLTs including the finalisation of the front-end GUI. Following this,
a final version of the prototype underwent a small round of user-
testing with the two SLTs – both qualitative data via think-aloud
protocol and quantitative data (i.e., task completion metrics) was
used to make final changes to the prototype.

3.2
Prototype 2: My Speech OS – An AAC
Smartwatch Prototype

My Speech OS is a wearable and discreet smartwatch application,
which enables users to construct sentences and dialogue on the ba-
sis of ordering images, symbols and sounds. My Speech OS affords
low levels of visibility and was developed in collaboration with
specialists, young adults and children with learning disabilities.
Influenced by pre-existing high-tech AAC technology and depicted
in Figure 3, My Speech OS provides non-verbal users with a com-
fortable, discreet and wearable SGD or VOCA that can supplement
or even replace their speech – provided they require support to

make requests or for indiscriminate dialogue. Unlike traditional
SGDs and VOCAs, a key motive for the smartwatch form factor in-
cludes its discreetness – it importantly does not physically obscure
user’s pathways for non-verbal communication and expression
through gestural body language [32]. My Speech OS was developed
using user-centred design techniques in collaboration with 3 in-
terviewed specialists from a Center for Children with IDD and
ASD – specifically, a child psychologist, therapist and psychothera-
pist. Furthermore, the application was also shaped by secondary
results from a questionnaire delivered to eighteen stakeholders and
students from the centre. To ensure rapid development, the My
Speech OS prototype was simulated in Adobe XD and exported to a
smartwatch. Once a final version of the prototype had been built,
the prototype was iterated on the basis of further suggestions and
feedback from user-testing of the prototype with 5 specialists from
the centre. User-testing involved both recorded quantitative data
on prototype usability (i.e., task completion metrics) and qualita-
tive suggestions for improvement (i.e., think-aloud protocol and
subsequent observations from the specialists).

(a)
(b)

Figure 4: The STT Badge conceptualised and deployed: (a) initial graphics of the STT Badge and (b) the STT Badge prototype
with lapel microphone, 3D printed encasing and portable power bank.

3.3
Prototype 3: Speech-to-Text (STT) Badge – A
Wearable AAC Badge

Unlike mainstream AAC approaches, which predominantly har-
ness an independence frame of assistive technology – the STT Badge
embraces Bennett et al.’s interdependent frame of assistive tech-
nology by subverting normalised roles and instead has a disabled
person’s interlocutor wear the AAC. With this setup, pictured in
Figure 4, the relatively visible badge can provide live transcription
and subtitles of the wearer’s dialogue for any DHH individuals
including in noisy environments. Envisaged contexts for the STT
Badge are face-to-face services consequently the device could be
worn by – bank tellers, shop clerks, teachers in schools and doctors.
The STT Badge was initially conceived based on the third author’s
autoethnographic experiences, having been deaf throughout child-
hood. Furthermore, the prototype was built using a user-centred
design process with survey results from 9 DHH participants to
determine the custom-built GUI preferences (i.e., optimal font type,
number of lines, colour contrast, font size and word speed) coupled
with iterative feedback from a specialist during the development
process. During user testing, both quantitative data from partici-
pants’ multiple choice survey data and qualitative suggestions for
improvement were harnessed to make changes to the prototype.
For instance, a key qualitative finding from this user-centred design
process included that, participants desired a slower word speed
from the STT Badge so that they could simultaneously, “lip read to
some extent”. The eventual prototype was built using a variety of
hardware – including a Raspberry Pi 4 with mounted HyperPixel
Display and encased in a custom 3D printed box. Equally, the pro-
totype’s software used open-source speech recognition libraries11

and the Coqui STT AI deep learning toolkit12 – enabling the badge
to successfully function completely offline.

11https://pypi.org/project/SpeechRecognition/
12https://github.com/coqui-ai/STT

4
FOCUS GROUPS WITH PEOPLE WITH
APHASIA

Following the user-centred development of three high-fidelity pro-
totypes in collaboration with a broad demographic (i.e., Section 3),
we then held two complementary focus groups with people living
with aphasia and SLTs. Depicted in Figure 1, the two focus groups
were complementary and spaced one week apart. The first focus
group leveraged divergent co-design approaches enabling people
with aphasia to extensively ideate and prototype ideas for AAC.
Whilst, in contrast, the second focus group transitioned to acces-
sible convergent approaches – including, people with aphasia’s
evaluation of the three tangible high-fidelity prototypes. The par-
ticipants with aphasia were deliberately blind to the development
process and had strictly no prior involvement in the design of the
three prototypes – promoting honest evaluation and reflection.

4.1
Research Environment

Participants were recruited from an aphasia charity and exclusively,
research sessions were held at familiar facilities – to avoid bur-
dening participants with travel costs to a central research site or
university lab. The charity, Aphasia Re-Connect supports people
with aphasia by providing a social community and group speech and
language therapy. We conducted our research during the weekly
face-to-face group drop-in at the Robert Williams Speech and Lan-
guage Therapy Centre. All participants were familiar with the lo-
cation for weekly therapy and most arrived independently using
public transport.

4.2
Focus Group Participants

Collectively, we had 12 participants with aphasia and 3 SLT par-
ticipants across both focus groups – presented in Tables 1 and 2.
Participants had a range of aphasic language difficulties, which is
representative of the wider population of people living with aphasia.
To make the focus groups more accessible we followed Mack et al.

[44] guidelines throughout the research process – we operated in a
familiar space for participants, used accessible consent procedures,
monitored participants’ needs and endorsed flexible attendance. All
participants were at least six months post-stroke, had spoken Eng-
lish fluently prior to their stroke and 5 participants had hemiplegic
limb weakness which restricted the use of their right arm and leg.

4.3
Procedures

The focus groups met one week apart and each lasted two hours.
Ethical approval for this research was granted by the Health Facul-
ties Research Ethics Subcommittee at King’s College London. One
week prior to the first focus group, participants were provided with
an accessible information sheet and completed a consent form –
participants with aphasia were also supported to access these mate-
rials by SLTs. Furthermore, participants with aphasia were provided
with a week to discuss the information sheet and study with trusted
friends and family. The focus group sessions used video and au-
dio recording to collect qualitative data from discussions. Initially,
participants freely seated themselves then the first author and an
SLT initiated proceedings with an introduction and answered par-
ticipants’ questions. Following this, participants were assigned to
take part in focus group activities on two tables. Subsequently, the
first and fifth authors each supported the focus group proceedings
concurrently with prepared materials on each table.

4.4
Data Analysis

Both focus groups were analysed for structured observation of
the video data, transcribed and organised using NVivo 12. After-
wards we applied inductive Thematic Analysis – an iterative process
whereby qualitative data is restructured into themes [8, 9]. In line
with Braun and Clarke’s original interpretation, the coding pro-
cess was initially carried out by solely the first author13 [8, 9, 74].
Following this, all the authors met and collectively refined and
discussed the themes together to mitigate individual bias. In total,
we found 459 instances of statements and discussion relevant to
this study. For focus group one, the low-fidelity AAC prototypes
are evaluated and discussed. Whilst, for focus group two qualitative
data was categorised into positive/negative evaluations of the three
high-fidelity prototypes: Prompt Me Out, My Speech OS and STT
Badge plus ancillary findings for future research.

4.5
Focus Group One: Divergent Design
Thinking and Prototyping of Discreet and
Wearable AAC

Focus group one supported participants’ discussions on regularly
encountered communication challenges and then the co-design
of low-fidelity discreet and wearable AAC prototypes – that af-
ford different levels of public visibility. In the vein of divergent
design thinking, we wanted participants to be empowered to dis-
cuss frequently encountered communication problems, provide a
high volume of solutions and take creative risks [13, 27]. Yet, we
immediately recognised the pressures and demands of on-the-spot
creativity – particularly for participants with aphasia. Consequently,
we harnessed Lindsay et al.’s video prompts [39] to facilitate easier

13The first author attended both focus groups.

communication, better discussion and improved ideation. Discus-
sions after each video prompt were improvised with the researchers
and SLTs jointly encouraging many disparate ideas.

4.5.1
Video Prompts. We developed six video prompts to be played
during the focus group. These prompts were curated from open-
source video footage – supporting participants to recollect experi-
ences, and personal communication challenges and ideate potential
technologies for discreet and wearable AAC support. The final six
video prompt contexts are generic locations where communica-
tion is needed – coffee shops, visiting the doctors, taking public
transport, supermarket shopping, visiting friends/family and eating
out. These contexts were derived from ethnographic data collected
by Parr [57], which tracked the livelihoods of people with apha-
sia and the first author’s prior knowledge of participants’ daily
routines. Additionally, we provided ample time for participants to
propose and discuss further unprompted contexts. Collectively, the
video prompts resulted in 3 minutes and 14 seconds of footage. Dur-
ing the focus group, we played each video prompt and supported
approximately 10 minutes of subsequent group discussion.

4.5.2
Low-fidelity Exploratory Prototyping. After the video prompt
discussions, we then invited participants to envision their own dis-
creet and wearable high-tech AAC device. Participants were given
approximately 60 minutes to build their low-fidelity prototypes,
whilst the prototyping activities were directly scaffolded by the
video prompts as participants could ideate solutions for the com-
munication challenges of the prompted contexts. All participants
were familiar with mainstream discreet and wearable technologies
and some of the participants were smartwatch users. Initially, we
verbally explained to participants the process of low-fidelity pro-
totyping accompanied by a small demonstration of using the craft
materials. If necessary, participants were supported and assisted
during the low-fidelity prototyping process. For instance, the three
SLT participants and two researchers supported participants with
Hemiplegia/paralysis through appropriate closed ‘yes/no’ question-
ing (e.g., “Do you want to use this coloured card?”) and performing
some of the dexterous building activities on their behalf (e.g., cut-
ting card with scissors or drawing). Some participants felt more
comfortable building collectively as a small group rather than on
their own with the support of an SLT or researcher mediating dis-
cussions. Equally, during building we extemporaneously prompted
participants to reflect on device visibility, social acceptability, form
factors, placement on the body and types of communication support
from the AAC device. Participants were given space to imagine and
discuss different discreet and wearable AAC devices – providing
personalised solutions for their varying communication challenges.
Importantly, participants were free to make either paper proto-
types or use the craft materials provided at the session (i.e., fabric,
coloured card and wool etc.). Throughout, we were supportive,
positive and politely enquiring over participants’ design choices.
The low-fidelity building process naturally finished once partic-
ipants were satisfied and many proud of their final low-fidelity
prototypes. Lastly, we finished with a small group demonstration
of each prototype and its functionality.

Table 1: Overview of focus group participants with aphasia. PWA, F1 and F2 serve as acronyms for people with aphasia, focus
group 1 and 2. Assessed by an SLT are participants’ aphasia, speaking, reading, hearing, and writing – scaled: Mild, Moderate
and Severe. Also, we noted participants’ Hemiplegia and personal technology refers to participants’ day-to-day devices or AAC.

PWA (Gender - Age)
Aphasia
Attendance
Difficulties
Personal Technology

Grace (F - 83)
Mild
F1, F2
Speaking: Moderate
Reading: Moderate
Writing: Moderate

Smartphone
Tablet

Julia (F - 50)
Severe
F1
Speaking: Severe
Reading: Severe
Writing: Severe
Physical: Hemiplegia

Smartphone
Tablet

Gavin (M - 75)
Severe
F1, F2
Speaking: Severe
Reading: Severe
Writing: Severe

Smartphone
Smartwatch
Communication book

Josh (M - 65)
Moderate
F1
Speaking: Moderate
Reading: Moderate
Writing: Severe

Smartphone

Rick (M - 51)
Moderate
F1, F2
Speaking: Moderate
Reading: Moderate
Writing: Severe

Smartphone
Smartwatch

Steven (M - 52)
Moderate
F1, F2
Speaking: Moderate
Reading: Severe
Writing: Severe
Physical: Hemiplegia

Smartphone

Joanna (M - 53)
Severe
F1, F2
Speaking: Severe
Reading: Severe
Writing: Severe
Physical: Hemiplegia

Smartphone
Smartwatch

Peter (M - 73)
Mild
F2
Speaking: Moderate
Reading: Moderate
Writing: Moderate

Smartphone

Thomas (M - 72)
Severe
F2
Speaking: Severe
Reading: Severe
Writing: Severe

Smartphone
Tablet

Graeme (M - 58)
Mild
F2
Speaking: Mild
Reading: Severe
Writing: Severe
Physical: Hemiplegia

Smartphone

Alex (M - 64)
Severe
F2
Speaking: Severe
Reading: Severe
Writing: Severe
Physical: Hemiplegia

Smartphone

Olivia (F - 82)
Moderate
F2
Speaking: Moderate
Reading: Moderate
Writing: Moderate

Smartphone

Table 2: Overview of SLT Focus Group participants. Respectively, F1 and F2 serve as shorthand acronyms for focus group 1 and
2. Lastly, professional experience refers to SLTs time spent working with people with aphasia.

SLT (Gender)
Attendance
Professional Experience

Sophia (F)
F1
40 years

Kendall (F)
F1, F2
2 years

Harriet (F)
F1
3 years

Figure 5: Photos of focus group one. On the left, we have materials used for the low-fidelity prototyping and the research
environment. On the right, we have two photos of engaged participant tables during the divergent prototyping session.

4.6
Focus Group Two: Convergent Design
Thinking and Evaluation of High-Fidelity
Prototypes

Focus group two favoured a convergent design thinking method-
ology – we wanted participants to analytically critique the three
discreet and wearable high-fidelity AAC prototypes from the user-
centred design process in Section 3: Prompt Me Out, My Speech OS
and the STT Badge [13, 27]. This methodology is advocated by Wil-
son et al. [83], high-fidelity prototypes can empower participants
with aphasia through tangible design and minimise conceptual de-
mands. In terms of procedure, participants were introduced to the
prototypes with a two-minute video demonstration and provided
with each prototype to explore and test. Importantly, the partici-
pants with aphasia had no involvement in the initial user-centred
design of the three prototypes – promoting honest evaluation. After
approximately 10 minutes of prototype usage, we then facilitated a
recorded group discussion using a methodical approach – whereby

researchers had a predefined list of analytical questions to ask
participants. In particular, participants’ consensus was gathered
concerning refinements to each prototype.

5
RESULTS FROM FOCUS GROUPS

Results are drawn from qualitative analysis of the two focus groups
including Thematic Analysis of transcripts and video footage (i.e.,
Figure 6). The complementary focus groups occurred one week
apart. Using divergent design thinking approaches, focus group one
provided Thematic Analysis of responses to the six video prompts
and participants constructed seven low-fidelity discreet and wear-
able AAC prototypes. In contrast, focus group two transitioned
to convergent design thinking approaches in which participants
critiqued the three discreet and wearable high-fidelity AAC proto-
types from the user-centred design process in Section 3: Prompt
Me Out, My Speech OS and the STT Badge [13, 27].

Having aphasia
within everyday
social environments

Theme 1: Psychological and contextual factors
restrain people with aphasia's communication

Negative emotions
and trauma of past

communication

experiences

Exasperation of
unpredictable verbal

communication

Challenges of an
invisible disability

Themes

Sub-themes

Reticence to
communicate true needs

and desires

Anxiety and fear from

social pressures and

crowds

Moments of confusion
and frustration onset by

aphasia

Internal positive
emotions and habits

Theme 2: Positive emotions and externally visible

supports can empower communication

Externally visible

technology and
human supports

Preparation for future

dialogues is an

important tool

Confidence is essential

for communication

Habits and routines
improve communication

and create access

Accessible technologies

become integral else
low-tech options are

favoured

Family members and
considerate audiences
improve communication

Figure 6: The structure of themes and associated sub-themes from Thematic Analysis of focus group one.

5.1
Divergent Focus Group One

5.1.1
Theme 1: Psychological and contextual factors constrain people
with aphasia’s communication. This theme describes participants’
feelings and emotions harboured from public communication with
an invisible disability. Crafted sub-themes are: (1) having aphasia
within everyday social environments, (2) the negative emotions
and trauma of past communication experiences.
Exasperation of unpredictable verbal communication. Par-
ticipants identified verbal communication and word finding as a
prominent yet unpredictable challenge day-to-day. In some situ-
ations, word finding with aphasia can be more challenging than
others: “Rick: Yeah! Yeah! its like ummm... if I don’t you know like...
like when I meet new people... that’s like when its worst! Yeah... mhm...
you can’t get the words out at all!”. Meeting and engaging with
strangers can lead to stumbling blocks and make on-the-spot word
finding more challenging – particularly as strangers are completely
unfamiliar with their personal communication needs and strategies.
Participants mentioned ordering specific memorised café menu
items and avoiding lengthy dialogues as strategies: “Rick: Yeah...
Yeah... Just... like ummm... I couldn’t get the words out... I wanted you
know like... there is all types of coffee and all I can say is black coffee”.
One non-verbal participant during ordering shows his low-tech
AAC communication book which provides a picture of ‘Double
Espresso’ on a page, yet if further questioned by oblivious café staff
he struggles to find the words to express his desires and needs:
“Researcher 2: So you go in with your book and say double espresso?
Gavin: Yes, that’s right!... Sophia: What if someone says... do you want
milk [i.e., with your coffee]? Gavin: Ahhh... [confused look]... hmm...
ummm... I don’t know!”.

Challenges of an invisible disability. Participants without
noticeable paralysis/hemiplegia or a visible assistive technology
(e.g., walking stick) expressed their frustration at suffering from an
invisible disability. Frequently, strangers are not accommodating or
empathetic – such as providing a seat on public transport or patient
and considerate communication partners. Therefore, participants
emphasised the importance of wearing an Aphasia/Stroke badge14:
“Rick: Yeah... Yeah... You wouldn’t believe that I have... no paralysis!
[Throws arms in the air]... Researcher 1: Oh really... so sometimes
people don’t believe you? [...] Rick: not even knowing... that I’ve had
a stroke! Because physically I look normal... Because they look at
you like... erm why do you need a seat? Yeah... yeah... you’ve got to
either... have a badge on... or... or... erm a card that says I have apha-
sia... say that I’ve had a stroke”. Moreover, an SLT and participant
with aphasia reminisced about the difficulties of communicating in
public before the wearable badges existed: “Sophia: Now Julia throw
your mind back to the supervision... you had many years ago, when
you came in very hot under the collar because you had gone to the
coffee shop and you’d tried to order! [...] and they just wouldn’t listen!
Julia: Yeah! Yeah! That’s it! [...] so yeah we made a badge... [brushing
chest where badge would be] you know?”. Importantly, participants
also stressed times when they don’t want there disability openly
revealed: “Grace: Yes! Particularly young people [with aphasia] don’t
want their hidden disability always revealed!”.
Turning to the second sub-theme, which considers the negative
emotions and trauma of past communication experiences. Aphasia
made participants anxious and reticent to communicate their true

14The day prior to the focus group, Rick was wrongly denied access to a public disabled
bathroom by inattentive transport staff as he forgot his disability badge.

Prompt Me Out 
AAC Pendant

AAC Badge

My Speech OS

STT Badge

Steven's Smartphone
Minimalist Navigation App

Joanna's AAC Smartwatch

Rick's AAC Smartwatch

Voice Operated Smartwatch

(a)
(b)

Figure 7: Study prototypes placement on the body – affording different levels of visibility: (a) user-centered designed high-
fidelity prototypes from Section 3 and (b) low-fidelity prototypes built by participants from Subsection 5.1.3.

desires and needs, keen to avoid crowds and experience general
moments of confusion and frustration.
Reticence to communicate true needs and desires. Partici-
pants expressed that they often felt reticent to communicate their
true thoughts and feelings in public and with friends/family. Over
long periods, this can become deeper emotions of feeling ignored
or misunderstood. In one example, a participant expressed reluc-
tance about complaining if his order was wrong in a café due to his
invisible disability: “Rick: If you have to complain its a no! no! Just...
get it!”. The same participant will not request modifications to his
medication and prefers to live with the burden of too low blood
pressure and fainting: “Rick: You see... they change the medication...
and they won’t change it... I have to live with fainting”. Whilst an-
other participant always orders either vegetarian or chicken dishes
at restaurants because they don’t want to explain their CCNs to the
waiter: “Julia: Well I can just say I like chicken because its easier...
Starters – no! Main course – yes! And chicken or the vegetarian”.
Anxiety and fear from social pressures and crowds. Regu-
larly, public dialogues caused our participants to feel trepidation,
social anxiety and fear – particularly in busy environments. One
participant presents her anxiety about ordering in busy bars: “Grace:
And if there is sort of a queue behind you sort of tutting! That makes it
[communicating] really worse!... And sort of sighing!”. Furthermore,
participants admitted that they struggle to understand and follow
dialogue in very noisy environments. Consequently, participants

revealed that they actively avoids crowds – never using the Under-
ground at certain times of the day: “Steven: With the... Underground
you’ve got too many people on top of you... I’ll only use it at certain
times of the day”. From further discussion, we found Steven fears
being unable to communicate to people that he has a disability,
needs personal space and a seat.
Moments of confusion and frustration onset by aphasia.
Participants admitted that they could find experiences confusing
(e.g., solo navigation on public transport) and equally acknowledged
that aphasia was generally very frustrating and inhibiting in these
contexts. On the topic of public transport, a participant revealed she
sometimes felt lost and confused: “Grace: You’ll be surprised at how
many things are dependent on word finding! If you can’t find the word
[...] You rummage about! And if you can’t find the word you’re just
a bit lost!”. Despite the frustrations of struggling to communicate,
when speaking with her daughter one participant really appreciated
just being listened to – even if she could not get the message across:
“Joanna: It’s erm... it’s difficult... but it’s difficult... it’s like ohhh God!
[clenches fists with frustration] But it’s very nice as well... it’s my
dearest [...] Oh! Wow! You listen to me!”.

5.1.2
Theme 2: Positive emotions and externally visible supports can
empower communication. This theme considers factors that enable
participants to be empowered and communicate more successfully.

The crafted sub-themes are: (1) internal positive emotions and
habits, (2) externally visible technology and human supports.
Preparation for future dialogues is an important tool. Par-
ticipants emphasised the helpfulness of mental and physical prepa-
ration for future anticipated dialogues. For instance, mental prepa-
ration for dialogues and communication notebooks allows partic-
ipants to have more effective communication exchanges: “Grace:
[whenever at the doctors] I would always have a notebook... Umm...
Umm... and sketch what I wanted to say! [...] Yes! I’ve got my questions
already written... And I write down what the doctor has said to me!”.
In addition to a considerate doctor, participants also noted that they
felt more confident when properly prepared with notes/lists. For
instance, one participant even preferred phone calls to face-to-face
dialogue because it let her freely read and write mid-conversation
in a notebook without judgement.
Confidence is essential for communication. Put simply, par-
ticipants with more confidence communicated day-to-day more
successfully15. For public transport, participants had more success
communicating their needs to members of the public when confi-
dent: “Rick: When she gets on the Tube [metro train service] she’s like
I need a seat – so whose gonna get up? Researcher 1: How come you
don’t do that? Rick: Confidence!”. Indeed, participants with more
confidence will never hesitate to communicate that their order is
wrong or if they need further assistance: “[In response to complain-
ing about a wrong order] Joanna: I will!.. I will!.. I will! [...] Can I have
my say please! [To café staff]”. In contrast, some participants readily
admitted that they desired more confidence, which would help with
there overall ability to communicate: “Researcher 1: Would you want
a confidence app? [...] Rick: Yeah! A kick up the backside!”.
Habits and routines improve communication and create ac-
cess. Participants felt more comfortable and communicated better
following extensive habitual practice and routinisation of daily ac-
tivities/environments. Familiarity and awareness of their expected
environment and context instilled them with more confidence to
communicate. For example, one participant was comfortable speak-
ing to people in stores because of his previous work: “Rick: I used
to work in a store... I would... erm... speak to anybody in a store!”.
In particular, routine enables participants to repeatedly practice
anticipated dialogues and exchanges: “Grace: And its practice! Prac-
tice! Practice! And now I can order my coffee! Its always the same!
Americano without any milk”. For unfamiliar locations, participants
rely on family or group outings with other people with aphasia to
support their communication needs.
Turning to the second sub-theme, which considers externally
visible technology and human supports. We consider the communi-
cation affordances of key technology and the significance of human
support including family members.
Accessible technologies become integral else low-tech op-
tions are favoured. The participants are all smartphone users and
several have smartwatches. Despite this, some apps are immedi-
ately more accessible than others. Accessible technologies become
integral once learnt and adopted – whilst inaccessible technologies
are quickly abandoned. For example, for many participants, Google
Maps is imperative for planning trips and logistics: “[On Google

15Participants expressed dislike for self-checkout and ticket machines because they
rob participants of tangible and positive human interactions.

(a)
(b)

Figure 8: Initial outputs from low-fidelity prototyping: (a)
Steven’s smartphone drawn on the left piece of card and (b)
the minimalist compass navigation app built with wool and
a popsicle stick.

Maps] Steven: Yeah, on my phone when I want to get to know an area...
I always use that thing”. Yet when it comes to eventually purchasing
travel tickets – participants prefer to book in-person at the ticket
office because the online booking website is wordy and complicated.
In a similar vein, currently, there is no accessible health and medical
information app so participants instead favour visible and tangible
low-tech resources. For example, one participant uses a low-tech
communication book with several pages of personalised medical
information – to support communication at the doctors.
Family members and considerate audiences improve com-
munication. Family are an integral human support for participants’
needs and general communication16. Almost all participants rely
on family members for supported communication within challeng-
ing contexts: “Steven: I just see my family... and I’m just like they
know what I like... They do the ordering and talk for me... Cos I’m
easy-going!”. Aside from family, having a considerate audience that
will listen can also make participants feel more confident to commu-
nicate effectively: “Grace: because I’m so old... I think that old age is
a component! Sophia: It buys you a ticket does it? Grace: Yes! Yes! Poor
old lady you know! She’s got aphasia [...] I get a great deal of sympa-
thy cards”. Participants even noted that they communicated better
during weekly therapy and group outings with an understanding
collective of fellow people with aphasia and SLTs.

5.1.3
Low-fidelity discreet and wearable AAC prototypes. Proceed-
ing the discussions on contextual communication challenges we
delved into divergent prototyping of low-fidelity discreet and wear-
able AAC with the participants. Illustrated in Figure 7, participants
built 7 AAC prototypes with varying form-factors and visibility:
2 mobile phone apps, 3 smartwatch apps, 1 pendant device and 1
wearable badge.
Steven’s Smartphone. Steven desired to customise a new smart-
phone as his current 5-year-old smartphone had almost run out of
memory and the battery did not last for his daily needs. Over time
he said he would like a more discreet smartwatch – but for now,
he wanted the familiar smartphone form factor. Key features of the

16Participants often have small social circles and consequently rely on family to help
communicate their needs: “Rick: They don’t... to lose... The quickest way to lose friends is
to have a stroke! You don’t... don’t its like... you’ve got the err.. the plague! Steven: Yeah I
know what you mean... I knew a lot of people... all gone! All I’ve got now is my family”.

Figure 9: Participants prototyping of AAC smartwatch technology: (a) low-fidelity mockup, (b) Joanna’s envisaged AAC
smartwatch crafted on A4 page with bullet point instructions and (c) Rick’s drawn AAC smartwatch and instructions on card.

phone include Google Maps and the Contact List to reach his family.
Indeed, for any challenging communication context, Steven prefers
to be supported by a network of considerate family members that
recognise his disability. In terms of interaction, Steven was keen to
use primarily a vocal interface for control: “Steven: see over there
her phone can do talk... [...] but I’d like it in the new one I can talk
‘Islington’ [neighbourhood in London] and ‘Up the Arsenal’ [football
team] – and it opens the map and where I want to go”.
A Minimalist Navigation App. Collectively, the participants
built a minimalist compass navigation app to help support their
ability to travel to new environments. Initially an earable was con-
sidered before participants pivoted towards the more visible and
minimalist compass to provide directions via pointing. This was
designed to solve the confusion of Google Maps at the start of jour-
neys: “Grace: Sometimes I look at Google Maps and I can’t find what
way up I’m meant to be”.
A Voice Operated Smartwatch. Collectively, participants con-
sidered an AAC smartwatch app. However, they stressed the im-
portance of better voice operation: “Sophia: better than Siri!”. Touch
on a smartwatch was quite inaccessible for those with paralysis
from right-side hemiplegia: “Sophia: So yeah you wear it on your left
hand [...] you don’t have to touch it... you can speak into it!”. Features
of the smartwatch wearable included that it would read emails and
provide useful information when told things – such as directions
and assist with finding supermarket items.
Joanna’s AAC Smartwatch. As an existing smartwatch user,
Joanna built a personalised smartwatch device that provides plenty
of customised functionality. Notable features include the smart
voice assistant, which makes the device one-hand friendly and its
ability to support communication in social settings – Joanna’s right
arm is in a brace and sling, which restricted her ability to use the
touchscreen. Plus, the stretchable material of the watch strap is key
for enabling the device to be easily worn, adjusted or taken off.
Rick’s AAC Smartwatch. As an existing smartwatch user, Rick
also built a personalised smartwatch device with custom functional-
ity. Initially, he wanted the device to properly understand his voice

commands – currently, Siri is immensely frustrating and does not
provide enough time for voice commands, “Rick: I can say the name
Siri and erm... I can’t get the words out and it cuts off!”. He would like
the AAC smartwatch to notify members of the public that he has
an invisible disability via a highly visible display on the screen if he
forgets his Aphasia/Stroke badge at home. Plus, notify his brother
at times if he is too condescending and patronising: “Researcher 1:
Would you like it to tell your brother anything? Rick: Yeah, I’m not
a baby!”. Furthermore, the smartwatch can help Rick manage his
fainting by providing notifications if his blood pressure is getting
too low – boosting his day-to-day confidence.
AAC Pendant. Initially, participants collectively proposed a
pendant form factor because it was discreet, less visible and enabled
one-hand usage. In particular, they wanted the device to be plain
but built with high-quality precious metals, “Grace: The sort of thing
designed by Tiffany’s”.
AAC Badge. Following the proposal of the pendant, participants
then collectively designed an (in)visible AAC badge. The badge
could be highly visible in public – large, dazzling, flashing and
technicolor to display ‘I have a disability’, ‘I have aphasia’ and, ‘I
have a stroke’. Yet when turned off, the badge could blend into the
colour of the user’s clothing – altering its visibility – becoming
discreet and unobtrusive. The badge interface could be controlled
by the user via their phone: “Sophia: [The badge is] flagging that you
have a disability and you want people to be aware!”. Other playful
ideas for the badge’s public display included that it could potentially
express communicative emojis – so that, “Sophia: When someone
gives you a seat – you can give them a big smile!” or conversely,
“Sophia: When someone doesn’t give you a seat you can give them an
angry face!”. Participants then proposed other visible public displays
for the badge, “Josh: It could say Eagles! The band or the team!” –
becoming an emblem of the user’s personality (like a ‘traditional’
badge). On top of this, Josh also proposed that it could say just
say, “Josh: Crystal Palace” – to provide a display of the location the
wearer is trying to reach and helping support dialogue if the user
was lost or needed assistance on public transport.

Figure 10: Participants envisaged pendant and badge: (a) participants initial construction of pendant form factor, (b) participants
proceeding consideration of an AAC smart badge to be worn on the breast pocket and (c) finally participants proposal of display
features – the blue blends well into clothing and can display: ‘Crystal Palace’, ‘Aphasia’, ‘The Eagles’ and aesthetically desirable
star or artwork.

5.2
Convergent Focus Group Two

5.2.1
Prompt Me Out. Prompt Me Out was considered useful for
supporting participants’ solo reading practice: “Grace: Good for
reading to yourself and for reading out loud”. Others saw the pro-
totype as being useful for public speaking engagements: “Peter:
Possibly being useful with public speaking... just needs to be quicker”.
Interestingly, Peter was keen for the earable AAC device to be more
visible and less discreet – even providing a supplementary GUI on
his phone to display paragraphs of prepared text: “Peter: On my bad
days I can’t do that... I just write something on my phone and show
it to people”. Participants envisaged future iterations of Prompt Me
Out to be available in more tangible form factors – some envisaged
it working well with a smart pen that could scan text and even in
a pair of smart glasses. Paul even wanted the device to work with
photos of text so: “Peter: It would read it all out to you”. Collective
recommendations for Prompt Me Out from participants included
that, some people with aphasia would potentially struggle with
writing pre-prepared dialogues to be prompted upon. Equally, some
participants were critical of the current latency and discreet form
factor of the earable device – they would want the device to deliver
language prompts instantaneously to the wearer’s ear given the

limited device visibility. Whilst, some participants had the verbal
capacity to instantaneously substitute words and therefore believed
they did not need language prompts. Equally, a few participants
expressed that they would prefer family deliver public speeches on
their behalf: “Rick: Get one of my kids to do it”.

5.2.2
My Speech OS. My Speech OS was positively evaluated by
participants with aphasia that were younger and more non-verbal.
Some of the participants were smartwatch adopters – they particu-
larly liked the health and fitness features that came with a smart-
watch (i.e., activity, steps, heart health and temperature sensors).
Many felt My Speech OS would be very useful to have contextual,
personalised vocabulary and built-in reminders: “Rick: I find I’m
going to the doctors... I forget what I’m going to the doctor’s for”.
Additionally, the accessible form factor was seen as useful instead
of having to rely on a larger phone: “Rick: I just go into my watch
and see whats going on [...] Joanna: It does yeah!”. Some partici-
pants envisaged the potential of using a smartwatch AAC app via
the voice assistant and were not alarmed about speaking verbal
commands to the watch – thereby making the AAC more publicly
visible. Critiques of My Speech OS predominantly came from older

and more verbal participants. Many felt the watch screen/text was
too small and suggested fewer buttons: “Grace: I would like it to
read my texts and emails! Yep – but one button! Or at the most two
buttons! [...] Graeme: Less functions per screen... so the text can be
bigger”. Some felt nervous about wearing a smartwatch due to the
potential anxiety from the health features: “Grace: it will encour-
age my hypochondria!” – and felt it was more suited to a younger
generation.

5.2.3
The STT Badge. The STT badge was considered very useful
in multiple public contexts – particularly visiting the doctors and at
public bars. Many participants mentioned that they struggled with
busy environments with plenty of background noise and following
longer multi-threaded discussions often in groups – in both cases,
the STT badge was seen as a very useful AAC intervention: “Re-
searcher 1: difficulties with following the many different interweaving
conversations at once [...] Alex: Me umm... umm... yes I have diffi-
culty with that... and I raise my hand and then speak”. Suggested
adaptations for the STT badge include its potential in a much more
visible iPad form factor – letting users scroll and re-read parts of
the conversation: “Researcher 1: So if this was in iPad form would
this be helpful? [...] Peter: Yes it would be very useful”. Adding to this,
participants suggested potentially an option for symbols or pictures
and highlighting of the current word in a different colour would
also serve as beneficial improvements to the interface. Some even
considered potentially receiving receipts of recorded conversations
to review afterwards – a few hours after the dialogue exchange.
Critiques of the system included the consideration that some people
with aphasia would not be able to read the text of the STT badge
and a larger screen size for more visibility.

6
DISCUSSION

In this section, we discuss the efficacy and visibility of discreet and
wearable AAC. Secondly, in light of our findings, we offer consider-
ations for future high-tech AAC research. Finally, we briefly reflect
on our adopted divergent and convergent focus group methods.

6.1
The Efficacy of (In)Visible Discreet and
Wearable AAC

The present study focused on discreet and wearable AAC devices
to support those with CCNs, yet our work also renews previous
nuanced academic discussions on (in)visible assistive technolo-
gies [19]. In response to the video prompts, the first theme from
focus group one in Section 4.5 considered the unpredictable chal-
lenge of living with fluctuating CCNs, difficulties encountered with
an invisible disability and associated negative emotions from trau-
matic communication experiences. From this initial theme, it is
clear that high-tech AAC interventions must be designed to serve
users with evolving communication needs and that AAC devices,
which provide increased visibility are inherently useful in specific
circumstances (e.g., on busy public transport with limited seats).
Consequently, discreet and wearable AAC must provide users with
the autonomy to control the visibility of their assistive technology
dependent on the setting and communication partners. Likewise in
theme two, most of our participants felt empowered to communi-
cate successfully when imbued with positive emotions and accessi-
ble plus visible supports (i.e., low-tech resources, family members

and empathetic audiences). Yet, most pre-existing high-tech AAC
devices are inaccessible because the large and heavy form factor is a
major impediment to comfortable usage in public. Indeed, some of
our participants with aphasia had right-side hemiplegic paralysis
and used a walking stick – consequently, they expressed a desire to
carry very little each day [5] – even tablets and smartphones might
be challenging to operate with hemiplegia, especially when ‘on the
go’, where AAC might be of the most use. Therefore, discreet and
wearable AAC should be designed with an accessible and comfort-
able form factor – supporting seamless one-handed, ambidextrous
input, using sensors to unobtrusively gain relevant contextual data
and supportive of discreet modes of input.
Following video prompts, participants with aphasia successfully
co-designed low-fidelity discreet and wearable AAC prototypes in
Subsection 5.1.3. Most notably, the voice-controlled AAC smart-
watch, AAC pendant which supports one-handed usage and finally
the AAC badge that blends into clothing or can visibly attract atten-
tion to disclose key information to members of the public. These
discreet and wearable AAC prototypes have the advantage of being
always on, readily available and customisable – without necessarily
visibly revealing the underlying disability of the user by ‘blend-
ing’ into clothing – preventing potential unwanted attention and
stigmas [56]. Indeed, research has previously considered camou-
flaging methods for hand-held ‘chameleon’ devices to limit their
visibility [59]. Yet, on the other end of the spectrum, our partici-
pants also wanted these AAC prototypes to become socially visible
– even becoming public displays of information [58]. People with
invisible disabilities like aphasia, frequently face disability denial
and illegitimacy – the assistive technology becomes a key social
marker that they may need further assistance and communication
support from others [19]. Furthermore, the visible AAC device
can in fact enhance the user’s communication abilities, making it
easier for the user to start conversations and set conversational
expectations – with strangers encouraged to be more considerate,
patient and empathetic during conversations with a person they
recognise has CCNs. Indeed, many with CCNs are social and keen
to actively engage in communication [61, 66]. Adding to findings
from previous research on smartwatches as public displays [58], our
participants with aphasia even requested a desire to personalise the
display of the assistive technology (e.g., the AAC Badge displays
their favourite band or football team) and thus control what the
AAC device communicates about them to the outside world [19].
On top of this creative ideation, a wide range of communities suc-
cessfully engaged with the three high-fidelity discreet and wearable
AAC prototypes from Section 3. Notably, the STT Badge was most
popular amongst our focus group participants and even reversed
normalised roles by embracing the Bennett et al. [4] interdepen-
dent frame of assistive technology. Furthermore, our work has
also reiterated the importance of discreet and wearable AAC that
does not visibly detract from users’ pre-existing communication
abilities such as non-verbal communication. In our previously pub-
lished systematic review, we previously found just 1.4% of AAC
devices enhance non-verbal forms of communication [14]. Indeed,
many people living with CCNs like aphasia have extraordinary
non-verbal communication abilities through paralinguistics, ges-
ture, body language, personal space, eye gaze, appearance and the
use of low-tech artifacts [73]. Discreet and wearable AAC could

enhance these embodied and often faster forms of communicative
expression [6]. In contrast, pre-existing high-tech AAC is often
prominently external and separate from the user’s body – fostering
slow communication rates17 and creating a visible physical barrier
with the communication partner18 – leading to eventual commu-
nication breakdowns and misalignments [6, 31, 32]. In contrast,
discreet and wearable devices can circumvent debilitating physical
prominence with a less visible form factor. Equally, this finding
builds upon the larger objective of high-tech AAC that augments
rather than automates [54]. Indeed, many of our participants ac-
knowledged the importance of preparation, routinizing and not
wanting technology to impact their daily autonomy. Discreet and
wearable AAC can certainly serve communities with CCNs without
overstepping personal boundaries and disrupting habits – with the
less visible AAC form factor augmenting and supporting users’
communication discreetly [54]. Potentially even allowing users to
practice and rehearse future interactions rather than perform these
human interactions on behalf of the user.
Reflecting on the outcomes of the complementary two focus
groups together – participants with aphasia did not advocate for
the most invisible AAC designs like the Prompt Me Out earable and
instead preferred the more visible and tangible badge and smart-
watch form factors. However, the STT Badge output from the user-
centred design process and AAC Badge built-in co-designed with
participants with aphasia had very different functionality. Initially,
the STT Badge was conceptualised to be worn by service staff and
provide live transcription of their dialogue for members of the
public – promoting accessibility, interdependence and discretion.
Nonetheless, participants with aphasia instead advocated for their
own visible and wearable AAC badge and public display – fully cus-
tomisable to support communication of their personal needs with
the wider public (e.g., selectively output the wearers underlying
disability, personality traits and desired location). Importantly, par-
ticipants with aphasia specified that they wanted the AAC badge
to blend into clothing and become invisible at the users discre-
tion. Turning to the smartwatch AAC form factor, the user-centred
design process resulted in My Speech OS: a wearable symbolic
SGD or VOCA. However, some participants with aphasia during
the co-design process expressed discomfort with the smartwatch
form-factor and My Speech OS small symbol size – instead advo-
cating for more augmentative AAC, operation via voice input and
features based on smart sensing. Indeed, participants co-designed
smartwatch features were collectively more understated versus My
Speech OS – they desired a smartwatch to support notifications to
close family, make the public aware of the wearer’s aphasia and
use smart sensing for personal health data (i.e., activity, sleeping
and blood pressure).

6.2
Considerations for Future High-tech AAC
Research

This work provides further evidence for more direct engagement
with communities with CCNs and co-design of human-centred

17The Fiannaca et al. [20] AACrobat tries to speed up communication rates via a mobile
companion app.
18The Sobel et al. [68] AAC Awareness Displays presents a novel pathway to circumvent
this problem.

high-tech AAC technologies. During the focus groups we made
numerous key findings, which were only realised through partic-
ipatory design activities. For example, several participants with
aphasia regularly displayed an unexpected preference for voice
input to control AAC technologies rather than the touch screen.
Despite this, mainstream voice assistants such as Siri typically deny
access because they do not provide enough time for people with
aphasia to utter key vocal commands. These findings bolster sup-
port for initiatives to design more accessible voice interfaces, such
as the work of Clark et al. [11]. Consequently, future high-tech
AAC research should use participatory design techniques to ex-
plore the input/output interaction of high-tech AAC devices with
communities. Multiple different input modalities can support ac-
cessible control and more long-term AAC adoption. Altogether,
our participants wanted AAC devices that use touch, camera, con-
textual, gestural and vocal inputs. Recent research has initially
explored novel forms of input to discreet and wearable technolo-
gies such as smartwatch frameworks that support customisable
hand gestures [84] and leverage biosignals for communication [40]
– these modalities could be leveraged to improve high-tech AAC.
Equally, research should explore a variety of AAC outputs – less
information-dense and more subtle channels can still communicate
meaning (e.g., motion outputted from AAC Sidekicks) [70]. Indeed,
during the focus groups, participants playfully suggested an AAC
badge that used bright technicolour to draw public attention when
necessary and outputs emojis to communicate the user’s current
emotion. These novel outputs beyond the audio output of typical
SGDs – can help communicate meaning quickly and augment the
user’s own pre-existing communication abilities [54]. Many of the
participants with aphasia were non-verbal but still communicate
profoundly each day. Based on our themes, it would also be more ef-
fective if high-tech AAC tools were designed to improve people with
CCNs confidence with communication and self-esteem [10]. Dur-
ing our focus group participants with aphasia repeatedly stressed
the importance of confidence for communication. Indeed, as ar-
gued by Dietz et al. [15], AAC should serve as an empowering tool
to encourage people with CCNs to pursue further independence
and life-affirming activities – whilst providing support during any
potential communication breakdowns.

6.3
Reflection on Divergent and Convergent
Methods

During the first focus group, which leveraged divergent design
methods – we were initially concerned that the prepared materi-
als would be too abstract, and limited and that participants with
aphasia would consequently struggle to ideate creative solutions
following the video prompts [83]. However, as previously noted
by Valencia et al., often in the co-design process less is indeed
more [70]. Eventually, the first focus group was very productive
with plenty of effective ideation and ultimately seven tangible low-
fidelity AAC prototypes. Following this process, much like previous
research, we also strongly recommend designing a high volume of
solutions [28, 70], even building ideas with participants that do not
feasibly work and encouraging participants to take creative risks.

Turning to the second focus group, the convergent co-design meth-
ods employed were also broadly successful. In particular, the tangi-
ble mediums of the three high-fidelity discreet and wearable AAC
prototypes really supported participants’ ability to compellingly
communicate the pros and cons of each device plus subsequent
key amendments. Equally, the prototypes helped the research team
seamlessly communicate to all participants the many possibilities
of feasible discreet and wearable technologies. Transitioning from
divergent to convergent design methods between two focus groups
separated by a week was successful and did not confuse or cogni-
tively burden participants. Divergent approaches employed much
more participant creativity and effort. Importantly, divergent ap-
proaches were greatly enriched by the contextualisation of familiar
scenarios from the video prompts and scaffolding of the SLTs during
eventual low-fidelity prototyping. Subsequently, during the second
convergent focus group participants were much more vocal and
keen to critique the high-fidelity prototypes because they were po-
tentially imbued with greater confidence from the first focus group.
In light of these findings, we can clearly see the merits of previ-
ous AAC research, which has successfully deployed and iterated
co-designed technology directly with people with CCNs [54].

7
LIMITATIONS

This study represents an initial exploration into (in)visible discreet
and wearable AAC technologies to support people with CCNs. In
terms of limitations, the work reflects a relatively small sample size
and limited context – therefore results should be interpreted on the
basis of a Western context and densely populated region with good
public infrastructure. Amongst the small group, there was a wide
spread in terms of technology literacy – all owned a smartphone –
yet some participants were more comfortable with technology than
others. Indeed, not all communities globally would have equivalent
personal technology access. As previously acknowledged, people
with disabilities are very diverse versus the general population [60]
– consequently, not all people with CCNs and aphasia would be
able to successfully use the high-fidelity prototypes and produce
equivalent results. In terms of methods, we had two separate and
distinct focus groups which transitioned between divergent and
convergent co-design approaches. Perhaps future research may
want to perform the iteration between divergent and convergent
co-design within a singular longer focus group – directly feeding
ideas from the divergent into the convergent phase. However, our
study design deliberately suited the needs of our participants by
maintaining flexible attendance for both focus groups and favouring
weekly shorter focus groups to mitigate cognitive exertion.

8
CONCLUSION

Discreet and wearable technologies are becoming ubiquitous – over
time these ‘smart’ technologies and environments will only become
more unobtrusive, immersive and intelligent [78, 79]. Consequently,
it is essential to leverage these technologies to support people with
disabilities such as CCNs in their nascent phases. In this work, we
envision the (in)visibility of potential discreet and wearable AAC
technologies with communities with CCNs. We initially used user-
centred design principles to build three high-fidelity technologies
with people with disabilities, specialists and experts. Following this,

we employed divergent and convergent co-design methods during
two focus groups with 12 people living with aphasia and 3 SLTs.
Our work contributes new knowledge regarding the (in)visibility
of discreet and wearable AAC technologies – importantly, AAC
users want control over the visibility of their devices and highly
visible AAC is very useful in certain circumstances. We also provide
considerations for future research on AAC form factors, embodied
communication, user autonomy and communication confidence.