Viewpoint

A Novel Patient Values Tab for the Electronic Health Record: A
User-Centered Design Approach

Anjali Varma Desai1,2, MSCE, MD; Chelsea L Michael1, MS; Gilad J Kuperman1, MD, PhD; Gregory Jordan1, BS;
Haley Mittelstaedt1, MFA; Andrew S Epstein1,2, MD; MaryAnn Connor1, MSN, RN-BC, CPHIMS, FAMIA; Rika
Paula B Villar1, BSN, MSHI, RN-BC; Camila Bernal1, MPH; Dana Kramer1, NP; Mary Elizabeth Davis1, RN, DNP,
AOCNS; Yuxiao Chen1, BS; Catherine Malisse1, BS; Gigi Markose1, MBA, MSN, RN-BC; Judith E Nelson1,2, MD,
JD

1Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, United States
2Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY, United States

Anjali Varma Desai, MSCE, MD
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center
1275 York Avenue
New York, NY, 10065
United States
Phone: 1 917 865 2495

Abstract

Background: The COVID-19 pandemic has shined a harsh light on a critical deficiency in our health care system: our inability
to access important information about patients’values, goals, and preferences in the electronic health record (EHR). At Memorial
Sloan Kettering Cancer Center (MSK), we have integrated and systematized health-related values discussions led by oncology
nurses for newly diagnosed cancer patients as part of routine comprehensive cancer care. Such conversations include not only
the patient’s wishes for care at the end of life but also more holistic personal values, including sources of strength, concerns,
hopes, and their definition of an acceptable quality of life. In addition, health care providers use a structured template to document
their discussions of patient goals of care.

Objective: To provide ready access to key information about the patient as a person with individual values, goals, and preferences,
we undertook the creation of the Patient Values Tab in our center’s EHR to display this information in a single, central location.
Here, we describe the interprofessional, interdisciplinary, iterative process and user-centered design methodology that we applied
to build this novel functionality as well as our initial implementation experience and plans for evaluation.
Methods: 
We first convened a working group of experts from multiple departments, including medical oncology, health
informatics, information systems, nursing informatics, nursing education, and supportive care, and a user experience designer.
We conducted in-depth, semistructured, audiorecorded interviews of over 100 key stakeholders. The working group sought
consensus on the tab’s main content, homing in on high-priority areas identified by the stakeholders. The core content was mapped
to various EHR data sources. We established a set of high-level design principles to guide our process. Our user experience
designer then created wireframes of the tab design. The designer conducted usability testing with physicians, nurses, and other
health professionals. Data validation testing was conducted.
Results: We have already deployed the Patient Values Tab to a pilot sample of users in the MSK Gastrointestinal Medical
Oncology Service, including physicians, advanced practice providers, nurses, and administrative staff. We have early evidence
of the positive impact of this EHR innovation. Audit logs show increasing use. Many of the initial user comments have been
enthusiastically positive, while others have provided constructive suggestions for additional tab refinements with respect to format
and content.
Conclusions: It is our challenge and obligation to enrich the EHR with information about the patient as a person. Realization
of this capability is a pressing public health need requiring the collaboration of technological experts with a broad range of clinical
leaders, users, patients, and families to achieve solutions that are both principled and practical. Our new Patient Values Tab
represents a step forward in this important direction.

J Med Internet Res 2021 | vol. 23 | iss. 2 | e21615 | p. 1

(J Med Internet Res 2021;23(2):e21615) doi: 10.2196/21615

KEYWORDS
electronic health record; health informatics; supportive care; palliative care; oncology

Introduction

Background

Besides inadequate personal protective equipment and limited
intensive care surge capacity, the COVID-19 pandemic has
shined a harsh light on another critical deficiency in our system
of health care delivery: our inability to access important
information about patients’ values, goals, and preferences in
the electronic health record (EHR) [1-3]. All over the United
States, frontline clinicians in the field, emergency departments,
intensive care units (ICUs), and on rapid response teams and
hospital floors have struggled with urgent decisions about the
use of life-supporting technologies to treat serious complications
of COVID-19 infection without sufficient information about
the patient as a person, what means most to this individual, how
the patient defines living well, and whom the patient trusts to
make important decisions about health care [4,5]. Such
information is rarely accessible even for older adults and others
with underlying diseases, such as cancer or chronic comorbid
conditions, who are most vulnerable. Either this information
was not previously elicited or, although it was discussed, it was
not documented or is difficult to find in the EHR [6-9].

This is not a new problem, and it will certainly persist after
COVID-19 in the absence of major innovative efforts. Although
many clinicians consider the EHR to pose a barrier to
patient-centered care by literally shifting the attention from the
patient to the computer screen [10-12], the EHR is also a
potentially powerful tool that can support clinician-patient
communication, team collaboration, personalized and respectful
care, continuity across settings, patient engagement, and shared
decision making in accordance with patients’ individual needs
and priorities [13,14]. Several recent initiatives have utilized
digital platforms and tools (eg, documentation templates,
automated prompts, and electronic order sets) to optimize
documentation of advance care planning and goals of care
discussions [15-17]. Some have focused primarily on the
documentation of advance care planning in patients who are
older or have advanced disease [18,19]. A more recent initiative
leverages the Epic EHR by assembling information about serious
illness conversations, including prognostic information given
by clinicians to the patient and family, the patient’s
understanding of the course of the illness, hopes and worries,
priorities, and clinician recommendations, into a new EHR
template [20].

At Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center (MSK), we
integrated and systematized health-related values discussions
led by oncology nurses for newly diagnosed cancer patients as
part of routine comprehensive cancer care, regardless of the
patient’s stage, prognosis, or treatment intent [21,22]. These
discussions are revisited quarterly or as deemed appropriate
after prespecified clinical events (eg, progression of disease
through first-line therapy, hospitalization, or admission to the
ICU). In this model, communication encompasses not only the

patient’s wishes for care at the end of life but also more basic
and holistic personal values, including sources of strength,
concerns, hopes, definition of an acceptable quality of life, and
what the patient wants the clinical team to know about them as
a person in order to provide the best care and preserve dignity
[22]. In addition, oncologists and other physicians and advanced
practice providers use a structured template to document their
discussions of patient goals of care, which may address the
expected course of the patient’s illness, intent of the current
treatment, goals identified by the patient, preferences for
end-of-life care, and, if relevant, hospice enrollment.

The Patient Values Tab: Concept and Design

To provide ready access to these crucial communications
between clinicians and patients as well as key information about
the patient as a person with individual values, goals, and
preferences, we undertook the creation of the Patient Values
Tab in our center’s EHR to display this information in a single
centralized location. Our institution’s EHR platform is Allscripts
Sunrise Clinical Manager (Allscripts Healthcare LLC), which
organizes data displays into tabs, as do many other EHR
platforms. 
Here, 
we 
describe 
the 
interprofessional,
interdisciplinary, iterative process and user-centered design
methodology we applied to build this novel functionality [23].

Methods

Working Group and Stakeholder Interviews

We first convened a working group of experts from multiple
departments, including medical oncology, health informatics,
information systems, nursing informatics, nursing education,
and supportive care (a multidisciplinary palliative care service),
and a user experience designer. Members of the working group
were selected for their previous experience leading large-scale
institutional initiatives and unique expertise in the integration
of supportive care and oncology. This core team met every 2
weeks to collaborate on the development and design of the new
tab.

To understand the needs and perspectives of a broad range of
institutional stakeholders, we also conducted in-depth,
semistructured, audiorecorded interviews of over 100 key
stakeholders based on a written guide prepared by the core team.
Analysis of these interviews, which is reported in a separate
publication (which includes selected stakeholder comments in
an appendix), was used to inform content and format of the tab
[24]. As active contributors to the creative process, those who
were interviewed were more inclined to buy in to the ultimate
product. In addition, many of these stakeholders held leadership
positions within divisions and departments and went on to share
enthusiasm about the upcoming tab with their colleagues,
enhancing the visibility of the ongoing development effort
among a broader group of users.

J Med Internet Res 2021 | vol. 23 | iss. 2 | e21615 | p. 2

Mapping Tab Content

The core team sought consensus on the Patient Values Tab’s
main content, homing in on high-priority areas identified in the
stakeholder interviews while also incorporating their input on
format and considering suggestions on the logistics of the
implementation process. The core content was mapped to
various data sources within the EHR (as shown in Multimedia
Appendix 1).

For example, oncology nurses use a structured document entitled
“Assessment, Patient Personal Values” to summarize their
values discussions. The patient’s preferred name, language, and
communication preferences are elicited through the digital

patient portal system via an electronic care questionnaire, which
the nurse verifies and updates as needed at the first clinic visit
on the nursing health assessment. Education about health care
proxy (HCP) and other advance directives is provided in the
hospital by patient representatives, who also record designation
of and information about the HCP in a specific clinical
document.

High-Level Design Principles

As the data sources were clarified, we also established a set of
high-level design principles (shown in Textbox 1) to guide this
process.

Textbox 1. High-level design principles.

1.
The Patient Values Tab should provide users with an at-a-glance understanding of the patient as a person.

2.
The Patient Values Tab should offer easy access to data that can be viewed in aggregate in the context of other relevant information to support
clinical decision making.

3.
The Patient Values Tab will specify the context in which the information was collected (with the source and date the information was updated).

4.
The Patient Values Tab will be in a read-only format (ie, the data displayed will be captured and edited elsewhere).

5.
The Patient Values Tab will contain the most high-yield information while presenting this information in a succinct, streamlined way to minimize
cognitive load for users.

6.
The Patient Values Tab will be accessible to all health care team members across the spectrum of patient care.

One such principle was that the tab would be in a read-only
display format, populated with existing source documents in
the EHR that could not be directly edited in the tab itself. We
chose this approach because we and various key stakeholders
we interviewed were concerned that the content would become
unwieldy and unstable, ultimately leading to inefficiency for
users if multiple modifications were allowed. We concluded
that reliance on existing workflows and processes would reduce
the cognitive load for clinicians and enable a communal
responsibility for the underlying documentation, with important
roles for various team members as contributors to a shared
understanding of the patient as a person.

User Testing

The next step was close collaboration with our user experience
designer to create and refine wireframes of the tab design.
During this process, the designer conducted usability testing
with physicians, nurses, and other health professionals. All
participants were asked to provide general usability feedback
on the design. To obtain more detailed feedback, participants
were presented with specific clinical tasks calling for the use
of information contained in the Patient Values Tab in scenarios
that the core team generated and adapted for particular roles
and responsibilities. For example, in one scenario, the physician
was preparing to “discuss serious results with the patient,” while
the nurse needed to “provide information for medication
management.” This process revealed a lack of familiarity among
users with some of the underlying documentation that sourced
the data displayed in the tab. To address this issue, we created
a frequently asked questions tile (ie, section) in the tab including
basic information about data sources and directing users to the
appropriate underlying document to update the information, if
needed.

Refinement and Validation

Additional design refinements incorporated (1) suggestions
from the user experience designer (eg, creating a banner at the
top of the tab with the preferred name information, color coding
the different categories of information to help users recognize
and navigate among them quickly, including a separate feedback
tile within the tab inviting users’ input and comments about
their experience using the tab); (2) input from the core team
(eg, placing the goals of care discussions and the nurse values
summary in the most central, prominent positions in the tab;
extracting and separately displaying the essential information
regarding emergency contact, HCP, and next of kin for rapid
access during clinical emergencies, with relevant advance
directive scanned forms located below this information); and
(3) insights gleaned from the stakeholder interviews (eg,
providing expedited access to consultant notes from supportive
care, psychiatry, and ethics as the highest yield and most
consistently complete sources of information about patient
values and personhood). During this iterative process, the
designer shared mock-up options and elicited feedback from
the core team via email and throughout the series of biweekly
core team meetings.

Members of our core team with informatics expertise conducted
data validation testing to ensure the fidelity of the information
displayed in the tab to the underlying source of this information
(ie, confirming that the tab displayed the correct information
from the intended source document in the intended format for
the correct patient). In addition, to detect delays in displaying
information to the user that might decrease usability, we
assessed the time to launch the tab content for selected patients.
If time delays were identified, we worked with the information
systems team to identify the source of the delay so that it could

J Med Internet Res 2021 | vol. 23 | iss. 2 | e21615 | p. 3

be rectified; specifically, technical optimizations were made to
bring the load times in line with other feature load times in our
EHR (ie, no longer than a few seconds).

Results

Initial Deployment and Implementation

We have already deployed the Patient Values Tab to a pilot
sample of users in the Gastrointestinal (GI) Medical Oncology
Service at our center, including the physicians, advanced
practice providers (APPs), nurses, and administrative staff. We
chose this service for this first phase of our pilot deployment
because it is the largest solid tumor service at MSK, with
approximately 40 physicians varying in age, gender, race and
ethnicity, number of years in clinical practice, and disease focus
who care for a large number of cancer patients with diverse
demographics (eg, age, gender) and types and stages of cancer
with wide variability in the pace of the disease process and
overall clinical course. Patients of the GI Medical Oncology
Service represent the largest proportion of admissions to our
Memorial Hospital, thus frequently involving both outpatient
and inpatient teams in their care.

We have executed a detailed implementation plan, which
includes (1) discussion with the physician, APP, and nursing
leaders of the service about the tab and its integration in clinical
care by that service; (2) email notification to users about the
availability and basic content of the new tab; and (3)
presentations encompassing key features and functionality of
the tab together with options for incorporating its use in regular
clinical workflows. For each of these steps, we have targeted
the professional groups individually, since they have different
needs, roles, and workflows in providing patient care, although
ultimately, they must all collaborate and communicate as a team
to optimize this care.

Further Iteration and Evaluation

Learnings from this pilot will inform further refinement of the
Patient Values Tab before broader implementation. We are
measuring usage of the tab through audit logs, which specify
the time, user, and patient involved each time it is launched. In
addition, we have included a feedback tile within the tab itself
that asks in closed-ended items for users’ broad impressions
(“It’s great,” “It’s okay,” or “It needs improvement”) and
provides space for free-text comments. In-depth feedback will
be gathered from selected clinicians through brief individual
interviews. We plan to select these clinicians based on audit log
data indicating those who are low adopters or high adopters in
terms of the frequency and timing of their tab use. Through the
interviews, we will explore whether the tab fits with the
clinician’s workflow and patterns of use (or lack of use) in
clinical practice, the perceived value of the tab to the clinician,
and suggestions for improvement (eg, with respect to content
and format).

Guided by this diverse user input, we have continued cycles of
refinement and deployment to additional groups incrementally,
with a plan for institution-wide rollout by the fall of 2020. The
core team is continuing its biweekly meetings, monitoring every
step in the implementation and evaluation process, and
collaborating to address and incorporate user feedback in order
to ensure that the use of the tab is maximized and sustained.

Early Findings

We already have early evidence of the positive impact of this
EHR innovation. Audit logs show increasing use among
different user groups. Among users who have engaged with the
feedback section within the tab, 25 of 48 (52%) users reported
that “it is great” compared with 18 of 48 (38%) users who
reported that “it needs improvement” and provided specific
constructive suggestions and 5 of 48 (10%) users who reported
that “it is okay.” Many of these initial user comments have been
enthusiastically positive (Textbox 2).

Textbox 2. Illustrative quotes.

“[I] love the easy access to [health care proxy] and Advance directives!”

“Being able to quickly check the patient's preferred name is incredibly helpful!”

“I like that it captures information from many different areas and placed in one area. I will be using this tab.”

“Numerous tiles you have developed give the patient a ‘voice’in our [electronic health record]. Strong work….This will be a great advance in Cognitive
Support for our clinical teams.”

Users also suggested specific enhancements to the tab’s content
quality and design.

Our early pilot data have also revealed potential barriers to
large-scale implementation, which include perceived lack of
time to engage with the tab, competing priorities, incomplete
or inaccurate tab content, technical glitches, and difficulty
remembering to launch the tab as part of routine workflow. To
address these challenges, we have enacted several proactive
educational strategies when deploying to additional user groups,
including (1) emphasizing that the tab is a display-only feature
that is intended to save time by consolidating key information
in a central location, (2) describing the processes by which
incomplete or inaccurate tab content can be updated by the user,

and (3) highlighting the “share feedback” section as a means
for providing feedback on technical (or content-related) glitches
that can be addressed by the Patient Values Tab interdisciplinary
working group. In all circumstances, the Patient Values Tab
working group follows up with each individual user who
provides feedback to ensure closed-loop communication and
enhance transparency in the ongoing effort to refine and
optimize the tab’s functionality.

We are also increasingly receiving reports of specific patient
situations in which the information displayed in the tab,
including the outpatient oncology nurse’s values summary,
allowed the hospital team to support families in difficult
decisions about the use of intensive care therapies. In one such

J Med Internet Res 2021 | vol. 23 | iss. 2 | e21615 | p. 4

case, the family described hearing the ICU physician reading
the values summary aloud as feeling that the patient, who no
longer was conscious and had not discussed this type of situation
with them previously, “was in the room, speaking directly to
them,” clarifying his priorities, providing guidance, and relieving
them of burden and guilt in deciding to limit life support at that
time. Immediate access that the Patient Values Tab provides to
primary physicians’goals of care discussions greatly facilitates
the work of our emergency department and rapid response team
clinicians, who must act quickly in emergencies.

Similarly, we are hearing that the communication preferences
section within the Patient Values Tab is particularly helpful to
teams as they are preparing for family meetings and goals of
care discussions. For example, one Patient Values Tab user
recounted:

I did use it actually this week.…We were going to go
have an impromptu family meeting and the attending
physician asked, “Would the patient want to be
involved?” and I said, “Well, let’s look at the Patient
Values Tab”….We clicked there and it said “patient
wants a lot of information with her partner
present”…so…we used it in real time.
In this case, knowing how the patient preferred to receive
medical information (ie, in detail) and with whom present (ie,
her partner) helped guide the health care team’s approach to
having a goals of care conversation at a timely moment.

Discussion

Even at this pilot stage of deployment, it is becoming clear that
the Patient Values Tab enables care and decision making that
honors the personhood and values of our patients. During the
COVID-19 pandemic, as life-threatening emergencies have
occurred without warning to patients who were then too ill to

speak for themselves, we have learned—again, in a more painful
but perhaps more enduring lesson—that high-quality care is
heavily dependent on immediate access to this crucial
information. As implementation and usage of the tab expands
and our center moves beyond the current COVID-19 crisis, we
will be able to examine its impact on a variety of outcomes at
the level of the patient, clinician, work process, and health care
system. Although the Patient Values Tab was built in MSK’s
specific EHR (ie, Allscripts), this software can be configured
in other EHR platforms as well, including Epic (the predominant
platform in the United States). Further research is needed on
the best ways to optimize and enhance the patient centeredness
of various EHR systems through the synergistic integration of
tools that capture broader, holistic patient values (eg, the Patient
Values Tab), with ongoing efforts that are primarily focused on
advance care planning (eg, Epic’s Advance Care Planning tab).

All EHRs contain extensive quantitative information and
voluminous data about patients that are mostly impersonal.
Now, it is our challenge and obligation to enrich the EHR with
information about the patient as a person, which is rarely
included or readily accessible. Patient-centered care is highly
prioritized by the Institute of Medicine [25], patients and
families, and professional caregivers [26], but it can only be
delivered if the patient’s personal values are as prominent as
the laboratory values in the EHR on which health care
professionals rely and spend the bulk of their time. Although it
can be burdensome and distracting for clinical care, the EHR
has tremendous untapped potential to support patient-centered
care. Realization of this capability is a pressing public health
need requiring the full collaboration of technological experts
with a broad range of clinical leaders, users, patients, and
families to achieve solutions that are both principled and
practical. Our new Patient Values Tab is a step forward in this
important direction.

Conflicts of Interest

None declared.

Multimedia Appendix 1

Table S1. Mapping the Patient Values Tab content to source documentation.
[DOCX File , 20 KB-Multimedia Appendix 1]