HUOM! Tämä on alkuperäisen artikkelin rinnakkaistallenne. Rinnakkaistallenne saattaa erota 
alkuperäisestä sivutukseltaan ja painoasultaan. 
 
Käytä viittauksessa alkuperäistä lähdettä: 
 
Dirin, M., Dirin, A. & Laine, T. (2015). User-Centered Design of a Context-Aware Nurse Assistant 
(CANA) at Finnish elderly Houses. IMCOM15. Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on 
Ubiquitous Information Management and Communication Bali, Indonesia — January 08 - 10, 2015. 
New York, ACM. 
 
 
PLEASE NOTE! This in an electronic self-archived version of the original article. This reprint 
may differ from the original in pagination and typographic detail. 
 
Please cite the original version: 
  
Dirin, M., Dirin, A. & Laine, T. (2015). User-Centered Design of a Context-Aware Nurse Assistant 
(CANA) at Finnish elderly Houses. IMCOM15. Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on 
Ubiquitous Information Management and Communication Bali, Indonesia — January 08 - 10, 2015. 
New York, ACM. 
 
The final authenticated publication is available at: https://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2701225 
 
 
Copyright © 2015 by the Association for Computing Machinery, Inc.

User-Centered Design of a Context-Aware Nurse Assistant 

(CANA) at Finnish Elderly Houses 

Mitra Dirin 

Department of Health Care, 
Metropolia University of Applied 

Sciences, Helsinki, Finland 

+358404126406 

Amir Dirin  
Department of Business Information 
Technology, Haaga-Helia University of 

Applied Sciences, Helsinki, Finland 

+358504869666 

Teemu H. Laine 

Department of Information and 

Computer Engineering, Ajou 

University, Korea 

+82312193549 

ABSTRACT 
In this age of mobile and ubiquitous computing, many nurses 
working in the healthcare sector still utilize traditional tools (e.g., 
paper calendars and clipboards) and pre-installed mobile 
applications (e.g., web browser, calendar) in their work activities. 
There exists a variety of mHealth applications, but none of them 
combines essential professional tools for nursing. We tackled this 
problem in the Finnish elderly house context through the User 
Centered Design (UCD) method whereby the target users actively 
participate in the design process. Together with 12 nurses, we first 
identified their profiles and their expectations on work-related 
mHealth application functionalities. The results were utilized in 
conceptual design of Context-Aware Nurse Assistant (CANA), 
which combines the identified functionalities and provides context-
sensitive services to consolidate nurses’ work activities. This paper 
contributes to the field of ubiquitous healthcare as follows: 1) initial 
user survey that shows the need for the proposed CANA system; 2) 
UCD design process of CANA and its suitability for designing 
ubiquitous healthcare systems, 3) technical architecture based on 
modular web services and 4) evaluation results of a low-fidelity 
CANA prototype. These results are of interest to software 
designers, healthcare professionals and context-aware application 
developers. 

Categories and Subject Descriptors 
[Human-Centered Computing]: Ubiquitous and mobile computing 
– Ubiquitous and mobile computing systems and tools. [Human-
Centered Computing]: Interaction design – Interaction design 
process and methods – User centered design. [Applied 
Computing]: Life and medical sciences – Health care information 
systems. 

General Terms 
Design, Experimentation, Human Factors 

Keywords 
User centered design, context-aware mobile application, mHealth, 
nursing. 

1. INTRODUCTION 
Smartphones are popular gadgets which people are carrying in their 
everyday lives. They are often used in various contexts through pre-
installed applications such as calendar or email which are similar 
across mobile platforms. Third party applications, however, are 
applications which users download from application stores into the 
devices. As the smartphone has gained popularity, third party 
application developers have started creating applications to assist 
people in their work-related activities. These productivity 
applications are being used to enhance and consolidate the existing 

tools (e.g., clipboards, paper calendars, books) that people have 
previously used in their work. For example, smartphones and less 
smart mobile devices have been utilized in business [1], [2] and 
education [3]–[6] sectors for several years. However, the potential 
of smartphones has not been fully utilized in some sectors such as 
healthcare. In particular, nurses at hospitals and elderly houses have 
so far lagged behind the trend of smartphone adoption for 
consolidating professional tasks despite of the fact that 
smartphones and other mobile technology has been applied in 
nursing education [4], [6], [7].   

Electronic health, or eHealth, is a field at the intersection of medical 
informatics, public health and business where there Internet and 
related technologies facilitate health service provision [8]. Mobile 
health, or mHealth, is an emerging subset of eHealth where services 
related to healthcare are accessed via mobile devices. Due to 
ubiquity of sensor-equipped smartphones, mHealth applications 
can also support context-awareness, thus providing appropriate 
services for a given situation. A typical context-aware mHealth 
service is a patient monitoring system which combines body 
sensors, mobile devices and wireless communication technologies 
to enable remote monitoring of patients [9]–[11]. To our 
knowledge, until today context-aware mHealth services have not 
been developed to meet the professional needs of nurses in Finland.  

The Ministry of Social Affairs and Health in Finland promotes new 
service development in their national wide policy for elderly people 
[12]. This includes improving the quality of services and reducing 
costs with higher productivity [13]. Additionally, the nationwide 
governmental policy has conducted many initiatives to enhanced 
technology in the health sectors such as electronic prescriptions 
[14]. Moreover, initiatives have been made to improve existing 
applications, such as a patient-centered guide that encourages 
patients to use eHealth services, and eHealth services for families 
with children under school age [15], [16]. 

Based on our initial user study, nurses are often busy at work and 
do not have time to search for a particular application or service in 
their smartphones at the time of need. As result, mHealth 
applications and services are required to be adaptive and perform 
appropriately based on the context of use. In addition to saving time 
through adaptive operation, employing context-awareness in 
mHealth applications has other motivations. Firstly, nurses by law 
are not allowed to use their mobile devices in all premises at 
hospitals. Secondly, the concept of mHealth is more efficient if the 
services are invoked automatically when they are needed. 

The security and ethics related to patients’ information in the 
healthcare sector have always been a major concern. Utilization of 
internet and mobile technologies increases information integrity 
risks such as exposing sensitive information. Rezende et al. [17]

have studied what codes of ethics are considered in the 
development and implementation of eHealth services and how they 
are enforced. Additionally, developing an application especially for 
smart devices requires extensive considerations due technical 
constraints such as small screen size, limited input/output 
mechanisms, and limited resources (battery, memory, CPU). 
Finally, an essential requirement for context-aware application 
design is to understand the target users’ contexts in order to provide 
contextualized services. Aforementioned constraints require that 
the target users should be directly involved in the application 
development. Thus, in this study we employ the User Centered 
Design (UCD) methodology [18] to ensure the users’ involvement 
in all stages of development.  

In this paper we propose a novel mHealth system titled Context-
Aware Nurse Assistant (CANA). Novelty of this application stems 
from the UCD process which is deep-rooted in the target users’ 
needs elicited by a qualitative survey. The proposed CANA 
application focuses on nurses at elderly houses in Espoo, Finland. 
The aim is to consolidate nurses’ daily work activities through 
context-aware services in a single smartphone application. 

2. BACKGROUND 
There have been initiatives to introduce Internet and mobile 
technologies in healthcare, such as web-based and mobile-based 
interventions [8]. However, these tools do not support an individual 
employee’s needs. Mobile devices are increasingly important 
instruments in the toolkit of public health professionals and 
researchers [8]. Eysenbach [8] defines eHealth as an emerging field 
at the intersection of medical informatics, public health and 
business, referring to health services and information delivered or 
enhanced through the Internet and related technologies. In a 
broader sense, the term characterizes not only a technical 
development, but also a state-of-mind, a way of thinking, an 
attitude, and a commitment for networked, global thinking, to 
improve healthcare locally, regionally, and worldwide by using 
information and communication technology [8].  

The World Health Organization report [19] indicates that there are 
various global initiatives to employ mobile devices in healthcare, 
such as health call centers, appointment reminders, mobile 
telemedicine and patient monitoring. Mobile health, or mHealth, is 
a subset of eHealth, which brings services related to healthcare 
(e.g., patient status monitoring) into mobile devices. In 2011, there 
were more than 17,000 mHealth related applications [20]. This 
number has increased ever since, thus easing the workflow of 
healthcare involving the patients, nurses and doctors. 

Havelka analyzed mobile applications, mobile websites, e-book 
stores and databases that are commonly utilized in nursing work, 
suggesting that mobile applications for nursing and healthcare in 
general are on the rise [21]. As result, these mobile applications and 
resources extend the functions of a traditional library as a source of 
professional information. Wyatt and Krauskopf [22] also explored 
the use of smartphones in enhancing nursing practice by reviewing 
smartphone platforms, current practices, and available applications. 
They concluded that smartphones’ portability, quick access to 
resources and a variety of healthcare applications makes these 
devices convenient to use in healthcare. Furthermore, a supportive 
environment with technical assistance is required for smartphone 
adoption. In another study, Putzer and Park investigated the factors 
which influence smartphone adoption among nurses (N=80). Their 
results suggest that smartphone adoption is influenced by 
observability, compatibility, job relevance, internal environment, 
and external environment. Some of these factors are administrative 

and therefore will require adjustment of policies and organizational 
practices at a high level. Some, such as job relevance and 
compatibility, can be largely influenced by choosing an application 
design method that takes into account the target users’ needs. To 
achieve this, we employ the User Centered Design method (UCD) 
[18] which is described in the next section. 

Previous surveys have shown that there exist several categories of 
smartphone applications related to nursing work [7], [21], [22]. 
Examples of these categories are drug reference systems (e.g., 
ePocrates), medical calculators (e.g., MedCalc), medical research 
databases (e.g., Skyscape OCM), professional communities (e.g., 
QuantiaMD), and applications for specific fields such as radiology 
(e.g., Lieberman’s iRadiology Classics) and pediatrics (e.g., 5 
Minute Clinical Consult). Based on our understanding, these 
applications are not context-aware, i.e. they only focus on tasks 
occurring on the screen, such as information retrieval and 
calculations. Consequently, these applications cannot adapt to the 
user’s needs in a given working context. 

Since the concept of ubiquitous computing was coined in the 1990s, 
researchers have developed context-aware systems that adapt their 
behavior based on context information such as the user’s location, 
time of the day, the user’s current activity, the user’s emotional 
state, focus of attention, and so forth [23]–[25]. In the healthcare 
sector, context-aware mHealth applications have been applied 
particularly in patient monitoring through body sensor networks 
[9]–[11]. There have also been research efforts to create context-
aware applications that focus on facilitating nurses’ work. Nelwan 
et al. [26] described a system that allows a nurse to monitor a 
patient’s physiological signals using a PDA device, which can also 
receive alarms at specific events. Bardram [27] implemented a 
context-aware hospital bed and a pill container. The bed is aware 
of the patient’s identity, their condition and treatment, and nearby 
items or persons. The pill container can identify the patient by 
fingerprint and can communicate with a patient’s display on the 
bed, thus helping a nurse to choose the correct drug. In last 
example, a context-aware healthcare system was evaluated in a 
real-world deployment [28]. The system aims at alleviating 
coordination and collaboration challenges of clinical workers (i.e. 
doctors and nurses) through location tracking, context-aware 
scheduling on interactive displays, and social awareness through 
mobile devices. After four months of deployment, the system was 
still in use and a user study revealed that the provision of context 
information regarding colleagues and operating rooms was found 
to be particularly useful. 

Aforementioned mobile and context-aware applications focus on 
limited aspects of the nurses’ work. To this date there exist no 
systems that unify the features that are essential to nurses’ work and 
provide context-aware access to those features.  

 

3. DESIGN METHODOLOGY 
The term User Centered Design (UCD) was originated by Don 
Norman during 1980s [18]. UCD and development of interactive 
systems and devices have an increasing importance in product 
development in organizations [18]. To create a usable system, we 
need to involve users continuously, and based on the users’ 
feedback, modify  the design [29], [30]. UCD cuts costs [14] and 
improves usability, since it continually focuses on the essential 
needs of the user from an early stage of the development, hence 
ensuring appropriate functionalities [31]. The ISO standard 
“Human-centred design for interactive systems” [32] defines three 
different design solutions for UCD as: I. Cooperative design;

designers and users are involved in all stages II. Participatory 
design; users occasionally participate in the design process, III. 
Contextual design; design is based on the actual context. In this 
paper we apply the participatory design approach.  

The application concept development in this study is based on a 
UCD framework for addressing usability and user experience in 
mobile learning application development [31]. Figure 1 presents 
the UCD framework processes for creating CANA.  

 

Figure 1. UCD process of the CANA system 

The framework requires users’ involvement in all stages of the 
application concept development. Accordingly, concept design 
consists of the following phases: 

 
User Study – In this phase the designer aims to learn the 
users’ current ways and tools to handle their work related 
tasks by applying methods such as questionnaire and 
semi-structured interviews. 

 
Data Analysis– Analyze further the collected data in the 
first phase. This analysis consists of an analysis of 
transcript coding of user interviews [33] as well as user 
task and environment analysis [37]. The overall 
requirements of the target application are identified in 
this phase. 

 
Idea Creation – By applying methods such as affinity 
diagrams [34], actions and requirements prepared at the 
previous phases are categorized. Use-case scenarios are 
also applied as a design method to propose the 
application concept to the target users. 

 
Product Concept – Prepared scenarios are shared with 
3-5 users who provide feedback. A scenario reflects a 
potential application concept. The users’ feedback on the 
scenarios are analyzed in order to validate the concept’s 
feasibility and also to ensure that the users and designers 
have the same understanding about the application. If 
necessary, designers may return back to the previous 
phase to modify the scenarios. 

After validating the concept, a prototype is designed based on the 
scenarios, followed by a usability evaluation on the prototype with 
target users.  

We conducted an initial user study based on the aforementioned 
framework to understand the target users, and a subsequent analysis 
to identify their professional needs. The framework, which is based 
on the UCD principles, suggests that the users of the target 
application should be involved in all stages of the application 
development. Consequently, qualitative research was conducted 

among nurses and doctors at two elderly houses in Espoo. Resulting 
user profiles, scenarios and an application prototype are presented 
in the following sections. 

4. USER STUDY 
In order to design a mHealth application prototype with UCD 
method, we first must understand who the potential target users are 
and what are their needs regarding the application. For this reason 
we performed an initial user study with potential users. 
4.1 Data Collection 
The initial user study was conducted with 12 nurses and a doctor at 
two elderly houses in Espoo, Finland. These users were chosen 
among doctors, specialist nurses, registered nurses, practical nurses 
and registered nurse students with practical nursing education 
background. Semi-structured interview was selected as a method 
for eliciting in-depth information about the users’ requirements 
regarding the application. Face-to-face interviews were conducted 
during two weeks in spring 2014 at Aurorankoti and Kuusikoti 
elderly houses in Espoo, Finland, as well as at the Metropolia 
University of Applied Sciences. The interview sessions were 
recorded with a mobile phone for transcribing and analysis. At the 
beginning of interview sessions, the participants were briefed about 
the interview’s goals. Additionally, the participants were asked to 
sign a consent form for recoding the session and contacting them 
later should further questions arise. The interviews took place after 
the participants’ working hours and one session lasted 
approximately 30 minutes.    

Table 1 shows profiles of the users and how they currently use 
mobile devices. There were 12 users in total of whom two were 
male and the rest were female. The age distribution varied from 21 
years up to 61 years old (average: 36). Majority of the users were 
Finnish nationals. Two of the users had foreign nationalities, but 
they were able to speak Finnish fluently. 90% of the users had 
smartphones and 83% of them considered themselves to be expert 
users. Additionally, these expert users had experience with 
communication applications such as Viber, WhatsApp and 
Facebook. Conversely, novice users did not have much experience 
with smartphones and did not often download applications nor use 
the browser. 

Table 1. User profiles

4.2 Data Analysis 
In this phase, in order to understand the nurses’ needs, the recorded 
data were categorized and analyzed by applying data analysis 
methods such as user and task analysis [35] and transcript coding 
[33]. These methods help identify the actions and activities from 
interview transcripts. The actions (e.g., performing a particular task) 
and the activities (e.g., action that is performed at a specific time) 
for each user were listed and categorized accordingly. Afterwards, a 
merged list of actions for all users was prepared. We applied affinity 
diagrams and brain storming to compose a list of potential 
application requirements based on commonly quoted actions. 

Table 2 shows samples of tasks that the users reported to carry out 
often with mobile devices in different environments. Frequency 
indicates how often a task is carried out in a working day.  

 

Table 2. Samples of tasks, their frequencies and environments 

 

Figure 2 shows the most expected services, such as work shift table, 
notepad for measurements and work shift notifications, with 
frequencies. These services were identified by analyzing the 
interview transcripts. In other words, the nurses who participated in 
the study have high exceptions towards having these services in a 
mHealth application. 

 

 
Figure 2. Most expected services 

   

5. PROTOTYPE DESIGN 
There are two aspects of the proposed CANA application which 
need to be tackled separately in the prototype design. First aspect is 
concept design based on the requirements that were elicited from 
the user study above. The second aspect is the technical application 
architecture which must be created in accordance to the user study, 
e.g., the application must adapt its behavior and a set of provided 
services based on the context of use.   

 
5.1 Concept development 
The requirements list which was prepared in the previous phase 
must to be transferred into an application concept. There are various 
concept design techniques such as scenario based design, which is 
particularly a suitable for mobile application concept design, as it 
speaks the users language and often avoids technical terms and 
complexities [36]. A scenario is a simple story which contains all 
the requirements that are identified earlier in a brain storming 
session in the data analysis phase. There can be more than one 
scenario to illustrate different aspects or users of the concept. User 
personas are embedded in these scenarios. Prepared scenarios are

shared with target users for assessment. This is yet another 
opportunity for the target users to impact the concept design. An 
excerpt of a scenario devised for CANA is as follows: 

Julia is a nurse. Her shift and working place often varies 
during a week. She noticed that today she has an evening 
shift at an elderly house in Espoo which is a new working 
place for her. She has received the elderly house details 
(address, phone number, etc.) through the city staff service. 
She is concerned about how to get there in time and also 
how to find the proper unit when she is there. Luckily, 
nowadays there is a new mobile application called CANA 
provided by a nurse agency in Helsinki… 

We prepared three scenarios for nurses in total. The scenario above 
is a revised version of an original scenario, based on the users’ 
feedback collected at a scenario review session. Based on revised 
scenarios, a low-fidelity prototype was designed which represents 
the look and feel of the application. CANA prototype contains user 
interface for all functionalities that are defined in the scenarios, 
such as work shift lists, medicine information search, emergency 
alarms, discussion board and department’s booklet. Figure 3-5 
illustrate the prototype’s user interface mock-ups where the 
features were categorized under meaningful sections (Figure 3) 
according to the feedback received from nurses. 

 

 
Figure 3. Category selection after login 

 

 
Figure 4. Patient tab 

 

 
Figure 5. General services tab 

 
5.2 Architecture design 
After the conceptual design of CANA, we proceeded to design its 
technical architecture which is depicted in Figure 6. We chose to 
base the application on web services to maximize extensibility, 
accessibility and portability, thus being able to serve multiple client 
platforms. The CANA client makes RESTful HTTP requests to the 
server’s Web Service Interface, and then presents the web service’s 
response in appropriate format. As a consequence, the client is 
light-weight and most of its features require network connectivity. 
Conversely, the CANA server manages majority of the business 
logic and calculations.  

The server has a modular structure which is divided into three 
groups: feature modules, support modules and context-awareness. 
Each Feature module manages a specific feature of the system, 
such as SOS alarms, schedule, and patient information. When the 
user activates one of these features, the client communicates with 
the respective module on the server through a web service interface. 
Feature modules may utilize support modules, context-awareness 
and data repositories in order to fulfill their tasks. 

Support modules contain utilities and other common services that 
are shared by multiple feature modules. For example, the Users 
module handles user accounts and permissions, the Data Access 
module provides façades to the server database, and the Reporting 
module provides various reports and statistical data about the 
system. Clients can also directly access the interfaces of some of 
the support modules, such as Users module for registration, account 
management and login actions. 

The core of context-sensitive service provision lies in the Context-
Awareness module that maintains a context model for each user. In 
building the model, the context-awareness module utilizes raw 
context data received from the clients and other sources. For 
example, the context model keeps track of a nurse’s current 
location, task, schedule and other information relevant to a nurse’s 
work activities. The Context-Awareness module also contains a 
variety of inference algorithms that generate meaningful 
knowledge and events based on changes in the context. Indoor 
location is acquired by using an indoor positioning service [37]. 
Other modules, such as the SOS alarm module, can utilize the 
Context-Awareness module in order to provide contextually 
relevant services to the clients. The SOS alarm module could, for 
example, send alarms only to nurses who are currently working 
nearby the emergency location.

Figure 6. CANA architecture 

 

The server’s Data Access Adapters manage connections to various 
open and closed data repositories through the Adapter software 
design pattern. Data repositories could be, for example, public 
transport APIs (e.g., HSL in Finland), medical databases, online 
professional communities, and so on. Feature modules can access 
these repositories through the Data Access Adapters’ unified 
interface, thus simplifying feature development. Furthermore, 
using the adapter interface, the server can be extended later with 
adapters that connect to new repositories.  

The client connects to the server’s Web Service Interface which 
provides a façade to access other server modules. The Web Service 
Interface is based on a HTML5, CSS and JavaScript. The server 
should be able to acquire raw sensor data from the client in order to 
use it in the context-awareness module. This data, captured by 
smartphone sensors (e.g., accelerometer, GPS) cannot be directly 
accessed by aforementioned technologies. Thus, the CANA client 
is based on the Phonegap framework [38] which utilizes the Apache 
Cordova [39] platform that enables cross-platform mobile 
application development using HTML5, CSS and JavaScript. 
Developers using Apache Cordova can essentially build mobile 
applications without native code. The platform also provides a 
JavaScript API to smartphone’s hardware, including but not limited 
to accelerometer, GPS, camera and compass. This way, the client 
can supply inputs necessary for implementing the context-aware 
features of CANA. 

 
6. PROTOTYPE EVALUATION 
A low-fidelity prototype of CANA was developed using the 
HTML5 and CSS3 technologies. The prototype was not fully 
functional and it only contained main categories and sub categories 
for the services. Its user interface was designed to be responsive 
with consideration of desktop, tablet and smartphone browsers. The 
evaluations were carried out with smartphones in order to mimic a 
real world environment. 

The prototype was evaluated with five users age between 21 to 60 
years old (4 females, 1 male) who also participated in the initial 
user study. The evaluations were conducted in one-to-one sessions 
with four users at Aurorankoti elderly house and one user at 
Kuusikoti elderly house as follows. First the participants were 
given a set of tasks to complete one by one. They were asked to 
think aloud when they were carrying out the tasks. The evaluation 
sessions were recorded for analysis. Additionally, a semi-structured 
interview was conducted after each session in order to learn more 
about the participants’ experiences with the prototype.  

We defined the evaluation tasks so that they required the 
participants to navigate through the prototype screens. For 
example, we asked the participants to: 1. Login to the system; 2. 
after login, find the patient (given name “Timo”); 3. Find what 
medical tests “Timo” needs today. Other tasks followed similar 
stepwise pattern.  

The objective of this evaluation was to measure the prototype’s 
overall design and concept’s feasibility. The analysis of data 
indicates that 100% of the test users considered the application as 
unique and excellent. Statement such as “I never ever thought that 
I can perform my work related tasks with my mobile” was 
repeatedly heard from the participants. The surprising fact for the 
researchers was that even the expert participants, i.e. those who 
were familiar with smart devices, were surprised to see such an 
application. This indicates that the user data analysis and concept 
development using the UCD framework were successful.   

By analyzing the evaluation results we have assessed: How easy-
to-use the user finds the required functions? Does the user find a 
function in the right place? Where do users often expect to see a 
function? How fast do users find the required functions? Is there a 
big navigational difference between novice and expert users?  

Here are the summary of what we have found based on the 
mentioned assessment questions. The test analysis indicates that the 
application navigation was easy for both novice and expert users.

There were, however, some labels such as “Shift list” in General 
services category that confused almost all participants with term 
timetable. Base on the evaluation, we replaced and renamed some 
services. As a result the navigation in some parts due to the 
terminology was not as smooth as we anticipated. However we 
have not received complains about the functions or services that 
needed in elderly houses.  The prototype contained all the necessary 
function that nurses need in their work related tasks. We gained 
valuable experience by conducting the test, after we analyzed the 
prototype evaluation data we slightly modify the categories in order 
to make some service more visible for faster accessibility.    

We did not collect feedback about the performance and the 
functionality as the application was a low-fidelity prototype. 
However, we acquired some useful suggestions regarding 
functionality, such as adding SOS alert to all screens and highlight 
them to draw the nurses’ attention. Furthermore, the inclusion of a 
timecard feature in the system emerged during the evaluation. A 
timecard feature would allow automatic registration of an 
employee’s entrance to and exit from the work premises – these 
tasks are currently performed manually.    

The aim of semi-structured interviews was to further assess the user 
experience of the CANA system among nurses. We asked the 
participants what they think about having this application to assist 
in their daily work. The analysis shows that the participants enjoyed 
using the prototype – we did not receive even a single negative 
comment from them. This positive experience motivates us to 
pursue the implementation CANA in order to deploy it for field 
evaluations. 
DISCUSSION 
Based on the results of this paper, it is evident that a mHealth 
application is needed to consolidate work activities of nurses at two 
elderly houses in Espoo, Finland. Our initial user study revealed a 
lack of proper mobile application that would assist nurses in their 
work related tasks. The initial study also indicated that nurses are 
mainly using pre-installed mobile applications, such as a calendar 
or a browser, to facilitate their work activities. In addition to having 
usability challenges, the pre-installed applications often lack 
functionalities to support work related tasks. For example, calendar 
data cannot be shared with groups or be connected to existing 
hospital information systems. Pre-installed applications also have 
security related concerns which make them difficult to utilize as a 
healthcare application suite.  

Results of the initial user study further suggested that nurses are 
positive towards a smartphone application that would consolidate 
their work activities. Based on the study, we identified services that 
nurses expect to have in a mHealth application (Error! Reference 
source not found.). These services formed the basis for the 
proposed Context-Aware Nurse Assistant (CANA) concept which 
is able to change its behavior based on the user’s context, and can 
therefore provide appropriate services to nurses at the right time 
and right place. Through context-awareness, CANA provides only 
those features that are necessary to assist a nurse’s work in a given 
situation, thus supporting their work more efficiently.  

The evaluation results of CANA prototype indicate that nurses 
were excited about the CANA concept and usefulness of its features 
to their work activities. This is significant because research has 
shown that an important factor for technology acceptance among 
nurses is perceived usefulness [40], [41]. This result is further 
strengthened by an author’s personal experience and our analysis 

                                                                

1 http://www.hel.fi/hki/apotti/fi/Apotti-hanke/English  

of the semi-structured interview conducted after the evaluation. 
Technology acceptance and excitement thereof stem from 
performing the tasks with a familiar tool (i.e. the user’s 
smartphone). 

The CANA concept was created using a design framework based 
on UCD. Nurses participating in the study had crucial roles in all 
stages from requirement elicitation to concept creation to prototype 
evaluation. As the evaluation results suggest, the CANA concept 
was appealing to nurses. From our perspective, UCD performed 
satisfactorily as a design method for a context-aware healthcare 
application. We will continue to apply UCD through an iterative 
design-implementation-evaluation cycle in order to transform the 
CANA concept into a deployable product based on the nurses’ 
feedback. 

Compared with other sectors, such as business and education, 
smartphones are not yet widely utilized in healthcare to support 
nurses’ work related tasks. There are many understandable reasons, 
such as security or privacy, for not having a dedicated application 
for nurses running on their smartphones. The security and privacy 
concerns form an important challenge to resolve in the product 
development phase. 

At the moment of writing this paper, a group of municipalities in 
southern Finland, including Helsinki, is replacing their existing 
healthcare systems with a common system under the Apotti 
Programme1. The goal Apotti is to integrate various incompatible 
tools and services into a single system to facilitate eHealth services. 
The current design of the architecture does not mention mobile or 
context-aware services. Hence, the proposed CANA concept could 
complement the Apotti system’s lack of user mobility. Conversely, 
CANA would benefit from Apotti’s integrated tools and unified 
interfaces to data sources, which are essential for nurses who work 
in several locations throughout a week. 
7. CONCLUSION 
We proposed a novel Context-Aware Nurse Assistant (CANA) 
application that consolidates daily work activities of nurses through 
context-aware service provision. Using a design framework based 
on User Centered Design, we invited target users (i.e. nurses) to 
partake in the design process of CANA. By co-designing with a 
group of nurses from the beginning, we ensured that the CANA 
system meets the professional requirements of the nurses’ work. 
After eliciting the essential requirements with nurses, we developed 
a concept and a low-fidelity prototype to evaluate the concept’s 
feasibility. Positive evaluation results on the prototype suggest that 
the concept is ready for functional implementation and evaluation.  

We have taken the first steps towards creating a context-aware tool 
that could enhance nurses’ daily work activities. However, there 
remain several research challenges to be tackled before the CANA 
system can be deployed. Firstly, handling patients’ data involves 
security and privacy challenges that must be met with appropriate 
techniques and policies. Secondly, CANA should be able to 
communicate with various proprietary, subscription-based systems 
such as medical databases and patient information systems. Thus, 
administrative and technical challenges related to gaining access to 
external systems must be solved in order to implement all requested 
features. Thirdly, we must proceed with a functional prototype 
implementation and evaluation in order to refine the features and 
the architecture. In the process, we will continue applying the UCD 
framework used in this study.

8. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This study was done with support of Aurorankoti department no 5 
and Kuusikoti elderly house in Espoo, Finland. Special thanks to 
supervisors, nurses and doctors in these two institutions. 

9. REFERENCES 
[1] 
J. Gebauer and M. J. Shaw, “Success Factors and Impacts of 
Mobile Business Applications: Results from a Mobile e-
Procurement Study,” Int. J. Electron. Commer., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 
19–41, 2004. 
[2] 
A. Holzinger, P. Treitler, and W. Slany, “Making Apps Useable 
on Multiple Different Mobile Platforms: On Interoperability for 
Business Application Development on Smartphones,” in 
Proceedings of the CD-ARES 2012, 2012, pp. 176–189. 
[3] 
P. Thornton and C. Houser, “Using mobile phones in 
education,” in Proceedings of Wireless and Mobile Technologies 
in Education, 2004, pp. 3–10. 
[4] 
J. C. Phillippi and T. H. Wyatt, “Smartphones in Nursing 
Education,” Comput. Informatics, Nurs., vol. 29, no. 8, pp. 449–
454, 2011. 
[5] 
Y.-C. Hsu, H.-N. Ho, C.-C. Tsai, G.-J. Hwang, H.-C. Chu, C.-Y. 
Wang, and N.-S. Chen, “Research trends in technology-based 
learning from 2000 to 2009: A content analysis of publications 
in selected journals,” Educ. Technol. Soc., vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 
354–370, 2012. 
[6] 
M. Robb and T. Shellenbarger, “Using technology to promote 
mobile learning: engaging students with cell phones in the 
classroom.,” Nurse Educ., vol. 37, no. 6, pp. 258–261, 2012. 
[7] 
R. F. Kenny, C. Park, J. M. C. van Neste-Kenny, P. A. Burton, 
and J. Meiers, “Using Mobile Learning to Enhance the Quality 
of Nursing Practice Education,” in Mobile Learning: 
Transforming the Delivery of Education and Training, M. Ally, 
Ed. AU Press, Athabasca University, 2010, pp. 75–98. 
[8] 
G. Eysenbach, “CONSORT-EHEALTH: improving and 
standardizing evaluation reports of web-based and mobile health 
interventions.,” J. Med. Internet Res., vol. 13, no. 4, 2011. 
[9] 
Y. Hao and R. Foster, “Wireless body sensor networks for 
health-monitoring applications,” Physiol. Meas., vol. 29, no. 11, 
p. R27, 2008. 
[10] 
K.-H. Park and J.-G. Pak, “An integrated gateway for various 
PHDs in U-Healthcare environments,” J. Biomed. Biotechnol., 
vol. 2012, 2012. 
[11] 
T. H. Laine, C. W. Lee, and H. J. Suk, “Mobile gateway for 
heterogeneous sensors using ZigBee and Bluetooth,” in 
Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Innovative 
Mobile and Internet Services in Ubiquitous Computing, 2014. 
[12] 
P. Hämäläinen, J. Reponen, I. Winblad, J. Kärki, M. Laaksonen, 
H. Hyppönen, and M. Kangas, “eHealth and eWelfare in 
Finland,” 2013. 
[13] 
City of Espoo, “Täyttä elämää ikääntyneenä: Espoon 
ikääntymispoliittinen ohjelma 2009-2015, Sosiaali- ja 
terveystoimen julkaisusarja 2/2009,” 2009. 
[14] 
Citizins' online service 2013. . (www.kanta.fi) [accessed 
21.04.2014] 
[15] 
M. Suckcharoen and J. Hellberg, “Lapsiperheiden e-
terveyspalveluiden kartoitus,” Laurea University of Applied 
Sciences, 2012. 
[16] 
K. Rautio and K. Uutela, “Espoon kaupungin Terveyskansio-
palvelu käyttäjänoppaan uudistaminen,” Laurea University of 
Applied Sciences, 2013. 
[17] 
E. Rezende, M. Melo, E. Tavares, A. Santos, and C. de Souza, 
“Ethics and eHealth: reflections for a safe practice,” Rev. 
Panam. Salud Publica, vol. 28, pp. 58–65, 2010. 
[18] 
D. A. Norman and S. W. Draper, User Centered System Design; 
New Perspectives on Human-Computer Interaction. Hillsdale, 
NJ: L. Erlbaum Associates Inc., 1986. 
[19] 
World Health Organization, “mHealth: New horizons for health 
through mobile technologies,” Glob. Obs. eHealth Ser., vol. 3, 
2011. 

[20] 
H. Larkin, “mHealth.,” Hosp. Health Netw., vol. 85, pp. 22–6, 2, 
2011. 
[21] 
S. Havelka, “Mobile Resources for Nursing Students and 
Nursing Faculty,” J. Electron. Resour. Med. Libr., vol. 8, no. 2, 
pp. 194–199, 2011. 
[22] 
T. Wyatt and P. Krauskopf, “E-health and Nursing: Using 
Smartphones to Enhance Nursing Practice.,” Online J. Nurs. 
Informatics, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 10–14, 2012. 
[23] 
P. J. Brown, J. D. Bovey, and X. Chen, “Context-aware 
applications: From the laboratory to the marketplace,” IEEE 
Pers. Commun., vol. 4, no. 5, pp. 58–64, 1997. 
[24] 
A. Dey, “Context-aware computing: The CyberDesk project,” in 
Proceedings of the AAAI 1998 Spring Symposium on Intelligent 
Environments, 1998, pp. 51–54. 
[25] 
G. Chen and D. Kotz, “A Survey of Context-Aware Mobile 
Computing Research,” 2000. 
[26] 
S. P. Nelwan, T. B. van Dam, P. Klootwijk, and S. H. Meij, 
“Ubiquitous mobile access to real-time patient monitoring data,” 
Comput. Cardiol., vol. 29, pp. 557–560, 2002. 
[27] 
J. E. Bardram, “Applications of context-aware computing in 
hospital work: examples and design principles,” in ACM 
symposium on Applied computing, 2004, pp. 1574–1579. 
[28] 
J. E. Bardram, T. R. Hansen, M. Mogensen, and M. Soegaard, 
“Experiences from Real-World Deployment of Context-Aware 
Technologies in a Hospital Environment,” in International 
Conference on Ubiquitous Computing, 2006, pp. 369–386. 
[29] 
J. D. Gould and C. Lewis, “Designing for usability: key 
principles and what designers think,” Commun. ACM, vol. 28, 
no. 3, pp. 300–311, 1985. 
[30] 
J. D. Gould, S. J. Boies, and J. Ukelson, “How to Design Usable 
Systems,” in Handbook of Human Computer Interaction, M. G. 
Helander, T. K. Landauer, and P. V. Prabhu, Eds. Elsevier 
Science, 1997, pp. 231–254. 
[31] 
A. Dirin and M. Nieminen, “Framework for addressing usability 
and user experience in m-learning,” J. Comput., vol. in press, 
2014. 
[32] 
ISO, “Ergonomics of human-system interaction - Part 210: 
Human-centred design for interactive systems (ISO 9241-
210:2010).” 2010. 
[33] 
J. Saldana, “An Introduction to Codes and Coding,” in The 
coding manual for qualitative researchers, Los Angeles: Sage 
Publications, 2009, pp. 1–31. 
[34] 
K. Holtzblatt, J. B. Wendell, and S. Wood, “Chapter 8 - 
Building an Affinity Diagram,” in Interactive Technologies, 
2005, pp. 159–179. 
[35] 
J. T. Hackos and J. C. Redish, User and Task Analysis for 
Interface Design, vol. 42. John Wiley & Sons, 1998. 
[36] 
M. B. Rosson and J. M. Carroll, “Scenario-Based Design,” in 
The human-computer interaction handbook: fundamentals, 
evolving technologies and emerging applications, 2002, pp. 
1032–1050. 
[37] 
Hui Liu, H. Darabi, P. Banerjee, and Jing Liu, “Survey of 
Wireless Indoor Positioning Techniques and Systems,” IEEE 
Trans. Syst. MAN, Cybern. Part C Appl. Rev., vol. 37, no. 6, pp. 
1067–1080, 2007. 
[38] 
Adobe Systems, “PhoneGap,” 2014. [Online]. Available: 
http://phonegap.com/. 
[39] 
The Apache Software Foundation, “Apache Cordova,” 2014. 
[Online]. Available: http://cordova.apache.org/. 
[40] 
Y. Kowitlawakul, “The technology acceptance model: 
predicting nurses’ intention to use telemedicine technology 
(eICU).,” Comput. Informatics, Nurs., vol. 29, no. 7, pp. 411–
418, 2011. 
[41] 
S. Chow, W.-Y. Chin, H.-Y. Lee, H.-C. Leung, and F.-H. Tang, 
“Nurses’ perceptions and attitudes towards computerisation in a 
private hospital.,” J. Clin. Nurs., vol. 21, no. 11–12, pp. 1685–
96, 2012.