Developing e-Bug web games to teach microbiology 

David Farrell 1, Patty Kostkova 1*, Lisa Lazareck 1, Dasun Weerasinghe 1, Julius Weinberg 1, Donna M. Lecky 2, 

Niels Adriaenssens 3, Tereza Koprivova´ Herotova´ 4, Jette Holt 5, Pia Touboul 6, Kyriakoula Merakou 7, 
Raffaella Koncan 8, Anna Olczak-Pienkowska 9, Anto´nio Brito Avoˆ 10, Jose´ Campos 11  and Cliodna A. M. McNulty 2 
 

1City eHealth Research Centre (CeRC), School of Community and Health Sciences (SC&HS), City University London, Northampton Square, 

London EC1V 0HB, UK; 2Health Protection Agency Primary Care Unit, Microbiology Department, Gloucester Royal Hospital, Great Western 

Road, Gloucester, Gloucestershire, GL1 3NN, UK; 3Laboratory of Medical Microbiology, Vaccine & Infectious Disease Institute 
(VAXINFECTIO), University of Antwerp, Universiteitsplein 1, 2610 Antwerp, Belgium; 4Third Faculty of Medicine, Bulovka University 
Hospital, Budinova 2, 180 81 Prague, Czech Republic; 5National Unit of Infection Control, Department of Microbiological Surveillance and 
Research, Statens Serum Institut, Artillerivej 5, DK-2300 Copenhagen S, Denmark; 6Department of Public Health, Nice University Hospital, 

Archet 1 Hospital, 151, rte St Antoine de Ginestie`re, BP 3079, 06202 Nice Cedex 3, France; 7Department of Public  and Administrative 
Health, National School of Public Health, Athens 11521, Greece; 8Dipartimento di Patologia, Sezione Microbiologia, Universita`  degli Studi   di 

Verona, Strada Le Grazie 8, 37134 Verona, Italy; 9National Institute of Public Health, Chelmska Str. 30/40, 00-725 Warsaw, Poland; 
10Centro de Sau´de de Oeiras, Av Salvador Allende, Oeiras, 2780 Oeiras, Portugal; 11Antibiotic Laboratory, Centro Nacional de Microbiolog´ıa, 

Bacteriolog´ıa, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Majadahonda, Madrid, Spain 
 

As a complement to the e-Bug teaching pack, two e-Bug  games  were developed  to  provide  content that aimed 
to entertain as well as to educate. A set of agreed learning outcomes (LOs) were provided by the scientific part- 
ners of the e-Bug Project and the games were developed using user-centred design techniques (the needs, 
wants and limitations of the potential game players were assessed at each stage of the design process). The e-
Bug games were designed for two age groups: Junior (9 – 12 year olds); and Senior (13 – 15 year olds). 

A study using focus groups was done to gain an understanding as to the types of games enjoyed by the target 
users. According to the preliminary study, the Junior Game was developed as a platform game and the Senior 

Game was developed as a story-based detective game. The Junior Game consists of five levels, each associated 
with a set of LOs. Similarly, the Senior Game consists of four missions, each comprising five stages using 

problem-based learning techniques and LOs. In this paper, the process of development for each game is 
described in detail and an illustration is provided of how each game level or mission addresses the target LOs. 

Development of the games used feedback acquired from children in four schools across the UK (Glasgow, 
London and two in Gloucester). The children were selected according to their willingness to participate. 
European Partners of the e-Bug Project also provided further support, translation and requests for modifi- 

cations. The knowledge gained of LOs and further evaluation of the games is continuing, and preliminary results 
are in press. The final versions of the games, translated into 11 European languages, are available online via 
www.e-bug.eu. 
 

Keywords: antibiotic resistance, hand washing, education web games, Internet intervention, problem-based learning (PBL) 
 
 

Introduction 

In addition to the e-Bug school teaching pack, two e-Bug games 
were developed, providing content suitable for children, and cov- 
ering microbes, hygiene and the appropriate use of antibiotics. 
Both games aim to entertain as well as to educate the young 
people who play them. The games were a Junior Game (for 9 – 
12 year olds) and a Senior Game (for 13 – 15 year olds). Common 

 

learning outcomes (LOs) were agreed by the scientific partners of the e- 
Bug project pack and web site, and the

games were developed using user-centred design 
techniques (the needs, wants and limitations of the 
potential game players were assessed at each stage of 
the design process). Each game uses a different pedagogy 
(strategy of instruction) to teach its content and provides 

very different playing experi- ences. This paper discusses the 
approach used to develop these games. We used a standard 
iterative software develop- ment methodology. The actual 
development involved gathering user requirements and using 
design techniques such that the players were placed at the 
centre of each game’s design.

Junior schools computer access 
Junior schools broadband 
Senior schools computer access 
Senior schools broadband 

 
 

Involving children in every stage of the development process is 
also referred to as user-centred design in this article. 
 

Developing the games 

Hardware and software platforms 

Games software is typically distributed via CD-ROM or via the 
Internet. Games software provided on CD-ROM is typically com- 

patible with only one operating system (e.g. Windows, Mac, 
Linux), and requires that physical media be created and distribu- 
ted to every player who is interested in playing. Web browser 

games, on the other hand, are usually playable without any 
requisite installation of administrative rights. Furthermore, mul- 

tiple physical copies of the games software are not needed if 
more than one player wants to play (and download the game). 

If a suitable web gaming platform is chosen,  the  games  are 

also playable across most operating systems.  For  these 
reasons, it was decided that the e-Bug games would be hosted 

on the e-Bug web site and be playable through a web browser. 

In order for the games to be playable by as many European 
children as possible, it was necessary to assess the availability 

of computers and Broadband Internet to classrooms in each 
partner country. The e-Bug partners were asked to fill in a ques- 

tionnaire that provided these data about their own country. All 

countries  reported  a  high  accessibility  to  computers ≥(  80%)  at 
the Junior and Senior school levels. Poland reported the lowest 

accessibility~[ 70% ( junior schools) and 79%  (senior  schools)]. 
The range of schools with broadband access varied considerably 

between countries, with Greece relying largely on dial-up con- 
nections. This research took place in 2006 and while we expected 

the accessibility and broadband situation to improve in future, 
the data were instructive in choosing how to design the e-Bug 
games. Figure 1 shows Internet access for 7 of the 11 participat- 

ing countries. An attempt was made to identify the technical 

capabilities of these computers, but it was not possible to deter- 
mine this. The games were therefore designed to be suitable 
even for low-specification computers. 

A number of software technologies were considered for deli- 
vering the web-based games, but only Flash (Macromedia, Inc.) 
has sufficient market coverage to be readily available. A 2007 

survey by Millward Brown for Adobe.com found that Flash 
Version 8 had a market penetration of 95.1% by March 2007.1 
Flash is the technology used to power sites such as YouTube and 
is currently at Version 10; however, Version 8 was chosen to 
ensure that even older computers would be able to play the 
games. If a newer version of Flash (or an alternative technology) 
was required, it might be necessary for teachers to request 
administrative rights to their computers in order to install the 
web browser plug-in. 
 

Contexts in which the games would be played 

Early in the process, a focus group with five senior-school tea- 
chers (chosen for convenience) was held in Gloucester. They 
were asked how they would use games in the classroom and a 
number of situations were considered to be suitable for using a 
game, such as: an introduction to a topic; a summarizing activity 
at the end of a topic; a task for a child who finished a task early; 
or a piece of homework. No one scenario seemed to be domi- 
nant—teachers said that they would use games in the class- 
room when it was suitable on a case-by-case basis. Because of 
the difficulty in arranging the use of dedicated computer rooms 
for a class, and in order to increase the likelihood of the games 
being played by children out of class, it was decided that the 
games would stand independently of the e-Bug pack  (as opposed 
to being mini-games associated with each lesson, as the original 
idea had been) and would aim to be as entertain- ing as possible 
for children to help them compete with other web-based 
entertainment. This would also extend the  interest in the games 
for children not being taught e-Bug at school but who found the 
games online. The uptake of online users con- firmed this 
approach to be correct. 
 

Genres of play 

Focus  groups  were  held  with  a  small  number  of  children  (n¼ 6, 
junior age group; and n 1¼5, senior age group) in Glasgow in 2007 
(a convenience sample), to find out what kind of games they 
enjoyed. This was complemented by a computer games market 
study to evaluate the popularity of current commercial games, in 
which we looked at the sales charts provided by the games 
industry magazine Develop in the UK and the various 
international Amazon web sites. 
(%) 
100 

80 

60 

40 

20 

0 

Availability of computer access in schools 
 

Junior Game 

Children in the younger age group expressed a liking for simple 
games, such as Super Mario Brothers (from Nintendo) and those 
found on web sites such as Kongregate.com. Most of these 
games are simple and require no training before use. It was 
decided after looking at these games and speaking to the 
 

Belgium Czech 

Republic 

France 
GB 
Greece Italy Poland 
children that a platform game (similar to the Super Mario Broth- 
ers series) would be an enjoyable play experience for this age 
 

European schools (in 2006). 
 
 

 

 

 

Figure 1. The reported availability of computer and Internet access in

group. 
 

Senior Game 

The older children had stronger opinions on the type of 
games they enjoyed. The most commonly mentioned 
genres were games that involved sports, racing and 
shooting. As these were

Figure 2. Snapshots of the Junior Game—Level 1 action. The player takes a photograph of ‘Steve Staphylococcus’ (top left); microbes are found on the 
surface of the human skin (top right) and in the kitchen (bottom left); and microbes are shown in various shapes and sizes (bottom right). 
 

unsuitable for e-Bug, further discussion elicited other types of 
games that they had enjoyed. Two children mentioned story- 
based adventure games, such as Broken Sword2 or the Phoenix 
Wright: Ace Attorney series.3 In a follow-up session, these chil- 
dren were given commercial games of this type to   play and they 
all enjoyed the experience with responses ranging from ‘I love 
this kind of game’ to ‘I wouldn’t mind playing it’. Therefore, a 
story-based play experience similar to the Phoenix Wright game 
was chosen as an appropriate genre for the Senior Game. 
 
 

Teaching through play: identifying suitable teaching 
methods 

In order to avoid what Habgood calls ‘chocolate-covered broccoli’,4 
whereagameoffersnoeducationalbenefitbeyondextrinsicmotiv- 
ation, itisnecessarytointegratelearningthrough gamemechanics. 
Unfortunately, games-basedlearning (GBL) researchisinitsinfancy 
and effective methods harnessing the learning that happens in 
games have not yet been sufficiently investigated.5 
 
 
 

Junior Game 

A platform game is both highly interactive and quick to respond 
to user actions. Work by Squire6 and Svarovsky and Shaffer7 has 
shown that these types of games can offer a deep and meaning- 
ful learning experience. Svarovsky and Shaffer in particular offer 
the concept of an exploratoid, or ‘short fragments of exploratory 
action in a microworld that cumulatively develop interest in and 
understanding of important scientific concepts’. This concept 
was used for the Junior Game, where the player is offered oppor- 
tunities to interact with microbes and see the consequences of 
their actions. 

Figure 3. Snapshot of the Junior Game—Level 2 action. The player has 
thrown soap at a harmful microbe, which is floating away inside a bubble. 
 

Senior Game 

Adventure games are largely story driven and because stories 
require a lot of text, it would be difficult to have the Senior Game 
allowing the player the interactive, iterative experience that is 
possible in a simple platform game. As such, an alternative peda- 
gogy was sought. Problem-based learning (PBL) is ‘any learning 
environment in which the problem drives the learning. That is, 
before students learn some knowledge they are given a 
problem’.8 By posing a problem before any learning takes place, 
children are able to contextualize new knowledge instead of 
simply learning stand-alone facts. PBL encourages independent 
learning with minimal intervention from a teacher. Used exten- 
sively in medical training in higher education, PBL can be adapted 
to teach a wide range of LOs, making it suitable for e-Bug. There 
have been a number of studies on the effectiveness of PBL and, 
whilst there is no conclusive evidence that PBL is prefer- able to 
other successful methods of teaching, it has been shown to be 
effective.9 Some research has suggested that PBL is a natural 
approach to GBL,10  but there has  been little empirical evaluation 
to date. Picard found that using PBL in a business game had a

Figure 4. Snapshots of the Junior Game—Level 3 action. The player uses a Lactobacillus bacterium to convert milk (left) into yogurt (right). 
 

positive effect on university students in terms of satisfaction and 
attainment.11 A recent study using a PBL-based game in senior 
school found that children were successfully engaged, but the 
difference in knowledge gain between intervention and control 
groups was not significant.12 Whilst the evidence supporting 
PBL’s use in GBL is not conclusive, the concepts behind PBL map 
very well onto the core game mechanics of adventure games. 
Given the lack of a clearly established pedagogy to support this 
type of game, and considering the wide remit of e-Bug and the 
flexibility that is required to cover all LOs, it was decided to use 
PBL to underpin the Senior Game’s teaching. 
 

Design mechanics 

Junior Game 

In order to facilitate teaching the LOs, the player chooses an 
avatar that is shrunk to the size of a bacterium and then uses a 
hoverboard to move around various environments that microbes 
inhabit. In total, there are five levels to the game, each with its 
own focus (LOs) and rules. 
 

Level1: Introductionto Microbes Theplayerisintroducedtothe 
general game structures—such as how to move the avatar and 
how to exit the level. The LOs are 3-fold: (i) bacteria, viruses and 
fungi are three different types of microbe; (ii) microbes are found 
everywhere; and (iii) microbes come in different shapes and 
sizes. The player is tasked with taking photographs of one type of 
microbe at a time and is not rewarded when taking photo- 
graphs of the ‘wrong’ type of microbe (Figure 2). The player is 
shown that microbes are ‘everywhere’ by visiting two common 
locations where microbes exist: on the human skin and in the 
kitchen. The in-game artwork depicts microbes as cartoons, 
drawn according to their real-life counterparts (i.e. size and 
shape). For example, fungi are shown to be larger than bacteria, 
which in turn are shown to be larger than viruses. 
 

Level 2: Harmful Microbes The player encounters microbes 
whose ‘harmful’ nature is represented in three game mechanics. 
Firstly, if a ‘good’ and a ‘bad’ microbe touch each other, they both 
die and are removed from the game. Secondly, if the  player 
touches a harmful microbe, they suffer the loss of one life. Thirdly, 
if the player loses three lives, they must restart this level. Lastly, 
good microbes are smiling, and bad microbes have evil eyes and 
bared teeth. The player can combat the harmful microbes; e.g. they 
can throw soap at a microbe in the kitchen or on the skin, and the 
microbe becomes enveloped in 

 

 

Figure 5. Snapshot of the Junior Game—Level 4 action. The player places 
the recently bought shopping items into their appropriate places in the 
kitchen. 
 

Figure 6. Snapshot of the Junior Game—Level 5 action. The player 
delivers a full course of antibiotics to the bacterial infection. 
 

the soap bubble and floats away (Figure 3). Also, they can throw 
white blood cells at the microbe whilst in the body and the 
harmful microbe is destroyed. The LOs are 3-fold, including: 
(i) sometimes microbes can make us ill; (ii) washing  can prevent 
the spread of infection; and (iii) our bodies have defences to fight 
off infection. 
 

Level 3: Useful Microbes The LOs are 2-fold, including: (i) not all 
microbes are harmful; and (ii) useful microbes can make things like 
bread and yogurt. The player can actually push a ‘Lucy Lacto- 
bacillus’ bacterium into a glass of milk to create yogurt (Figure 4). 
 

Level 4: Hygiene When the player moves into the kitchen, they 
change from their shrunken state to their full height, and must 
put shopping away in a fridge and cupboards, ensuring they wash 
their hands after handling meat and placing each item in an 
appropriate place to prevent contamination (Figure 5). If the 
avatar sneezes, the player must use a tissue to catch the sneeze, 
throw the tissue away and then wash their hands before continu- 
ing with the level. The LOs are 5-fold, including:  (i) infection can

Figure 7. Snapshots of the Senior Game. The player meets the bodyguard (left) and explores the kitchen (middle) using Microbe Vision (right). 
 

spread through unclean hands; (ii) hand washing can prevent the 
spread of infection; (iii) microbes found on food can pass to humans; 
(iv) cooking food properly can kill harmful microbes; and (v) 
sneezing or coughing in your hand can still spread infection. 
Respiratory and hand hygiene, and appropriate food handling and 
food storage are all discussed here. 
 

Level 5: Antibiotics The player returns to her/his shrunken state 
to tackle issues about antibiotics. The learning outcomes are 2-fold: 
(i) sometimes it is necessary to take antibiotics; and 
(ii) if antibiotics are taken, it is important to finish the course. The 
player uses an antibiotic as a ‘smart bomb’ effect, whereby both 
good and bad bacteria are killed, but not viruses (Figure 6). The 
player is shown how a serious infection returns after initially 
appearing eradicated, following a partial antibiotic course. The 
infection is only fully eradicated by using the remain- der of the 
antibiotic treatment. 
 

Senior Game 

The senior game is a story-based adventure and therefore it uses 
the same basic method (PBL approach) to implement all LOs.For 
each LO, a situation is designed that requires the user to speak to 
characters, look for evidence and identify the solution to pro- 
blems that elicit an understanding of the LO. 

The application of the five stages of PBL vary between 
implementations; however, for e-Bug, the Queen’s University 

(Kingston, Ontario, Canada)  definition  was  utilized.13   Using 

this definition, Stage 1 is the Topic Introduction, allowing the 
facilitator to introduce  the  topic  and  highlight  why the topic 

is relevant. In Stage 2, students write  the  Problem  Statement 
in their own words and care is taken to ensure that they cor- 

rectly understand the problem. In Stage 3, the students 
Hypothesize potential solutions to the problem  and  identify 

one to pursue. In Stage 4, the students carry out Research— 
seeking information that confirms  or refutes their hypothesis. 
In Stage 5, students consider whether their hypothesis is con- 
firmed through evidence—and if so, they Present their Result 

or findings with an emphasis on  methodology,  rather  than 
the final answer. If the hypothesis is proved incorrect, students 
return to Stage 3 and identify a new hypothesis to investigate. 

The Senior Game is divided into four missions, each of which 

covers related LOs and presents the player with an overall 
problem. The player does not have the information required to 
solve the problem and must therefore solve multiple subpro- 

blems first. Similarly, each subproblem covers other LOs and 
may be further divided. In the following example we will look 

at how the game delivers three LOs, with the player having been 
asked to investigate why an actor has fallen ill. The LOs include: 
(i) different types of microbes are found in different places; (ii) 
microbes can be found on our food and can transfer to humans; 
and (iii) separate chopping boards should be used for meat and 
vegetables. 
 
 

Stage 1: Topic Introduction Non-player characters (NPCs) use 
dialogue to describe the initial problem. Here, an  actor  has fallen 
ill and his bodyguard suspects foul play. The overall problem is to 
identify the cause of his illness. 
 
 

Stage 2: Problem Statement The actor’s bodyguard (see Figure 
7) offers theories that may explain the illness. One such hypothesis 
is that the chef deliberately poisoned the actor. Another theory 
suggests that poor food hygiene is responsible. 
 
 

Stage 3: Hypothesis In order to solve the problem, the player has 
to investigate one of the hypotheses. If the player switches on 
‘Microbe Vision’, she/he can identify potential evidence that may 
suggest which of these is most suitable (Figure 7). Relevant to the 
food hygiene hypothesis are evidence of microbial concen- 
trations on the actor’s leftover food as well as the chopping 
board in the kitchen. 
 
 

Stage 4: Research Having decided to pursue the food hygiene 
hypothesis, the player may speak to NPCs, visit locations, and collect 
and test evidence. If the  player  tests  the  chopping board and 
food leftovers, an NPC passes information to the player, teaching 
the desired LOs. For example, when the player tests the chopping 
board, Campylobacter is present. The player is told that this is 
normal for chopping boards used for meat. If the player tests the 
leftovers, she is informed that the chicken is clear of microbes (it 
was properly cooked) but that the salad is contaminated with 
Escherichia coli and norovirus. 
 
 

Stage 5: Presenting Results During dialogue with NPCs, the 
player has  the option to  present an item of evidence in response 
to a statement. By showing evidence that the microbes on the 
plate are of a different type than those on the chopping board, 
the player disproves the bodyguard’s hypothesis and completes 
the problem.

Conclusions 

The e-Bug Junior and Senior Games act as stand-alone compa- 
nions to the e-Bug teaching packs. Playable by children at home, 
or within the classroom, they offer an engaging and entertaining 
way for children to gain knowledge of learning outcomesrelated 
to microbiology. Each game was designed to have a genre and 
style of play appropriate for the target user group, and a suitable 
pedagogical model was used for teaching in each game. By enga- 
gingwithplay-testersfrequently(inkeepingwiththemethodology    of 
user-centred design techniques), it was possible to iteratively 
develop games that ensured player satisfaction. Although a 
game may be designed on paper, the experience of play is imposs- 
ible to assess without testing the game with users. Throughout 
development, frequent developmental evaluations using play- 
tests, focus groups and observational studies were used to test 
new features and to ensure that the games would be enjoyed by 
children. Quantitative and qualitative evaluations of the games 
are ongoing and in press.14,15 The final versions ofthe games have 
been translated into 11 European languages using support, 
translation and modification requests from the e-Bug partners 
throughout the course of the project. The e-Bug games are 
accessible online via www.e-bug.eu. 

 

 
Transparency declarations 
This article is part of a Supplement sponsored by the European Commis- 
sion Health and Consumer Protection Directorate-General DG SANCO 
(grant number 2005211).