Original Paper

An Immersive and Interactive Platform for Cognitive Assessment
and Rehabilitation (bWell): Design and Iterative Development
Process

Vincent Gagnon Shaigetz1*, MSc; Catherine Proulx1*, MSc; Anne Cabral1*, MEng; Nusrat Choudhury1, MEng; Mark
Hewko2, MEng; Elicia Kohlenberg2, DEC; Melanie Segado1, PhD; Michael S D Smith2, MSc; Patricia Debergue1,
MEng

1Simulation and Digital Health, Medical Devices Research Centre, National Research Council Canada, Boucherville, QC, Canada
2Simulation and Digital Health, Medical Devices Research Centre, National Research Council Canada, Winnipeg, MB, Canada
*these authors contributed equally

Nusrat Choudhury, MEng
Simulation and Digital Health
Medical Devices Research Centre
National Research Council Canada
75 Boulevard de Mortagne
Boucherville, QC, J4B 6Y4
Canada
Phone: 1 4506415208

Abstract

Background: Immersive technologies like virtual reality can enable clinical care that meaningfully aligns with real-world
deficits in cognitive functioning. However, options in immersive 3D environments are limited, partly because of the unique
challenges presented by the development of a clinical care platform. These challenges include selecting clinically relevant features,
enabling tasks that capture the full breadth of deficits, ensuring longevity in a rapidly changing technology landscape, and
performing the extensive technical and clinical validation required for digital interventions. Complicating development, is the
need to integrate recommendations from domain experts at all stages.
Objective: The Cognitive Health Technologies team at the National Research Council Canada aims to overcome these challenges
with an iterative process for the development of bWell, a cognitive care platform providing multisensory cognitive tasks for
adoption by treatment providers.
Methods: 
The team harnessed the affordances of immersive technologies while taking an interdisciplinary research and
developmental approach, obtaining active input from domain experts with iterative deliveries of the platform. The process made
use of technology readiness levels, agile software development, and human-centered design to advance four main activities:
identification of basic requirements and key differentiators, prototype design and foundational research to implement components,
testing and validation in lab settings, and recruitment of external clinical partners.
Results: 
bWell was implemented according to the findings from the design process. The main features of bWell include
multimodal (fully, semi, or nonimmersive) and multiplatform (extended reality, mobile, and PC) implementation, configurable
exercises that pair standardized assessment with adaptive and gamified variants for therapy, a therapist-facing user interface for
task administration and dosing, and automated activity data logging. bWell has been designed to serve as a broadly applicable
toolkit, targeting general aspects of cognition that are commonly impacted across many disorders, rather than focusing on 1
disorder or a specific cognitive domain. It comprises 8 exercises targeting different domains: states of attention (Egg), visual
working memory (Theater), relaxation (Tent), inhibition and cognitive control (Mole), multitasking (Lab), self-regulation
(Butterfly), sustained attention (Stroll), and visual search (Cloud). The prototype was tested and validated with healthy adults in
a laboratory environment. In addition, a cognitive care network (5 sites across Canada and 1 in Japan) was established, enabling
access to domain expertise and providing iterative input throughout the development process.

JMIR Rehabil Assist Technol 2021 | vol. 8 | iss. 4 | e26629 | p. 1

Conclusions: Implementing an interdisciplinary and iterative approach considering technology maturity brought important
considerations for the development of bWell. Altogether, this harnesses the affordances of immersive technology and design for
a broad range of applications, and for use in both cognitive assessment and rehabilitation. The technology has attained a maturity
level of prototype implementation with preliminary validation carried out in laboratory settings, with next steps to perform the
validation required for its eventual adoption as a clinical tool.

(JMIR Rehabil Assist Technol 2021;8(4):e26629) doi: 10.2196/26629

KEYWORDS
virtual reality; clinical psychology; cognitive assessment; neuropsychology; mental health; cognitive rehabilitation; digital
therapeutics; mobile phone; cognitive training

Introduction

Background

Mental health issues are increasing worldwide [1]. In middle-
and high-income countries, 50% of the general population will
experience at least one mental health disorder during their lives
[2]. Mental illness impacts national productivity, estimated to
be up to a 4% loss as measured by gross domestic product [3].
The cumulative economic output loss associated with mental
disorders between 2011 and 2030 is projected to be US $16.3
trillion worldwide, putting it in close contest with cardiovascular
disease, which is the leading health care burden [2]. Mental
health disorders encompass many conditions, challenging people
throughout their lives by impacting their ability to learn, build
flourishing lives, and age gracefully into their senior years [4].
Although mental health issues are prevalent, they remain
difficult to assess and treat.

To best manage a mental health condition, it is important to
understand the different ways in which functioning is impacted
in an individual. A core feature of psychopathology is cognitive
dysfunction, in which impairments can occur broadly and
nonspecifically among domains such as attention, response
inhibition, and visual memory, cutting across disorder
boundaries [5]. Current assessments of cognitive functions,
traditionally including in-person clinical evaluations consisting
of a battery of pen-and-paper and 2D computerized cognitive
tasks [6,7], may not be able to capture the complex processes
underlying behavior because they are based on a common set
of neuropsychological tools evaluating unitary cognitive
constructs [8]. On the other hand, looking at treatment, it
becomes evident that cognitive rehabilitation has emerged as a
promising strategy. It is based on the premise that repeated
practice of tasks targeting deficits can lead to improvements in
specific cognitive domains [9]. However, it remains unclear
whether these improvements translate into real-world
functioning.

Neuropsychological assessments are currently experiencing a
shift, moving away from traditional construct-driven
pen-and-paper paradigms toward tests that are representative
of everyday life, attracting the use of immersive, otherwise
known as extended reality (XR) technologies [10-12]. In
particular, virtual reality (VR) allows for almost complete
sensory immersion with vast design possibilities and tight
experimental control, making it ideal for assessing cognitive
functioning in the performance of simulated real-life tasks. The
ability of VR to deliver and control stimuli while capturing

responses with high fidelity during an exercise, provides a
controlled and repeatable tool that is unavailable in traditional
testing methods. The opportunities VR provides for both
assessment and rehabilitation have led to growing interest from
the research and clinical neuropsychology communities in recent
years [13]. The feasibility of using VR for cognitive assessment
and care has been demonstrated across various cognitive
domains, such as attention [6,14,15], executive functions [16],
memory [11,17,18], and spatial abilities [19]. Moreover, in an
extensive review describing the status of clinical VR, Rizzo et
al indicate that studies on the use of VR for cognitive assessment
have demonstrated construct validity and discrimination of
clinical groups from healthy controls, while VR cognitive
rehabilitation studies, though promising, have produced mixed
results [20]. In a systematic review of VR cognitive
rehabilitation, Larson et al [21] identify a few randomized
controlled trials demonstrating effective training for memory
[22-24], executive functioning [25], and visual attention [26]
and conclude that further studies in the field are needed.

Although existing solutions have shown great promise for the
use of digital cognitive health interventions in general, and even
VR interventions specifically, these interventions have not yet
been widely adopted. The majority of the VR platforms
mentioned above comprise a single exercise tailored to a specific
disorder, require manual exercise reconfiguration to support
repeated measures, and support limited and often specific user
display and interaction hardware [6,21,27,28]. Here, we outline
a co-design development framework for a cognitive care
platform and the platform developed using this process that
addresses these limitations. The development framework
includes an interdisciplinary team to match clinical intentions
with exercise software design for stimuli and measurements,
and a set of clinical partners to configure and validate
multipurpose exercises for specific use cases.

Objective

The aim of this work is to create a toolkit for clinicians to
perform assessment and rehabilitation on a platform enabled
with immersive technologies. Because of the novel,
interdisciplinary nature of developing software for immersive
cognitive care, a secondary goal is to outline a process for the
iterative development of cognitive care software in collaboration
with domain experts.

JMIR Rehabil Assist Technol 2021 | vol. 8 | iss. 4 | e26629 | p. 2

Methods

A human-centered approach and design thinking were used to
identify key requirements for the proposed platform such that

it would satisfy the criteria of being desirable, viable, and
feasible (Figure 1). When these components are balanced, one
can arrive at an innovation process that integrates the needs of
the end users as well as the potential of technology in a
sustainable fashion [29].

Figure 1. Venn diagram showing innovative solution sweet spot that lies at the intersection of desirability, viability, and feasibility.

Specifically, an interdisciplinary approach [30,31] previously
employed by the National Research Council Canada (NRC)
was leveraged to develop the bWell cognitive care platform.
This approach has been successfully applied by the NRC to
create surgical simulation platforms [30-35], most notably for
neurosurgery, NeuroTouch (now distributed worldwide as
NeuroVR by CAE Healthcare). For a feasible solution, the
technology was built on the team’s strengths in simulation. Over
the years, the team has developed skills and expertise in
assembling the pieces required for user interactivity in realistic
real-time simulation, engaging users through multiple senses
(visual, audio, and touch). Desirability, or the need for the
platform within the clinical community, was determined through
active discussion with clinical care providers and by identifying

gaps in existing solutions in the market. In the interest of
viability, early on, the team established long-term collaborative
research agreements with 5 world-renowned clinical sites across
Canada and 1 in Japan—a cognitive care network (CCN). The
CCN consists of an early adopter group that has provided
domain-specific perspectives as well as feedback on iterative
deliveries of the platform as bWell development progressed.
The CCN is currently launching several studies investigating
the content of bWell exercises, as well as its use, specific to
target populations. In addition, the technology readiness level
(TRL) framework [36] has been used to integrate and structure
the stages of clinical collaboration within the technology
development phases according to the level of maturity (Figure
2).

JMIR Rehabil Assist Technol 2021 | vol. 8 | iss. 4 | e26629 | p. 3

Figure 2. Schematic demonstrating the stages of clinical collaboration at the different TRL: early TRL (1-3: Foundational research), mid TRL (4-6:
Technology development) and late TRL (7-9: deployment). TLR: technology readiness levels.

Results

Technology Readiness

The development of the bWell platform began in 2017, and
activities to date have focused on research to demonstrate
technical feasibility as defined in the early TRLs. During this
phase of technology development, 4 main activities were
advanced: (1) identification of basic requirements and key
differentiating criteria (TRL-1), (2) prototype design and
foundational research to implement key components (TRL 2-3),
(3) testing and validation in laboratory settings (TRL 3-4), and
(4) the establishment of the CCN early adopter group. The CCN
was formed in 2019 to prepare for the time when the platform
would reach an intermediate TRL (TRL 4-6), ready to be shifted
from validation in the laboratory to validation in clinical settings.

Identification of Requirements and Differentiators

The fundamental objective of this work is to harness the
affordances of immersive technologies to enable assessment
and therapy that can meaningfully align with real-world
problems in cognitive functioning. By creating simulations that
engage users through multiple senses (visual, audio, and touch)
while permitting natural movement, immersive VR creates a
sense of presence (being there) that elicits a genuine response
in an individual [37]. The use of VR environments also permits
tight experimental control, which makes it feasible to measure
and study everyday functioning that can otherwise be
prohibitively difficult in real-world settings.

Taking into consideration the needs for cognitive care,
technology affordances and innovation potential, four main
requirements were identified for the bWell platform:

Requirement 1: Support for Multiple Hardware
Platforms and Different Modes of Immersion (Fully,
Semi-, or Nonimmersive)

Support for third-party hardware with varying levels of technical
maturity facilitates the planning of clinical interventions and
research in the ever-changing technical landscape of VR
hardware. In addition, different modes of immersion allow for
flexible content delivery in cases where immersive technology
is not available or where a fully immersive environment is not
well tolerated by a patient. Integrating this support also enabled
the use of a range of low-cost to high-end consumer devices for
clinical and home settings.

Requirement 2: A Suite of Customizable Tasks

This approach allows clinical partners to choose from the
available tasks and options based on the needs of a specific
patient or target clinical population (eg, pediatric and older adult
patients). Common core features required by all tasks were
standardized to enable a faster, more agile software development
process and to open up possibilities for adding customized
features. Tasks were selected to address aspects of cognition
common to a variety of mental health disorders rather than a
specific disorder. Additionally, configurable exercises permit
pairing standardized assessment with corresponding adaptive
and gamified variants for therapy, providing therapeutics that
do not stand in isolation from assessment.

JMIR Rehabil Assist Technol 2021 | vol. 8 | iss. 4 | e26629 | p. 4

Requirement 3: A Clinician-Facing UI to Control the
Task Parameters

This interface had to contain a wide range of adjustable
parameters, exposing the extensive design options afforded by
the platform. Exposed parameters would permit the clinician
to administer and prescribe interventions (dosing, duration, and
frequency) as well as facilitate their surveillance and control
for a trial.

Requirement 4: Data Logging Mechanism

Behavioral and experimental data recorded with precise timing
are required for the study of cognitive processes. To enable intra
and intersubject analysis of user response and physical
interaction, recording of movement data, user performance, and
simulation cues and events were also required.

Implementation

The implementation consisted of developing a platform enabled
by immersive technologies and translating the requirements
identified through the active co-design process (outlined above)
into hardware and software components, including the design
of the content.

bWell was developed using the Unity 3D game engine and was
implemented with multiple components (Figure 3). Tasks were
developed around a generic core that defines the flow and

interactions between different software and hardware
components. To support a variety of hardware (XR headset,
mobile device, PC), an in-house input manager was developed.
This component is an abstract layer that maps device inputs and
outputs to a functionality in the software. The clinician and the
patient interact with the platform through different interfaces
to facilitate patient-clinician interactions. When the platform is
launched, the clinician can access a nonimmersive user interface
(UI) to configure the trial settings required to customize the
intervention for the patient. The patient can interact within the
virtual environment for the selection of exercises using
immersive hardware. The content component contains the
exercises and the monitoring system. The exercises include the
virtual environment, task logic (rules and goals), instructions,
and exercise-specific interactions. When using an immersive
headset, the patient’s point of view in their head-mounted
display (HMD) is also displayed on a second screen to enable
monitoring. This is the same screen through which the clinician
can access the exercise settings. In addition, the clinician can
launch a task by clicking on the representative 2D icon in the
overlay. The final component concerns the data. Streaming data
are used in a closed loop to control the evolution of the exercises
based on user performance. Detailed data including motion, key
presses, cues, events, and patient performance are also logged
into files for post analysis.

Figure 3. bWell architecture components (Unity 3D engine): (1) in-house input or output manager for hardware, (2) comprehensive user interface for
customization of patient and clinical settings, (3) content displayed immersively to the patient or nonimmersively for clinician administration, control
and monitoring, and (4) resulting data are streamed for real-time adaptive control and automatically logged for offline analysis. AR: augmented reality;
HMD head-mounted display; VR: virtual reality; XR: extended reality.

Development Process

The research team made use of agile software development,
including feature-oriented code implementation, common code
repository, software testing, user tests, bug tracking, and
frequent software releases. Standardized user testing was
developed to solidify the integration of hardware and software
features. Individuals new to the platform were included as testers
to reinforce usability and to reveal issues that those familiar
with the system could no longer identify. Furthermore, to help
maintain the major features of each of the exercises and the core
features, unit tests developed with the integrated Unity 3D tools

were put in place to automate the process. To obtain active input
from domain experts, the agile methodology included regular
delivery of technology to early adopters to obtain iterative
feedback. This feedback informed the successive phases of
software development.

Prototype Development

The technical feasibility activities for bWell led to the
development of a prototype at a TRL-4 maturity level that has
been tested and validated in a laboratory environment (Figure
4).

JMIR Rehabil Assist Technol 2021 | vol. 8 | iss. 4 | e26629 | p. 5

Figure 4. bWell laboratory set-up with a user immersed in a virtual reality environment and the point of view displayed on an auxiliary monitoring
screen.

The prototype was designed to be administered by clinicians in
various clinical environments. Its architecture was kept flexible,
accommodating various input modalities and administration
hardware, because it was identified that each clinic had different
hardware needs depending on their patient constraints or
limitations, price, availability, and the hardware that they already
owned. Thus, the prototype was implemented as multimodal
(fully, semi-, or nonimmersive) and multiplatform (Oculus,
HTC Vive, Hololens, tablet [iOS and Android], and desktop).
Automatic detection of the connected devices is executed when
the platform is launched, making it a seamless feature for the

user, thereby facilitating the long-term goal of functioning in a
home environment with remote monitoring by a clinician.

Exercises

The exercises provided in the prototype were developed to target
cognitive domains common to multiple mental health disorders,
including attention, memory, and executive control. To promote
presence and immersion in the simulation, all exercises make
use of multisensory feedback (visual, audio, and touch). Some
exercises were designed to target a specific domain of interest,
whereas others simultaneously engage multiple cognitive
domains to be representative of everyday tasks. A total of 8
exercises were implemented (Figure 5).

Figure 5. Cognitive exercises: (Top row) states of attention (Egg), multitasking (Lab), visual working memory (Theater), relaxation (Tent); (Bottom
row) response inhibition and cognitive control (Mole), self-regulation (Butterfly), sustained attention (Stroll), visual search (Cloud).

States of Attention (Egg)

The user must first scan the environment for eggs. They are
then required to direct and hold their gaze on a located egg long
enough to make it hatch (attentional focus). Audio and visual

distractors in the environment challenge the user, and bonus
points are awarded if the user reacts to a cue while fixating
(covert attention).

JMIR Rehabil Assist Technol 2021 | vol. 8 | iss. 4 | e26629 | p. 6

Multitasking (Lab)

The user must complete 2 recipes simultaneously to investigate
their ability to accomplish a range of tasks by swapping between
them strategically or by planning the order in which they can
be performed most efficiently. This requires the user to closely
follow the recipe steps (ability to monitor) displayed on the
virtual tablet screens in front of them.

Visual Working Memory (Theater)

Inspired by matching tasks for visual and short-term memory,
the user is presented with target shapes ordered from left to
right. After a set viewing time, the targets are hidden. After a
specific time (delay recall), objects fall into view of the user,
some of which are the target and others are not (comparison
objects). The user is required to select the targets from all the
objects and place them in the order presented within a limited
time.

Response Inhibition & Cognitive Control (Mole)

A Whack-A-Mole variation is used where the user has a hammer
in each hand and has to hit cylinders that pop up in front of
them. The colors of the hammers change over time, and the
cylinders also have different colors. The user should only hit
cylinders with a hammer of the same color (go signal).

Self-regulation (Butterfly)

The user engages in motor self-regulation through an activity
that rewards self-restraint. The user is instructed to catch
butterflies with a net but must do so in a gentle fashion because
brisk movements scare them away. A motion speed indicator
is visible on the net to promote self-awareness. The user can
monitor, control, and inhibit unproductive motor responses that
may be triggered when the butterflies are near.

Sustained Attention (Stroll)

This is an immersive version of a sustained attention to response
task, a go or no-go task with infrequent no-go events to measure
user attention. The user is provided a self-avatar, taking a stroll
in a natural scene. Shapes continuously appear in front of the
user, and a button must be pressed when each new shape
appears, except when it is a green diamond.

Visual Search & Attention (Cloud)

This is an immersive version of a visual search and attention
test, in which a grid of orange and blue U shapes is displayed
in front of the user. The user must find the only blue U shape
that points upward or downward and respond with the
corresponding up or down response on their controller. Orange
shapes and blue shapes pointing left or right are distractors that
must be ignored.

Relaxation (Tent)

In relaxation and sensory exploration, the user is immersed in
scenic views and asked to look around while focusing on their
breathing. A rhythmic object is present to guide their breathing
pace. Close adherence to the rhythmic object should have a
calming effect. The user is free to explore the scene in which
they are or to select a different scene from a set of options
presented to them as pages in a book. This exercise was also
designed for eventual self-guided stress management, where
future efforts will include the integration of heart rate variability
biofeedback based on slow-paced breathing within virtual nature
scenes.

Clinician Customization and Monitoring Interfaces

The clinician-facing UI was developed to allow the exercise
parameters to be customized and for functionalities to be turned
on or off during the exercises. A scrolling menu (Figure 6)
provides access to the settings to design the variants of a given
exercise, or establish the dosing of an intervention, pairing
standardized assessment with corresponding adaptive and
gamified variants for personalized rehabilitation training. The
settings can be saved and shared, allowing multiple clinical sites
to conduct studies with standardized configurations. While a
patient participates in a bWell trial with an HMD, a white
overlay of clickable icons are available to the clinician to assist
with operating and controlling the VR experience received
(Figure 7). The icons allow the clinician to launch a specific
exercise (left panel) and to intervene if needed, such as start or
end the exercise, recenter the user in the immersive environment,
or pause the session (bottom panel).

JMIR Rehabil Assist Technol 2021 | vol. 8 | iss. 4 | e26629 | p. 7

Figure 6. Clinician-facing user interface with clinical exercise settings interface under Clinical tab.

Figure 7. Clinician user interface 2D icons: (1) exercise selection, (2) real-time intervention, and (3) settings user interface menu access.

Task Parameters

bWell was designed to serve as a toolkit; so, task parameters
were designed to be highly configurable. Several personalization
elements were included to promote a sense of embodiment. The
self-avatar can be personalized with elements such as gender,
skin color, height, and dominant hand that can be modified in
a patient settings tab added to the clinician-facing UI. bWell’s
design also considers potential physical limitations of users,

giving them the option to play while standing or sitting. The
patient settings can also be used to adjust the height of certain
elements inside an exercise if the auto-adjusting features are
insufficient. In addition, the patient VR interactions in bWell
use multiple input types, such as gaze direction, teleportation,
and grabbing or hitting objects, to accommodate participants
with conditions that limit dexterous hand movements.

Task difficulty parameters were configured to allow for
personalized assessments and rehabilitation plans. Difficulty

JMIR Rehabil Assist Technol 2021 | vol. 8 | iss. 4 | e26629 | p. 8

levels can be set at fixed levels by the clinician, ensuring trial
reproducibility for comparison with past performance or across
participants, or set to use an adaptive algorithm configured to
achieve an 80% success rate. Intra and intersession difficulty
progression settings are also available.

All task parameters are logged using a completely automated
logging system to facilitate offline analysis. In addition to
logging exercise settings, event orders, and difficulty levels,
the system records an array of timestamped, synchronized data,
including motion tracking, exercise events, cues presented to
the user, and performance measures. The logs, anonymized for
confidentiality, are output as JSON and CSV files, which are
compatible with standard data analysis software.

Other features were included to add variety to gameplay and to
promote the repetition of tasks typically required in cognitive
rehabilitation protocols. Gamification elements, such as rewards
and animations, were integrated to promote adherence and
engagement and to provide feedback on performance. Visual
cues, audio cues, and sometimes distracting elements were also
incorporated. In certain exercises, the displayed virtual
environment can be explored with a teleportation feature, or the
user can select between different virtual environments.

Intervention Modes

bWell is designed to operate in three modes: (1) tutorial, (2)
assessment, and (3) rehabilitation. Each mode is designed to
address a specific set of clinical requirements determined
through early adopter feedback.

Tutorial Mode

In the tutorial mode, participants engaged in structured learning
of the required actions for each task. This was implemented to
ensure that participants began assessment and rehabilitation
exercises with comparable levels of familiarity with the actions
required to complete the exercises, even if they had different
baseline levels of familiarity with XR. During the tutorial for
each exercise, a standardized set of instructions is presented in
writing and verbally by a humanoid avatar. If an action was not
executed after a specified time interval, a revised version of the
instructions was presented to increase the likelihood that
participants properly understood what was required. The
humanoid avatar also provided verbal feedback about successes
and failures throughout the tutorial (Figure 8, left). The only
way to progress through the tutorial is by successfully executing
the specific required actions, at which point the participant can
continue engaging in free practice without any specified goal.
The clinician can then transition from the tutorial mode to the
assessment or rehabilitation mode through the clinician-facing
UI.

Figure 8. bWell Mole exercise as an example of modes and configurable parameters. The left image shows the tutorial mode with the score that must
be achieved before the exercise can begin. The humanoid avatar provides instructions and verbal feedback on successes and failures. The center image
shows the mole exercise in progress at a fixed, low difficulty level (4 cylinders) without any feedback on successes and failures. The right image shows
the mole exercise in progress with adaptive difficulty leveling and a score visually displayed. This configuration aims for gamified rehabilitation.

Assessment Mode

In the assessment mode, participants completed the exercise
with events always occurring in the same order and with the
same timing (ie, based on a fixed randomization seed) and with
fixed difficulty levels [38] (Figure 8, center). The seed number
that determines the order and timing of events can be modified
by the clinician such that assessments can be pseudorandomized
across sessions or participants. The clinician configures the
settings for each difficulty level to best meet their assessment
needs. Because the presentation to each user is consistent, it is
possible to assess user performance against established results
or in comparison to others in the same study. For example,
commission errors (incorrect hits) are of particular interest when
investigating cognitive control.

Rehabilitation Mode

In the rehabilitation mode, the emphasis is on parameters that
promote patient adherence by increasing engagement and
providing feedback on performance. Adaptive algorithms adjust
current level of difficulty based on performance to ensure that
it is never too easy (boring) or too hard (demoralizing) for the
user [39]. For enhanced motivation, real-time feedback is
provided with level or score changes as well as success and
error indications (Figure 8, right). Finally, in the rehabilitation
mode, the series of events in each session is randomized to avoid
redundancy. Therefore, even if the progress is reset between
sessions, a patient should never see the exact same series of
events twice.

JMIR Rehabil Assist Technol 2021 | vol. 8 | iss. 4 | e26629 | p. 9

Acceptability Study Results

The authors conducted 2 preliminary acceptability studies with
healthy participants and have described them in previous reports
[40,41]. These studies showed that using immersive VR for
clinical applications is not only technically feasible but also
well tolerated and has advantages over traditional 2D
equivalents. The first study showed that subjective reports of
engagement when performing a task in bWell (an immersive
environment) were greater than those when performing the same
task on a tablet (a nonimmersive environment) [40]. The second
study showed that two types of passive displacement, linear and
sinusoidal walking vection, did not increase subjective reports
of cybersickness during a visual attention task [41].

The results of these preliminary studies demonstrate the
acceptability of the bWell platform. The careful attention taken
during the design regarding cybersickness has shown successful
administration even in participants who reported being highly
susceptible to motion sickness. bWell tasks in immersive VR,
both in static scenes and those involving more complex user
motion, were well tolerated and engaging for healthy participants
and provided the required support for testing in clinical
populations as the next steps. In addition, as it was determined
that engagement is not the same for immersive versus
nonimmersive delivery of the exercises, the fully semi-, or

nonimmersive modes may result in different user performances.
As such, and in particular for cognitive assessment, comparisons
of task results should be performed within a given mode of
immersion.

Although bWell has shown general acceptability and tolerability,
a small number of users experienced mild cybersickness. The
Biomedical Data Intelligence team at the NRC investigated the
use of an avatar within the bWell environment to monitor user
discomfort. The dialog agent provides instantaneous and
interactive assistance to users in the form of personalized advice
on symptom relief [42]. The results show promise for the
development of virtual agents for cognitive self-care and will
be further explored for use within bWell.

Cognitive Care Network

The prototype is currently being taken beyond the laboratory
and into clinical settings. To provide domain-specific expertise
and clinical validation, a CCN was assembled consisting of 4
institutions across Canada and 1 in Japan (Figure 9). They have
expertise in addiction, schizophrenia, memory and mild
cognitive impairment in older adults, executive functioning in
pediatric populations and major depressive disorders with
backgrounds in neuropsychology, psychiatry, and clinical
psychology.

Figure 9. Cognitive Care Network (CCN) sites. The CCN includes 5 clinical partners at 4 sites across Canada (CAMH, IUGM, SickKids, and UBC)
and 1 site in Japan (ATR). Sites cover a broad range of expertise and are critical for the iterative development of bWell.

Evaluation of bWell by clinicians began in 2019 to provide
domain-specific input throughout the bWell development
process. bWell has thus far been installed at 4 locations, and
ongoing feedback from early testing at these installations has
been incorporated in iterative improvements. Adaptations of
bWell exercises to target clinical populations have begun. These
activities are structured according to the Birckhead et al VR
trial methodology [43], including co-design of content with
patients and early studies (feasibility, acceptability, tolerability,
and initial clinical efficacy), as well as randomized controlled

trials investigating the outcomes of the use of bWell. As these
activities are currently underway, they are beyond the scope of
this paper.

Discussion

Principal Findings

The use of digital solutions has the potential to address the
current gap in mental health care resources. To this end, digital
therapeutics have entered the pharmaceutical landscape [44].

JMIR Rehabil Assist Technol 2021 | vol. 8 | iss. 4 | e26629 | p. 10

Web-based and mobile apps can improve the accessibility and
affordability of care and can help keep patients motivated and
engaged during interventions. To maximize the latter value,
digital solutions have taken creative approaches, using
game-based therapy or leveraging technology to create more
immersive experiences [45]. XR platforms on the market
currently include mental health care for behavioral health
(BehaVR), autism and developmental delay screening (Cognoa),
and stress management (Healium). Although XR solutions are
currently in the stages of demonstrating evidence on the benefits
of use, some mobile-based digital therapeutics have reached
regulatory approval [46]. For example, Pear Therapeutics has
received authorization from the US Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) for prescription-based digital therapeutics
for substance abuse disorders and chronic insomnia. Moreover,
in 2020 the FDA permitted the marketing of the first game-based
digital therapeutic by Akili Interactive to improve attention
function in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder
[47,48].

A primary driver for the use of VR technology is its capacity
for sensory immersion with tight experimental control, making
it feasible to test or study cognitive and sensory-motor
functioning that is typically prohibitive in real world settings
because of the unpredictable and uncontrolled events that occur
in everyday life. Immersive and engaging tasks were selected
in bWell to encourage meaningful user interactions. The
simulated scenes were also designed to be multisensorial and
interactive to permit naturalistic movement, increasing the
likelihood that skills learned within VR would be transferable
to real life.

Another driver for the use of simulation technologies is the
ability to capture rich behavioral data simultaneously. As users
interact in virtual environments, all activities can be recorded
for analysis. bWell was implemented with two data
workflows—one with data streaming for real-time adaptive
exercises and the other with data logging for offline analysis.
In bWell, streaming data are used in a closed loop to adapt the
exercises in real time, targeting patient-specific rehabilitation.
Currently, data on user performance are used as input for
adaptive algorithms that adjust the difficulty levels of the
exercise accordingly. The integration of wearable, physiological
sensors in XR scenes is also currently in progress to enable
biofeedback. In this case, features derived in real time from
sensor data are used as input to adapt the exercises. As part of
the collaboration with the Advanced Telecommunications
Research Institute from the CCN, new exercises are being
developed 
for 
cognitive 
training 
using 
an
electroencephalography-based brain-machine interface to control
a virtual third arm [49]. This work has broad applicability as it
provides a novel form of multitasking training for elderly users
to cognitive load training in operational environments.

In bWell, data are also currently being logged for offline
analysis, with information including motion, key presses, VR
cues, events, and patient performance. In this workflow, the
goal is to derive features from sensor data that cannot be
obtained from real-time processing. For example, classification
of user states can be obtained with predictive models built using
techniques performed offline, such as cognitive modeling and

machine learning. With user state obtained from quantitative
measures, such as user reaction to an increase in exercise
difficulty or adverse response, VR assessments coupled with
physiological sensors can provide more objective measures of
individual function than a traditional self-report, which is known
to be an unreliable index of functional outcomes [50]. By
collecting behavioral and physiological responses during
carefully designed VR interventions, the long-term vision is to
create 
closed-loop 
adaptive 
digital 
interventions 
for
characterizing and treating cognitive deficits, as well as enabling
treatment providers to predict real-world clinical outcomes.

During the development of the platform, two lessons were
learned. First, design with a generic core and providing users
with customizable options is a valuable approach for developing
applications for a variety of treatment providers. To accomplish
this, the bWell platform was designed to target specific cognitive
domains rather than specific pathologies. Clinicians select
exercises from the available ones to address the needs of a
particular patient. This choice provides an opportunity to address
symptoms rather than disorders. The treatment provider can
further customize individual exercises by choosing from the
configurable settings, such as enabling 1 of the 3 basic modes
(tutorial, assessment, and rehabilitation) or turning specific
functionalities on or off. In the study of cognitive functioning,
this means that one is able to design a paradigm specific to a
research question by choosing the virtual environment (eg,
game-based or real-world setting), the type of experimental
stimuli (eg, target, distractors, cueing, and feedback), the time
and type of presentation (multisensorial or not), and the type of
user response (eg, aim to minimize errors or perform as quickly
as possible).

Second, avoiding dependence on specific hardware is
advantageous when developing with XR. The implementation
in bWell was hardware agnostic, multimodal, and multiplatform,
accommodating the range of specifications coming from
different potential clinical applications and increasing its staying
power in the rapidly changing technological landscape. The
work done on bWell focused on the use case where clinicians
administer the intervention. However, the hardware agnostic
core of the platform considers its eventual use at home with
remote monitoring by clinicians. bWell’s core was also designed
to accommodate the evolution of commercially available HMDs.
HMDs have come a long way, from unwieldy, tethered devices
to performant and comfortable standalone units aimed at the
mass market. bWell’s core also allows for other modes of
content delivery, such as AR or mobile, when immersive VR
is not suitable. For instance, Google AR glasses have shown to
be promising for teaching children on the autism spectrum to
recognize emotions in real time [51]. Given that a headset
obscures facial expressions, the use of VR is not suitable in this
context. The use of bWell as a mobile app might also facilitate
pervasive use at home, given the ubiquity of smartphones.
Nonimmersive XR may also provide an option for those
susceptible to cybersickness in immersive environments. Thus,
further advancement of bWell is planned in these directions.

JMIR Rehabil Assist Technol 2021 | vol. 8 | iss. 4 | e26629 | p. 11

Conclusions

bWell, developed by the NRC, is an immersive and interactive
cognitive care platform that delivers assessment and therapeutic
tasks as a multisensorial experience (visual, auditory, and touch).
The technology has attained the maturity level of prototype
implementation with preliminary validation carried out in

laboratory settings. A CCN of early adopters was formed to
evaluate the system and access domain-specific perspectives.
Within this network, 4 installations of bWell prototypes have
been completed, and the next steps have begun to adapt the
system and to co-design content targeting specific clinical
populations. In addition, we plan to perform the validation
required for the eventual adoption of bWell as a clinical tool.

Conflicts of Interest

None declared.