MILITARY MEDICINE, 188, S6:614, 2023

Usability Enhancements to a Prototype Clinical Decision Support 
System for Combat Medics

James C. Gaudaen, MA; Amy Papadopoulos, DSc; Tee Dockery, MBA; Carl Manemeit, MA
 

ABSTRACT 
Introduction:
A Clinical Decision Support System that provides just-in-time medical guidance at the point of injury is being developed. 
To develop a user interface, a user-centered design approach was taken.

Materials and Methods:
To evaluate the system, personas of the users were created, a comparative analysis of the system against the Tactical 
Combat Casualty Care Card and Battlefield Assisted Trauma Distributed Observation Kit was completed, and user testing 
was performed.

Results:
Many design recommendations were gathered from the user-centered design approach including replacing buttons with 
a homunculus, replacing prompts with a tree and node system, and allowing more user freedom in working with the 
system.

Conclusions:
Through multiple different evaluations, design recommendations for a clinical decision support system were imple-
mented in an iterative process. More iterations and more formalized user testing are planned to maximize the usability 
of the system.
 

Future multidomain operations with peer or near-peer ene-
mies are expected to bring unique challenges to the realm 
of military medicine. Such challenges include an increase in 
mass casualty events, resource limitations, disrupted commu-
nications, and delayed evacuation.1 These challenges require 
the enterprise to provide tools that support just-in-time medi-
cal guidance for soldiers who will be required to operate above 
their training or comfort level at the point of need. The current 
tools available are static documents (PDFs) including clini-
cal practice guidelines (CPGs) and individual critical task lists 
(ICTLs). These are valuable tools but are not easy to refer to 
when a soldier is overwhelmed with numbers or severity of 
causalities.

A system using artificial intelligence (AI) to provide deci-
sion support could deliver just-in-time medical guidance 
needed to reduce cognitive burden and be beneficial in future 
combat casualty care. The system could take information pro-
vided by a medic, or another user, and offer suggestions or 
instructions on how best to care for the casualty. According 
to Wong et al. (2020), this kind of decision support would be 
most beneficial in far forward echelons of care such as point 

 
Telemedicine and Advanced Technology Research Center, Ft Detrick, 
MD 21702, USA

This effort was previously presented as a poster at the 2022 Military 
Health System Research Symposium (MHSRS) in Kissimmee, FL. Abstract 
Number: MHSRS-22-07333.

doi:https://doi.org/10.1093/milmed/usad279

© The Association of Military Surgeons of the United States 
2023. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: journals.
permissions@oup.com.

of injury (POI) or during prolonged casualty care (PCC).2 
Care at POI can be described as immediate first aid/buddy 
aid and can be carried out by both medical (combat medic) 
and nonmedical personnel (service members with only com-
bat lifesaver training).3 PCC is defined as care required in an 
austere environment with delayed or denied evacuation.4

The Telemedicine and Advanced Technology Research 
Center (TATRC) has started the development of a Clinical 
Decision Support System for combat medics (Medic CDSS) 
that aims to provide just-in-time guidance. This system lever-
ages CPGs, Tactical Combat Casualty Care (TCCC) Guide-
lines, and ICTLs as the foundation to the algorithm and incor-
porates medical observations and patient monitoring data to 
provide decision support to the user at POI/PCC. The project 
began by having Subject Matter Experts (SMEs) convert the 
Tactical Field Care section of the TCCC guidelines into rules 
that could be used by an advanced rules-based engine. A rules 
engine, also referred to as an inference engine, is software 
designed to take incoming information or facts and determine 
if those facts would cause any “rules” to fire. Rules can be 
considered IF-THEN statements, for example, IF the casualty 
has an amputation, THEN put on a tourniquet.

Once the rules engine was created, an interface was needed 
for testing. The initial scope of the project was to integrate 
with pre-existing electronic documentation systems such as 
the Air Force Research Laboratory’s Battlefield Assisted 
Trauma Distributed Observation Kit (BATDOK).5 Therefore, 
only a rudimentary interface for testing the rules was created. 
As development proceeded, it became apparent that a stan-
dalone interface was needed for the system. The development 

614

of this interface began by converting the initial interface, 
designed for developers to test the system, into one usable 
by a real end user. The software will be fielded on a medic or 
corpsman’s end user device, i.e., the U.S. Nett Warrior Pro-
gram and Android Tactical Assault Kit targeted Android cell 
phone or tablet, so development targeted these devices.

The development of this interface utilized a user-centered 
design (UCD) process. The UCD process consists of four 
stages: defining the context of use, specifying user require-
ments, developing a prototype, and evaluating the prototype 
against requirements.6 Context of use is described as identify-
ing the characteristics of the user groups, the goals and tasks 
of the users, and the environment of the system. Specifying 
user requirements involves identifying user needs and speci-
fying other requirements of the system.7 The purpose of this 
paper is to describe the process taken to increase the usabil-
ity and user experience (UX) of a user interface (UI) that was 
initially used to test a prototype Medic CDSS.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Development of the UI used a UCD process.6 The context of 
use was set before this phase of the project and was defined 
as an application for use at the POI or during PCC designed 
to extend the ability of the user when caring for combat casu-
alties. The constraints associated with POI and PCC include 
limited resources, unknown evacuation times, and potentially 
a reduced knowledge base.3,4 The user requirements were 
identified through the development of personas described 
later. Implementation of a prototype has begun and is ongo-
ing. Design solutions were iteratively developed based on two 
types of usability tests: comparative analysis and user testing.

Personal Development
User requirements for the CDSS were identified by creating 
personas reflective of anticipated types of users for the tool. 
Personas are hypothetical users that are developed, so a team 
has a conceptual view for whom they are designing a sys-
tem. While a persona is not a real person, they help define 
behavioral patterns, thought processes, and skill level of a user 
group. Personas are also useful in identifying factors that may 
motivate a user to use/continue to use a system or factors that 
may cause a user to stop using a system.8

The personas used in this analysis included a Novice User 
and an Expert User, both developed from medical training 
curriculum criteria9,10 and through unstructured interviews of 
combat medic SMEs assigned to the project. These informal 
interviews were conducted by one researcher where SMEs 
were asked, individually, about how and when they would use 
the system, as well as about who would benefit from such a 
system. Multiple personas can be made for one system. When 
making changes to the prototype Medic CDSS, all personas 
needed to be considered and have methods implemented to 
aid each user type.

Comparative Analysis
To better understand the UX shortcomings of the Medic 
CDSS, a comparative analysis was used. A comparative analy-
sis takes pre-existing systems that are deemed similar enough 
to the prototype system and assesses how well those systems 
meet the context of use and user requirements. The prototype 
system was also assessed in this manner. Through this analy-
sis, design recommendations for the prototype system can be 
discovered based on how the other systems are used. The crite-
ria used for the comparative analysis are heuristics, or general 
rules of thumb, that a system needs to adhere to. The systems 
were compared on the ability to receive input about a casu-
alty’s injuries and provide actionable decision support based 
on that information. The researchers based their comparison 
criteria on a literature search of decision support tools and 
the Nielsen Norman (NN) Group’s 10 Heuristics for Interface 
Design.11

Two systems were selected for comparison with the Medic 
CDSS. The Tactical Combat Casualty Care Card (TCCC 
Card), a card developed for documenting care during TCCC, 
was selected since it is the current documentation system in 
use by the Army.12 BATDOK (version v4.0-dev.8) was cho-
sen because the original plans for the Medic CDSS were to 
integrate with and use the UX provided by that system.5 A 
comparative analysis of BATDOK, the TCCC Card, and the 
Medic CDSS was conducted to look at how well each system 
met the selected criteria.

The literature search was performed to get a holistic under-
standing of decision support tools. It targeted several charac-
teristics of these tools such as graphical UIs, workflow, user 
acceptance, system monitoring, and compatibility with other 
systems and design needs. For this analysis, the researchers 
focused on the design needs.

The NN group design heuristics are rules of thumb that 
were developed as basic principles around which all inter-
faces should be designed.11 Of those 10 heuristics, SMEs 
determined that three of the heuristics (match between system 
and real world, recognition rather than recall, and consistency 
and standards) were the most important heuristics to compare 
across systems.

1. Match between the system and the real world: The sys-
tem needs to follow real-world conventions. Information 
should be presented in a natural and logical order.
2. Recognition rather than recall: The user should not have to 
remember how to do things, and required actions should be 
intuitive. Instructions or intentions should be visible and 
easily retrievable.
3. Consistency and standards: Actions or things should have 
the same meaning, functionality, or appearance across the 
system.

In addition to the NN group design heuristics, we chose to 
also compare the system’s ability to deliver decision support 
advice at the time of need, a valuable criterion for usability of 
a decision support tool.13

615

For the comparative analysis, one researcher used each of 
the tools separately to perform the two outlined tasks, doc-
ument care, and provide actionable decision support. While 
using the system to perform the tasks, the researcher assessed 
how well the systems conformed to the four outlined heuris-
tics. When rating systems, a comparative analysis is rated 
through a dichotomous decision of “does conform to this 
heuristic” and “does not conform to this heuristic.” These are 
not assessed for statistical significance, but rather to highlight 
design areas to focus on.

User Testing
To make the Medic CDSS UI match the user’s needs more 
closely, iterative design modifications were developed starting 
with low-fidelity paper prototypes and progressing through 
higher-fidelity prototypes. Design modifications were deter-
mined by the development team using the system and noting 
bugs or any areas that needed improvement. The multidisci-
plinary team consisted of members who were novices (soft-
ware engineers, AI/machine learning SMEs, developers, and a 
human factors engineer) and Experts (Combat Medic SMEs). 
The team members individually used the device to input casu-
alties and injuries. If they experienced a bug or glitch in the 
system, they documented the path through the system that led 
to the bug. If another team member could replicate that bug, 
the team determined if it was an issue with the interface or pro-
graming issue. If it was programing issue, the bug was sent to 
the developers to fix. If it was an interface issue, the bug was 
sent to the human factors engineer to address.

Updated outlines of the proposed UI, generally referred to 
as wireframes, addressing the bugs and improvements were 
developed using the prototyping software Justinmind14 (ver-
sion 9.8). The wireframes were coded into a new Android 
Application Package that was retested for bugs or potential 
enhancements. As the effort involved only nonsystematically 
securing feedback from a few SMEs, the approval from an 
institutional review board was not required.

RESULTS

Personal Development
Through unstructured interviews and review of training cur-
ricula, two user types were identified. The SMEs believed that 
while they would only need the system for documentation or 
guidance outside their training, individuals with less training 
would benefit from detailed guidance when faced with emer-
gency scenarios. Their personas were mostly defined by their 
skill level with medicine and were called Expert User and 
Novice User.

The Novice User has been trained to, at most, perform 
basic life-saving procedures such as tourniquet application, 
placement of an airway, and needle decompression of the 
chest or is a combat medic with little experience who has been 
taught how to do an intervention but never performed it in a 
real-world situation. If the Novice is using this application, the 

combat medic is not available and the Novice is expected to 
perform care on a casualty with traumatic injuries. The Novice 
User will likely use the device to provide guidance about each 
step of care. Motivating factors for the Novice when decid-
ing to use or continue using this system are ease of use, the 
ability to understand the instructions given by the system for 
interventions, and the ability to understand and easily answer 
the questions asked by the system before making suggestions. 
Factors that would lead to a Novice ceasing use of the system 
would be the need for overly complex interactions with the 
system.

The Expert User is a fully trained and experienced medic 
who understands TCCC and can execute the medical pro-
cedures correctly. The Expert User will likely be inputting 
the treatment and injuries of the casualty after initial care is 
completed. The system would function as a way to confirm 
that procedures were performed properly and set alarms to 
reassess injuries and interventions. The Expert’s motivating 
factors for using the CDSS are the ability to quickly document 
the casualty’s injuries and interventions, the ability to use the 
available timers and reminders for reassessment, and the guid-
ance available if PCC is required. Factors that will lead to the 
Expert not using the system include, like the Novice, the need 
for overly complex interactions with the system. Expert Users 
will also stop using the application if the questions and inter-
ventions are presented in a manner that seems patronizing, 
time-consuming, or cumbersome.

Comparative Analysis
Table I shows the results of the comparative analysis between 
the TCCC Card, BATDOK, and the Medic CDSS. 

Both TCCC Card and BATDOK had a homunculus as the 
predominant feature on the main or front page of the system, 
making it easier to document care, since the exact location 
of an injury could be marked, resulting in a strong match 
between the system and the real world. However, neither 
system provided decision support.

The original prototype system, on the other hand, pro-
vided decision support but was found to require extensive 
manual input. Several fields required text to be typed. There 

TABLE I. Comparative Analysis

BATDOK

TCCC 
Card
CDSS

Recognition rather than recall
Yes
Yes
No
Match between system and real 
world

Yes
Yes
No

Consistency and standards
Yes
Yes
No
System offered decisions at the 
same time the medic is making 
the decision

No
No
Yes

Abbreviations: BATDOK, Battlefield Assisted Trauma Distributed Observa-
tion Kit; CDSS, Clinical Decision Support System; TCCC, Tactical Combat 
Casualty Care.

616

FIGURE 1. CDSS v1 injury screen. 

was no use of a homunculus or any pictorial representation 
of the casualty present in the system. Instead, the ability to 
select specific injuries, treatments, or conditions relied on 
extensive drop-down menus that were not always intuitively 
sorted (Fig. 1). Additionally, the Medic CDSS forced users 
to interact with the system because notifications took con-
trol of the screen blocking further input or information until 
acknowledged (Fig. 2), assumed that all users had the same 
skill set, and did not provide details at the level needed for a 
Novice User.

When providing decision support, the prototype system 
required very linear interactions. If the system received an 
input, rules were triggered that brought up a prompt. That 
prompt, however, took control of the entire screen, mean-
ing that the user had to answer the prompt before any other 
action could take place in the system. Thus, the only method 
of interacting with the system was to input something into the 
system, read the prompt, perform the specified action on the 
casualty, click on a button to indicate that the prompt action 
was performed, and then move on to the next prompt. This 
linear interaction is inconsistent with care pathways of the 
personas. Particularly, the Expert User will perform multi-
ple procedures on a casualty before starting to document the 
care given. Because of this analysis, two design enhancements 
of the Medic CDSS were identified. The first enhancement 
was to replace the dropdowns and buttons representing the 
location of injury with a homunculus, which will aid in match-
ing the system to the real world. The other enhancement 

was replacing text fields with dynamic buttons that repre-
sent common injuries and interventions, which will aid in 
the recognition of the procedure and provide consistency 
throughout.

User Testing
After testing, the first round of changes started with removal 
of the prompts that overtook the screen. This modification 
allowed the user to interact with the system in the order they 
desired and not be forced down a certain path. The deci-
sion support portion was transformed into a branching tree 
containing questions the system needs the answer to before 
suggesting an intervention. Each question had a check and an 
“X” available allowing the user to respond quickly or a drop-
down menu available for multiple choice questions. Next 
to each intervention suggestion (node), there were a check 
and an “X” available allowing the user to accept or reject 
the specific support the system suggested. Additionally, each 
intervention node was expandable to provide more details. All 
questions and prompts that the system has generated from 
the previous inputs are now present. The user can respond 
to each prompt in any order, and the system can recognize 
where the user is in the care process. This provides flexibil-
ity in the system to support both user types. Not forcing the 
user down a certain path but instead presenting them with the 
necessary information allows the user the freedom to perform 
their duties as they were taught or in the manner which they 
are most comfortable.

617

FIGURE 2. CDSS v1 prompt. 

FIGURE 3. CDSS current version. 

Through testing of the tree and node system, the initial 
font was found to be too small for most users. This was 
remedied by increasing the size of the font and then having 
the highest priority suggestion appear larger than the other 
suggestions. The interface sorts the suggested treatments by 
their order of necessity. This order was determined through 

TCCC guidelines. The guidelines dictate that providers treat a 
casualty’s injuries based on the Massive hemorrhage, Airway, 
Respirations, Circulation, Hypothermia (MARCH) Algo-
rithm. This pneumonic device outlines that providers address 
injuries in the order of Massive Hemorrhage, Airway, Respi-
rations, Circulation, and Hypothermia.10 Branches displayed 

618

at the top of the support screen are the most urgent. The 
level of urgency is also color coordinated in a “stop light”
color scheme (Fig. 3).

The check and “X” buttons were initially next to each other 
on the right side of the nodes, resulting in the occasional selec-
tion of the wrong button. Therefore, the two buttons were 
separated with the “X” being on the left side of the suggestion 
or question and the check being on the right side. This idea fits 
the schema of “swiping right or left” as is performed in some 
social media applications.

The tree and node selection process initially grouped all 
questions and suggestions together. This caused some users 
to feel overwhelmed by the amount of information. The 
questions and suggestions were than parsed out into tabs 
representing each portion of the MARCH algorithm that all 
service members are trained to understand.10 This reduced 
the number of interventions and questions that the user sees 
at once and therefore is expected to reduce the cognitive 
load (Fig. 3).

DISCUSSION

Limitations
No formalized user testing was performed for this project. 
Much of the testing was not performed by participants who 
perfectly match the personas of the system. There were also 
relatively few users of the system. While typical usability 
studies use a relatively small number of users, each iteration of 
the prototype is testing on different participants. This system 
was assessed by the same SMEs every time a new prototype 
was developed. More participants using the system in a more 
formalized testing are required for the project.

Table-top simulations were the primary method of user 
testing for this system. No care was being provided while 
simultaneously using this system. By inserting this prototype 
into more realistic simulations, more enhancements will be 
identified.

The SMEs interviewed during the persona development 
were members of the team developing this prototype system. 
These biases could have led to very broad definitions of the 
user types. Moving forward, thorough interviews with users 
will be required to better identify the user groups.

Conclusion
The UCD process provided insights for necessary enhance-
ments to the prototype Medic CDSS with the aim of making 
a medical tool that is more useful for the Warfighter. Continu-
ing efforts to develop clinical decision support systems for far 
forward care is necessary to enhance the capabilities of the 
military medical system.1 By ensuring that medical knowl-
edge is present for any skill level at the point of need, the 
prehospital casualty care becomes more adaptive by allow-
ing care to be given even if medically trained personnel are 
not available. Also, with all the medical information stored 
locally, the Medic CDSS will continue to even work in denied, 

degraded, intermittent, or latent radio network bandwidth 
environments.

Through the use of personas, the Medic CDSS team was 
better able to understand the types of users who will be using 
this tool. This centralized view of the users allowed the team 
to implement changes based on those users’ gaps and needs. 
Due to the comparative analysis, the study team was able to 
identify techniques to aid the users that the initial concept for 
Medic CDSS did not include. Through user testing of the sys-
tem, the ideas that came out of the persona development and 
comparative analysis were able to be refined and optimized for 
the user. While the Medic CDSS now has increased usability 
and a better UX, many more iterations are expected.

Next Steps
Future enhancements will focus on the addition of passive 
documentation and automated data entry. This will allow the 
provider to focus their attention on the casualty and reduce the 
number of inputs a user will have to make, while still provid-
ing the necessary facts to the rules engine. The rules engine 
will also expand the knowledge base beyond TCCC. The sys-
tem is currently focused on POI care, and its expansion to 
PCC is needed. Other care scenarios that could be added in 
the future are sick call and disease/nonbattle injuries.

SUPPLEMENT SPONSORSHIP
This article appears as part of the supplement “Proceedings of the 2022 
Military Health System Research Symposium,” sponsored by the Assistant 
Secretary of Defense for Health Affairs.