Implementing a Hospital Call Center Service for
Mental Health in Uganda: A Qualitative Formative

Study

 Johnblack K Kabukye, Rosemary Namagembe, Juliet Nakku, Vincent Kiberu,

Marie Sjölinder, Susanne Nilsson, Caroline Wamala-Larsson

Submitted to: JMIR Human Factors

on: October 25, 2023

Disclaimer: © The authors. All rights reserved. This is a privileged document currently under peer-review/community
review. Authors have provided JMIR Publications with an exclusive license to publish this preprint on it's website for
review purposes only. While the final peer-reviewed paper may be licensed under a CC BY license on publication, at this
stage authors and publisher expressively prohibit redistribution of this draft paper other than for review purposes.

Table of Contents

Original Manuscript ....................................................................................................................................................................... 5
Supplementary Files ..................................................................................................................................................................... 28

Figures ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 29

Figure 1 ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 30
Figure 2 ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 31
Multimedia Appendixes ................................................................................................................................................................. 32

Multimedia Appendix 1 .................................................................................................................................................................. 33

Implementing a Hospital Call Center Service for Mental Health in Uganda:
A Qualitative Formative Study

Johnblack K Kabukye1, 2 MBChB, MSc, PhD; Rosemary Namagembe3 BSN; Juliet Nakku4 MBChB, MMed; Vincent
Kiberu5 PhD; Marie Sjölinder6 PhD; Susanne Nilsson7 PhD; Caroline Wamala-Larsson1 PhD

1SPIDER - The Swedish Program for ICT in Developing Regions Department of Computer and Systems Sciences Stockholm University
Stockholm SE
2Uganda Cancer Institute Kampala UG
3Hutchinson Centre Research Institute of Uganda Uganda Cancer Institute Kampala UG
4Butabika National Referral and Teaching Mental Hospital Kampala UG
5School of Public Health Makerere University Kampala UG
6RISE - Research Institutes of Sweden Kista SE
7Unit for Integrated Product Development and Design Department of Machine Design KTH Royal Institute of Technology Stockholm SE

Johnblack K Kabukye MBChB, MSc, PhD
SPIDER - The Swedish Program for ICT in Developing Regions
Department of Computer and Systems Sciences
Stockholm University
Borgarfjordsgatan 12 (NOD Building)
PO Box 7003 Kista
Stockholm
SE

Abstract

Background: Mental health conditions are a significant public health problem globally, responsible for over 8 million deaths per
year. They also lead to lost productivity, exacerbate physical illness, and people with mental health problems suffer stigma and
human rights violations. Uganda, like many low- and middle-income countries (LMICs), faces a massive treatment gap for
mental health conditions, and numerous sociocultural challenges exacerbate the burden of mental health conditions.

Objective: To describe the development and formative evaluation of a digital health intervention for improving access to mental
healthcare in Uganda.

Methods: This was a qualitative study employing principles of user-centered design and design science research. Stakeholders,
including patients, caregivers, mental healthcare providers, and implementation experts (N=65), participated in focus group
discussions in which we explored participants’ experience of mental illness and mental healthcare, experience with digital
interventions, and opinions about a proposed digital mental health service. Data was analyzed using the consolidated framework
for implementation research to derive requirements for the digital solution, which was iteratively co-created with users.

Results: Several challenges were identified, including a severe shortage of mental health facilities, unmet mental health
information needs, heavy burden of caregiving, financial challenges, stigma, and negative beliefs related to mental health.
Participants’ enthusiasm about digital solutions as feasible, acceptable and convenient for accessing mental health services was
also revealed, along with recommendations to make the service user-friendly, affordable, available 24/7, and to ensure
anonymity. A hospital call center service was developed to provide mental health information and advice in two languages
through interactive voice response and live calls with healthcare professionals and peer support workers (recovering patients).
Early implementation results indicate positive user feedback, with callers appreciating the inclusion of peer support workers who
share their personal recovery journeys. However, some recommendations from participants (e.g., adding video calls options)
could not be accommodated due to resource limitations or technical feasibility, and it is not possible to address individualized
clinical questions such as prescriptions.

Conclusions: This study demonstrates a systematic and theory-driven approach for developing contextually appropriate digital
solutions for improving mental healthcare in Uganda and similar contexts. The positive reception of the implemented service
underscores its potential impact. Future research should address the identified limitations, and evaluate clinical outcomes of long-

term adoption.

(JMIR Preprints 25/10/2023:53976)
DOI: https://doi.org/10.2196/preprints.53976

Preprint Settings

1) Would you like to publish your submitted manuscript as preprint?

Please make my preprint PDF available to anyone at any time (recommended).
Please make my preprint PDF available only to logged-in users; I understand that my title and abstract will remain visible to all users.
Only make the preprint title and abstract visible.
No, I do not wish to publish my submitted manuscript as a preprint.
2) If accepted for publication in a JMIR journal, would you like the PDF to be visible to the public?

Yes, please make my accepted manuscript PDF available to anyone at any time (Recommended). 
Yes, but please make my accepted manuscript PDF available only to logged-in users; I understand that the title and abstract will remain v
Yes, but only make the title and abstract visible (see Important note, above). I understand that if I later pay to participate in  <a href="http

Original Manuscript

Implementing a Hospital Call Center Service for Mental Health in Uganda: A Qualitative Formative
Study

Johnblack K. Kabukye, Rosemary Namagembe, Juliet Nakku, Vincent Kiberu, Marie Sjölinder,
Sussanne Nilsson, Caroline Wamala Larsson.

Abstract
Background: Mental health conditions are a significant public health problem globally, responsible
for over 8 million deaths per year. They also lead to lost productivity, exacerbate physical illness, and
are associated with stigma and human rights violations. Uganda, like many low- and middle-income
countries (LMICs), faces a massive treatment gap for mental health conditions, and numerous
sociocultural challenges exacerbate the burden of mental health conditions.
Objective: To describe the development and formative evaluation of a digital health intervention for
improving access to mental healthcare in Uganda.

Methods:  This  qualitative  study  employed  user-centered  design  and  design  science  research
principles.  Stakeholders,  including  patients,  caregivers,  mental  healthcare  providers,  and
implementation experts (N=65), participated in focus group discussions in which we explored
participants’  experience  of  mental  illness  and  mental  healthcare,  experience  with  digital
interventions, and opinions about a proposed digital mental health service. Data was analyzed using
the consolidated framework for implementation research to derive requirements for the digital
solution, which was iteratively co-created with users and piloted.

Results: Several challenges were identified, including a severe shortage of mental health facilities,
unmet mental health information needs, heavy burden of caregiving, financial challenges, stigma,
and negative beliefs related to mental health. Participants’ enthusiasm about digital solutions as
feasible, acceptable and convenient for accessing mental health services was also revealed, along
with recommendations to make the service user-friendly, affordable, available 24/7, and to ensure
anonymity. A hospital call center service was developed to provide mental health information and
advice in two languages through interactive voice response (IVR) and live calls with healthcare
professionals and peer support workers (recovering patients). In the four months after go-live, 456
calls, from 236 unique numbers, were made to the system. Eighty calls stopped at the IVR, 99 went
to voicemails (out-of-office hours), 231 calls were answered by call agents, and 22 were not
answered. User feedback was positive, with callers appreciating the inclusion of peer support
workers who share their recovery journeys. However, some participant recommendations (e.g.,
adding video call options) or individualized needs (e.g., prescriptions) could not be accommodated
due to resource limitations or technical feasibility.

Conclusion:  This  study  demonstrates  a  systematic  and  theory-driven  approach  to  developing
contextually appropriate digital solutions for improving mental healthcare in Uganda and similar
contexts. The positive reception of the implemented service underscores its potential impact. Future
research should address the identified limitations, and evaluate clinical outcomes of long-term
adoption.

1. Introduction

Mental health conditions are an important public health issue globally, responsible for over 8 million
deaths per year  1–5. Three million people die annually from the harmful use of alcohol, and one
person dies every 40 seconds by suicide 1,2. An estimated 970.1 million people (12.6% of the global
population) experience some form of mental health problem 4. Mental health conditions account for
5% of the global disability-adjusted life years and 12-20% of years lived with disability 4,6. People
with mental health conditions, on average, die 20 years prematurely 4,6 both due to mental as well as
physical illness, because mental health conditions are a risk factor for, or can complicate physical
illnesses, including physical injury and road traffic accidents, HIV/AIDS, cardiovascular diseases,
and cancer 5,7. People with mental health conditions also experience severe human rights violations,
stigma, discrimination, abuse, and generally poor socio-economic status 5,7–9.

Unfortunately, over 75% of people with mental health problems do not have access to the care they
need 1–3. This is especially true for Uganda10,11 and similar low and middle-income countries (LMICs)
where the treatment gap for mental disorders reaches 90% 12–14. It is estimated that the ratio of mental
health workers to population is 200 times smaller in LMICs compared to high-income countries 3. In
LMICs, mental health is under-prioritized in the face of other competing public health challenges
such as HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria, and maternal and child health. Uganda, for example,
spends 9.8% of its gross domestic product on healthcare, but under 1% of this goes towards mental
healthcare  10,11. Consequently, Uganda suffers from a shortage of mental health care facilities and
professionals and poor and inconsistent access to medication and related mental health services 11. In
addition, most of the health workforce is limited to urban areas, yet over 80% of the population lives
in rural areas, thus geographically isolated from even the limited care available. Other important
challenges facing mental health in Uganda include social norms 15, beliefs (such as witchcraft), lack
of awareness of mental health disorders  8,11,16, pervasive stigma, and socio-political conflicts  17,18.
These result in an increase in the incidence of mental health problems but also lead to many people
with mental health problems not seeking care and going undiagnosed.

To address some of the challenges above and improve access to mental health services in Uganda, we
implemented the project  digitalizing mental healthcare and access in Uganda (DiMHA). In this
project, we followed a user-centered design and co-creation process to set up a hospital call center
service to provide mental health information and advice to patients, caregivers, and the general
public. The objective of this paper is to describe the development and formative evaluation of this
mental health call center service.

2. Methods and Results

2.1. Study design
Ethical approval for the research study was obtained from Makerere University School of Public
Health research ethics committee (#SPH-2021-153) and the Uganda National Council of Science and
Technology (#HS1868ES). All participants provided written informed consent before participating in
the study activities.

We conducted a qualitative case study employing principles of user-centered design (UCD) 19–22 and
design science research 23,24. UCD focuses on understanding and prioritizing the needs, preferences,
and behavior of end users of a product throughout its development life cycle. UCD, therefore, calls
for iterative and collaborative engagement of users to ensure high usability and utility of the product.
Design science research (DSR) is a structured approach to creating and evaluating innovative
solutions or artifacts, where the design process is treated as research that contributes to knowledge
for improving the functional performance of artifacts. The steps involved in DSR mirror UCD, and

include the following: (i) identifying the problem and motivation (understanding user experiences
and context of use), (ii) defining the objective of the solution (specifying the requirements), (iii)
designing and development of (often novel) solutions using participatory or co-creation processes,
and (iv) demonstration and evaluation to validate against requirements, assess usability, and long-
term adoption. These steps help identify facilitators and barriers of adoption so that they can be
addressed early on in the project life cycle, allow user engagement and facilitate buy-in, ensure that
the product fits the context of use and purpose, and has good usability 25,26 and clinical utility 27.

In the following sections, we describe each of the above four steps. Note that there was overlap and
iterations over the steps as per UCD best practice. To ease readability, we report the procedure and
results from each step. Thereafter, we provide a general discussion and conclusion.

2.2. Step 1: understanding user experiences and context to identify the problem(s)

2.2.1. Participants and recruitment
The participants included adults (18 years or older), patients recovering from mental disorders,
caregivers of such patients, peer support workers (PSW), mental healthcare providers, and persons
involved  in  the  implementation  of  call  centers  for  telecoms  or  other  healthcare  centers.  The
healthcare providers, patients and caregivers, and PSWs were recruited from Butabika National
Mental Referral Hospital in Kampala, Uganda, which is also the site of implementation. Sampling
was purposive to include different cadres and expertise of providers (informed by the 3rd author, who
is the head of Butabika Hospital) and to represent different mental health conditions, levels of
education, and socio-economic status of patients and caregivers, so as to get diversity of experiences
and views. The investigators (JKK, JN, and VMK) physically approached the healthcare providers at
Butabika Hospital, explained the project's purpose and the research activities involved (including
participation  in  multiple  group  discussions  and  workshops), and  obtained  consent  from  those
interested. These healthcare providers then reached out to patients under their care, caregivers, and
PSWs, provided them with information about the study, and invited those interested for consent by
the  investigators, who explained the  participants’ rights  and voluntary nature  of participation.
Participants in the last stakeholder category were recruited through the network of the first author
working in the digital health field in Uganda.

2.2.2. Data collection
We conducted semi-structured focus group discussions (FGDs) in which we explored participants’
experience of mental illness and mental healthcare in Uganda (including unmet information and
supportive care needs), experience with call center services from the commercial service sector or
other digital healthcare services, and opinions about a proposed digital mental health service (i.e.,
feasibility, appropriateness, expected benefits or recommendations for successful implementation).
The FGD guide is shown in Table 1. There was flexibility in the order of the probes to allow free
flow of ideas, with additional probes for clarification added by moderators as issues of interest arose.
Also, certain issues or probes were discussed in detail, paraphrased, or left out as appropriate
depending on relevance to the session participant, or if such a topic had been sufficiently explored in
the prior sessions.

Table 1: Focus group discussion guide.

The sessions were conducted in English and Luganda (the lingua franca in Uganda) as appropriate
for the participant category. Additionally, we held male-only and female-only FGD sessions for
patients  to  reduce  the  possibility  that  some  participants  would  overshadow  others  during the
discussion, but other sessions were mixed to ensure rich discussions since diverse viewpoints from
the different participants inspire others and spur discussion (see Table 2). The first and fourth authors
(JKK and VMK) were the moderators, while the second author (RN) was a notetaker. The sessions
were audio recorded and afterward transcribed by the second author, who also translated the Luganda
ones into English for analysis. The FGDs took place in November 2021.

We drew on the consolidated framework for implementation research (CFIR)  28 to inform data
collection (and analysis; see section 2.2.3 below). The CFIR is a “meta-theoretical framework”
developed  by  consolidating  several  implementation  science  theories  into  one  comprehensive
taxonomy of clearly defined, non-overlapping constructs related to disseminating and implementing
evidence-based interventions. These constructs fall into five domains: (i) the individuals affected or
involved in the implementation, (ii) the innovation (intervention), (iii) the inner setting (organization)
where the innovation is implemented, (iv) the outer setting (wider societal context), and (v) the
process of implementation. The CFIR is one of the most widely used theoretical frameworks to
identify implementation barriers and facilitators (i.e., a determinant framework) 29–33. Following a
literature review and feedback from researchers who have used the CFIR 31, a recent update, dubbed
“CFIR 2.0”, has been made, in addition to a CFIR outcomes addendum  34. These updates have
provided further clarification between constructs, including, for example, a distinction between
“implementation determinants,” which relate to the context, versus “innovation determinants,” which
have to do with the characteristics of the innovation (e.g., ease of use, relative advantage, cost, and
efficacy  of  a  technology).  The  implementation  and  innovation  determinants  inform  the
implementation process (needs assessment, user engagement, tailoring to user needs, incentives,
marketing, etc), and through the antecedent assessments (tension or readiness for change, feasibility,

acceptability, appropriateness, etc) moderate the anticipated and actual implementation outcomes.
The updates to the CFIR make it also useful for informing the design, implementation and evaluation
of innovations (i.e. a process and evaluation framework) 32,33. Figure 1 shows an adaptation of the
CFIR and its recent updates as used in this study.

Figure 1: The consolidated framework for implementation research (CFIR) used in the study.
Adapted from 28,31,34

2.2.3. Data analysis
A directed (deductive) content analysis approach  35 was used. We began with a rapid qualitative

analysis 36–38 of the FGDs in order to quickly identify the requirements and other insights needed to
inform initial iterations of system development (see Step 2 below). Rapid qualitative analysis is
aimed at getting actionable and targeted insights in a timely manner and is suitable for studies such
as this one, where there is a need to refine and adapt an intervention or program, as opposed to
developing new theories. A deductive approach is taken, employing existing theories or frameworks
(in  our  case,  the  CFIR)  to  summarize  the  qualitative  data  into,  for  example,  intervention
characteristics or barriers and facilitators. In rapid qualitative research, data collection and analysis
occur concurrently and iteratively, with findings from one phase informing the next iteration. The
analysis is done not on the transcripts but on summaries or notes taken during the FGDs or the audio
recordings. In addition, multiple data collection methods are used to triangulate findings (e.g., FGDs,
field observations, debriefing  and reflections  by the research  team  or other  stakeholders, and
literature review). In our study, the rapid analysis was done by the first 4 authors (JKK, RN, JN, and
VMK) and involved note-taking during FGDs and discussion and summarization of insights after
each session. When necessary, listening to recordings was done, e.g., for the researcher who was not
present in the session before they contributed to the analysis, or for validating the summaries. We
summarized the findings into an initial list of mental health information topics to be covered by our
system and design considerations (system requirements) based on the experiences and expectations
of users, as well as contextual constraints.

Later, a traditional qualitative analysis was done 36–38. The first and second authors (JKK and  RN)
independently read one of the seven transcripts and extracted meaningful units or statements, and
coded them into themes related to the research objectives and the CFIR as described above. They
then met to discuss and refine the coding before independently coding the remaining transcripts.
Three more meetings were held to compare and refine the coding, after which the findings were
shared with all the authors for discussion and interpretation. We focused on saliency 39 rather than
frequency of issues and codes, such that even if an issue was mentioned once or by one participant
category, we coded it as long as it related to the research question and CFIR constructs. As such, we
did not count or rank the codes and themes. Basic office software was used for coding and
summarizing the qualitative data.

2.2.4. Results

2.2.4.1.
Participants and FGD sessions
We conducted 7 FGDs, each with 8-10 participants, for a total of 65 participants. The participants
were fairly balanced by sex (35 females and 30 males), and their ages ranged from 21 to 64 years,
with a median of 40 years. Each session lasted approximately one and half hours. Table 2 shows the
details of the FGD sessions.

Table 2: Details of focus group discussion sessions

2.2.4.2.
Findings from the FGDs
Table 3 shows the qualitative findings, including the CFIR domains, constructs, themes, and their
explanation. Appendix 1 contains the illustrative quotes.

Thirty-nine  themes  emerged  across  twenty  CFIR  constructs  in  all  the  five  domains  and  the
antecedent assessments. The themes recurred across the participant groups, supporting their validity
(Appendix 1 shows quotes from different participants under each theme and domain). The themes
under the individuals domain highlight several challenges that people with mental health conditions
in Uganda face, including the limited number of mental healthcare facilities, long distances to care,
lack of mental health information, stigma against patients with mental health problems and their
families, financial challenges, and unmet psychosocial needs. The themes also cover contextual
issues that explain these challenges. These include issues about the nature of mental illness (chronic
and with a high burden of caregiving); organizational issues (inner setting), such as under-staffing of
mental health facilities and frequent medication stockouts; and societal issues (outer setting), such as
beliefs and cultural norms (e.g., belief in witchcraft) which influence how people understand mental
health problems and how they seek care. Themes under the domain innovation determinants covered
participants’ perception or expected benefit from the proposed mental health call center service,
including affordability, familiarity with similar services and the technology (ubiquitous access to
mobile phones), convenience, time and cost saving, and anonymity offered by telephone services
which  protect  users  from  the  stigma.  Finally,  themes  in  the  implementation  process domain
encompassed mostly participants’ recommendations or strategies for successful implementation, such
as  linkage  with  other  stakeholders  involved  in  mental  healthcare,  marketing  of  the  service
(sensitization), training and supervision of staff for quality control, and the need to maintain the
human touch rather than attempting to digitalize or automate mental healthcare delivery. These
findings  suggested  the  feasibility,  acceptability,  and  appropriateness  of  the  proposed  solution
(antecedent assessments).

There were also several insights or implicit findings not mentioned by the FGD participants but
inferred from observations and the research team’s understanding of the context. These are relevant
for the implementation and can be mapped to CFIR constructs. For example, there has been an
increase in the adoption of telemedicine in Uganda, especially following the COVID-19 outbreak,
which has given credibility to such innovations and can explain the general enthusiasm shown by the
participants (CFIR construct “evidence base” in innovation determinants). In fact, the participants in

the implementers’ category were themselves involved in implementing call centers for HIV/AIDS,
private telemedicine clinics, and mental health NGOs and were aware of the growing scientific
evidence globally that supports digital health. COVID-19 is also an example of “critical incidents”
that can disrupt (or encourage) implementation and/or delivery of innovations  (outer  setting),
according to CFIR 2.0. Other issues included the external project grant (construct: “Financing”),
Uganda government’s positive digital transformation strategies and policies (construct: “External
pressure”), and Butabika hospital’s position as a national referral that is supposed to be exemplary
(construct: “Performance measurement pressure”).

Table 3: Summary of qualitative findings coded according to the consolidated framework for
implementation research (CFIR).

2.3. Step 2: Specifying the requirements of the system

2.3.1. Procedure and Team
Requirements were specified basing on the understanding of the users’ needs, challenges, and
contextual constraints from the FGDs. The development team consisted of the first three authors (a
medical doctor and digital health expert, a research nurse, and a senior consultant psychiatrist,
respectively), as well as a psychologist, a psychiatric nurse, and an IT professional specializing in
telephone systems. The first two authors and the IT professional have previously worked together to
set up a similar system at the Uganda Cancer Institute 40 from which they also drew insights. The
team held eight online meetings from December 2021 to March 2022 to iteratively discuss the
system features, content (mental health information), and set up considerations. We started with the
initial list from the rapid qualitative analysis (see section 2.2.3 above) which we refined to remove
conflicting requirements  or those that  are not  feasible  due to available resources  (e.g.,  video
telemedicine). We also agreed on the priority the features and mental health information topics.

2.3.2. Results
Table 3 lists the high-level requirements and how they were addressed in the system design and
implementation. Key of these requirements are that the system or the intervention provides correct
mental health information and psychosocial support, in a culturally sensitive and non-stigmatizing
manner, and in multiple languages. In addition, the system should be easy to use (navigate), should
be accessible 24/7, should be affordable (free) to users, there should be no long queues, and it should
fit within the workflow of the staff and not increase their workload. Finally, it should ensure privacy
and confidentiality to users’ information and risks of harm to users should be minimized through
quality control measures, training, and professionalism of staff.

Table 3: Requirements and how they are addressed by the system and/or its set up.

2.4. Step 3: Design and development of the system

2.4.1. Procedure and Team
We designed and developed a telephone system for providing mental health information and advice
to callers as per the requirements (see Table 3). The system consists of three complimentary
components or features; an interactive voice response (IVR), live calls, and voicemail. The IVR is
the first component that users interact with, and since it is automated, it is available 24/7. It contains
mental  health  information  in  audio  format  in  English  and  Luganda.  Callers  get  navigation
instructions and choose from a menu of topics in a self-service manner by pressing the corresponding
keys on their phones (e.g. “Thank you for calling Butabika Hospital. Please choose your preferred
language. For English, press 1, Bw’oba oyagala kuwuliriza mu Luganda, nyiga 2”). Figure 2 shows
the IVR flow and topics covered.

From the IVR, callers can choose to speak directly (live call) with an agent, for example to ask seek
more clarification on information in the IVR or ask information that is not covered by the IVR. If it

is during office hours, the system connects the caller to the agent. We had a total of eight agents
comprising of two PSWs, a psychologist, two psychiatric clinical officers, and three psychiatric
nurses. The staff do not sit in a physical call center; rather, they are accessible via dedicated mobile
phones. All their phones are dialed concurrently (“ring all” strategy) and whoever picks first
responds to the caller. Outside working hours, callers are instructed by the system to leave a
voicemail and the call agents returns the calls the next day; this is only possible from a soft-phone on
a computer within the hospital since the caller’s number is hidden on the agents’ mobile phones for
privacy reasons. All agents were encouraged to respond to the calls immediately, and a schedule was
created for responding to voicemails. The psychologist provided supervision to the agents and
handled  any  difficult  cases  which  the  agents  were  encourage  to  report  or  escalate  whenever
necessary.

Development  of  the  system  began  by  developing  IVR  content  (mental  health  messages  and
navigation instructions), which was done concurrently with the requirements specification process
described above. The team iteratively wrote the script for mental health messages basing on their
clinical expertise, reviewed the Luganda translation, and discussed the IVR menu options and caller-
system interaction basing on requirements and insights from prior work. We limited the IVR options
to a manageable number and organized the information in a logical order, i.e., from general
information (overview of mental illnesses) to specific (e.g., individual illness such as anxiety or
depression). Attention was paid to ease of language (e.g., description of concepts or illnesses in
addition to naming them, and reduction in use of medical jargon), tone (calm, empathic and non-
judgmental), and cultural appropriateness (e.g., acknowledging the role of faith and alternative
medicine). The  developed  content was  recorded  in a professional audio recording  studio and
deployed in private branch exchange (PBX) software by the IT professional and the first author.

2.4.2. Results
The telephone system was implemented using Asterisk, an open-source private branch exchange
(PBX) software. It was deployed on a simple server (Intel Core i5 2.6GHz, 8GB RAM, 1TB Hard
disk) at Butabika hospital, and connected to a local mobile telecom provider via session initiation
protocol (SIP) with 12 trunks. The calls to the system are reverse-billed, therefore are free to the
callers.

In sum, we developed a total of 22 messages, 14 of which are on mental health or other practical
information needs elicited from the participants, i.e. overview of what mental illnesses are, the
causes, signs and symptoms, the common mental illnesses in Uganda, assessment and management
of mental illness, and how to navigate the healthcare system. The remaining 8 messages contained
navigation instructions or feedback to user (welcome message, language selection, disclaimer and
warning in case of emergency, the different menu options, invalid selection, replaying a message,
returning to main menu, and voicemail instructions). The messages were then translated to Luganda
for a total of 44 messages. Figure 2 shows the topics addressed by the IVR messages (without some
of the navigation messages).

Figure 2: Mental health information topics and how they are accessed in the IVR.

2.5. Step 4: Demonstration and evaluation

2.5.1. Procedure and participants
Following deployment, we held a one-day workshop with the PSWs, nurses, and psychiatric clinical
officers (n=10) who had participated in the FGDs to test the system, get feedback about the IVR
content, and identify and correct any system malfunctions or errors (e.g., if there were language mix
up or a wrong response for a particular IVR option chosen by the caller).
We held a second workshop to train the call agents on workflows, software system and on phone
etiquettes and how to communicate with persons with mental health problems. We also discussed
operational issues, e.g., definition of office hours when live calls should be allowed, and schedules
for returning voicemails and evaluation survey.

The system was advertised via the hospital website and social media channels, posters in the
hospital, and through personal contacts of the staff and participants. After go live, we continued to
supervise the call agents, and held regular review meetings in which we listened to recorded calls
and critiqued the conversations, and offered support to the call agents (especially the PSW) in case of
difficult calls, and collected feedback on usability and user perception of utility of the service.

2.5.2. Results
No major problems were found during the testing workshops, but participants reported that the
workshops helped them better understand the service from practically trying it out. They showed
enthusiasm for their roles as call agents and became ambassadors who advertised the service to
patients and their social networks. Schedules were also drawn for returning calls and office hours

defined which were then programmed into the PBX, sending calls outside these hours to voicemail.
The system went live in August 2021. Detailed results from a survey of the callers and analysis of the
usage patterns will be reported in a separate manuscript (under preparation), but here, we summarize
observations from the first four months of operation.

From August to December 2022, 456 calls, from 236 unique numbers (average of 4 calls per day),
were made to the system, i.e., reaching at least the IVR (automated) component. Of these, 99
(21.7%) calls were made during out-of-office hours for the call agents, so they went to voicemail and
were called back within the following days. Of the remaining 357 calls made during office hours, 80
(22.4%) calls stopped at the IVR, while 231 (64.7%) proceeded to speak to a live agent. (Note that
the percentages do not add up to 100% because some callers made multiple calls, utilizing the IVR or
leaving a voicemail, and later called and spoke to a live agent). Twenty-two calls (6.2%) were never
answered by the call agents. On average, live calls were answered within 11 seconds, and their
average length was 3.5 minutes.

Callers come from all parts of the country (as far as 8 hours by road from Butabika Hospital),
although the majority were from the central region (within one hour’s distance from Butabika
Hospital). They included caregivers seeking advice about relatives who are showing symptoms of
mental illnesses or those already undergoing care, mental health patients who are relatively stable
and are seeking advice about medication or return dates, and others such as clinicians from other
health facilities, journalists and government officials who wanted more information about the call
center system or the mental healthcare services offered at Butabika hospital.  Calls about patients
who had “escaped” from the hospital, were also common, often made by concerned community
members  near  the  hospital  who  come  across  a  person  with  mental  illness  wondering  in  the
community. Generally, the service has been received positively. Callers were especially happy with
the PSW who shared their personal journeys with mental illnesses and recovery, and this encouraged
them to overcome the stigma and negativity they had about mental healthcare services. The PSWs
also reported positive experiences, stating that working as call agents and helping others gave them a
sense of purpose and brought order and calmness.

A key challenge was callers who required specific and individualized information which the call
agents did not have at hand and could not be pre-recorded in the IVR. Such information included
requests for prescriptions, questions on stocks of certain medications, availability and cost of certain
tests and procedures, or about the condition of a relative who is admitted in the hospital.

2.6. Reflexivity
The members of the research team involved in data collection and analysis (FGDs, workshops, and
analysis meetings) are intimately familiar with the local context and understand participants’ realities
(including participants’ access and use of mobile phones and the internet) since they come from the
same  region  of  the  country  and speak  the  local  language  (Luganda).  This  made  it  easier  to
communicate with the participants (even for sessions that were held in Luganda), and to understand
and relate to the ideas or issues they raised. To reduce potential undue coercion, the clinicians
involved in the care of the participants (patients and PSWs) did not participate in the FGDs sessions
but participated in data analysis and interpretation. These clinicians were especially important in
ensuring that the rest of the research team members were aware of assumptions and potential
prejudices, for example, with regards to beliefs in witchcraft as a cause for mental illnesses or in
faith-healing,  common  among  those  with  low  education  status.  Clinicians  working  in  mental
healthcare in this  context  frequently encounter  such beliefs  and appreciate  the  importance of
respecting them, which was also useful for informing how we crafted the mental health messages in
the system. Moreover, three of the research team members were from a different, high-income

country, and brought in different perspectives, which helped us question our interpretations and
assumptions.

3. Discussion

3.1. Principal findings
This paper describes the development and implementation of a digital health intervention aimed at
improving mental healthcare in Uganda. Employing principles of user-centered design  19–22 and
design science research 23,24., we systematically engaged stakeholders, collected data on target users’
experiences of mental healthcare, their opinions and recommendations about the proposed mental
health telephone service, and contextual issues that could influence implementation. We used the
CFIR, an established implementation science meta-framework 28–33, to collection and analysis of this
data, derive system requirements, and then iteratively co-created and tested the system.

We identified several challenges faced by patients with mental health problems and their caregivers
in Uganda, and peculiarities about the organization and the wider societal context which supported
the proposed innovation. These challenges included the severe shortage of mental health workers and
services, lack of awareness, negative beliefs and norms, stigma, huge burden of caregiving, and
financial challenges. At the same time, there is a general trend towards digitalization of healthcare to
improve patient experience and efficiency of healthcare, and participants were enthusiastic about our
proposed call center because they are familiar with the technology, considered it feasible, affordable,
convenient  and  efficient  way  to  get  mental  health  services  without  being  stigmatized.  The
participants also gave several recommendations on how to successfully implement the intervention,
for example by making calls toll free, ensuring 24/7 availability, providing mental health information
in multiple languages, using technologies or channels that are appropriate to the context (telephone
calls and IVR), sufficient staffing to reducing call waiting times, sensitizing people about the service,
and training and supervision of the call agents to ensure quality service. Early evaluation of the
intervention shows that clients are very positive about the service, particularly with the use of PSWs
(recovering patients) who share their lived experience with others.

3.2. Comparison to prior work
Prior research has demonstrated value of mHealth in addressing some of the healthcare challenges in
Uganda and similar contexts elsewhere. Systematic reviews on mHealth in general 41–47 or on specific
clinical domains such as HIV/AIDS  47–49 and palliative care  50 have highlighted improvement of
healthcare  coordination  and communication  between  patients  and  healthcare  providers, patient
adherence to treatment and reduction of loss  to follow up, patient engagement and self-care,
facilitation of community-based care, and improving access to care for rural or geographically
isolated  populations.  Advantages  such  as  ubiquity  of  mobile  technology,  affordability  and
acceptability by patients and health workers, interactivity and personalization, and saving of time and
cost of traveling to health facilities, have been cited. Examples of prior studies on mHealth in
Uganda include use of IVR, SMS and phone calls to support management of HIV/AIDS 51,52 and
tuberculosis  53, use  of IVR  to  address  barriers  to  fistula  care  in  Uganda  54,  SMS  for  stroke
rehabilitation 55 and IVR for provision of cancer awareness and advice 40. There is also a commercial
digital health company that has operated different mHealth services in Uganda for about 10 years 56.
Unfortunately, the use of mHealth in mental health in Uganda and Africa in general is limited 8,57,58.
This is likely due to the general underfunding of mental healthcare services 10–14. Available research
on mHealth in mental health is mostly from developed countries  59–63, with many interventions
utilizing the internet and smartphone apps, which might not be accessible or affordable in Uganda or
other LMICs. Interventions that utilize basic phone features such as SMS, IVR, and voice calls are
more appropriate in LMICs as they overcome infrastructural limitations. Such interventions are also
relevant for low-income and migrant communities in developed countries since these populations

face low digital health literacy and language barriers 64–67.

In the previous project led by the first author for the provision of cancer information  40, similar
findings in terms of challenges faced by patients, requirements and recommendations for the system,
and generally positive reception after implementation were reported. The cancer awareness system
mainly used the IVR feature with pre-recorded information, with the option to speak to a live agent
added as an emergency due to COVID-19 outbreak. The agents were healthcare workers (nurses and
doctors)  who, due to travel  restrictions,  had been freed to handle  phone calls.  While callers
appreciated this feature, it is otherwise untannable given the limited number of health workers. In the
current  project,  PSWs  helped  to  address  the  shortage  of  healthcare  professionals.  A  large
multinational research study from Uganda and elsewhere has demonstrated the positive benefits of
using PSWs, both for their own recovery and for the healthcare system  68–70. Our current project
builds onto this prior work to innovatively and efficiently put this under-utilized resource to use
through digital health.

3.3. Strengths and limitations of the study
A strength of this study is the strong theoretical underpinning. Implementation studies have been
faulted in the past for not being theory-driven which undermines the adoption of digital technologies
32. The UCD and DSR approach used informed a systematic co-creation process of intervention
development  with  user  participation,  while  the  CFIR  allowed  comprehensive  review  of  user,
technological and contextual issues to inform system requirements. Even so, we could not consider
all the requirements or recommendations by the participants when designing the system because of
resource limitations or contradictions. For example, some participants recommended adding video
calling features to the system to enhance interaction and assessment of affect. Other participants had
concerns about continuity of care which indeed is difficult to achieve with the current call center
system that lacks electronic medical records or mechanisms to ensure callers are directed to agents
they have interacted with before. However, adding such features would make the system complex,
expensive, and inaccessible to some such as those that mentioned inability to work with smartphones
or have connectivity problems. Still, the insights from this comprehensive assessment can inform
future, incremental iterations of the system during scale-up.

4. Conclusion 

Participants were enthusiastic about the proposed call center because they were familiar with the
technology, considered it feasible, affordable, convenient and efficient way to get mental health
services without being stigmatized. The system provided mental health information and linkage to
healthcare providers and peer support workers. The information in audio format made it accessible
even to the illiterate users, and the automated IVR allowed 24/7 access while reducing the pressure
on the healthcare workforce. Translation to English and Luganda, the two most spoken languages in
Uganda, increased reach, as did the reverse-billing (no cost to the caller) and use of basic telephone
calls as the channel of access since many Ugandans still do not have affordable and reliable internet
access.

5. Recommendations.
In this study, people with mental illness, caregivers, and health care providers deemed a telephone-
based mental health care service useful and necessary to increase access to mental health information
and care and reduce stigma towards people with mental health problems. This positive view needs to
be harnessed to scale up digitalization of mental health care including providing therapy and
establishing it in other mental health care settings in line with the current Ugandan digitalization
policy and the 3rd National Development Plan (NDP III). This method of mental health care may be

replicable and scalable in other LMICs with mental health care system and personnel challenges like
Uganda. Further research is needed to evaluate long-term adoption, patterns of utilization, and
impact on clinical outcomes.

Funding:
This  project  was  funded  by  Digital  Futures  https://www.digitalfutures.kth.se/,  a  research
collaboration  between  KTH  Royal  Institute  of  Technology,  Stockholm  University,  and  RISE
Research Institutes of Sweden. Funders had no influence in the conduct of the research study.