Original Paper

A Participatory Design Approach to Develop Visualization of
Wearable Actigraphy Data for Health Care Professionals: Case
Study in Qatar

Kamran Khowaja1,2, PhD; Wafa Waheeda Syed3, MSc; Meghna Singh4, MS; Shahrad Taheri5,6,7, PhD; Odette
Chagoury5,6,7, PhD; Dena Al-Thani1, PhD; Michaël Aupetit3, PhD

1Information and Computing Technology Division, College of Science and Engineering, Hamad Bin Khalifa University, Education City, Qatar
2Department of Computer Science, Shaheed Zulfikar Ali Bhutto Institute of Science and Technology, Hyderabad, Pakistan
3Social Computing, Qatar Computing Research Institute, Hamad Bin Khalifa University, Education City, Qatar
4Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, United States
5Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell Medicine, Doha, Qatar
6Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY, United States
7National Obesity Treatment Center, Qatar Metabolic Institute, Doha, Qatar

Michaël Aupetit, PhD
Social Computing, Qatar Computing Research Institute
Hamad Bin Khalifa University
Research Complex Building 1
Education City, 34110
Qatar
Phone: 974 44547150

Abstract

Background: Several tools have been developed for health care professionals to monitor the physical activity of their patients,
but most of these tools have been considering only the needs of users in North American and European countries and applicable
for only specific analytic tasks. To our knowledge, no research study has utilized the participatory design (PD) approach in the
Middle East region to develop such tools, involving all the stakeholders in the product development phases, and no clear use
cases have been derived from such studies that could serve future development in the field.
Objective: This study aims to develop an interactive visualization tool (ActiVis) to support local health care professionals in
monitoring the physical activity of their patients measured through wearable sensors, with the overall objective of improving the
health of the Qatari population.
Methods: We used PD and user-centered design methodologies to develop ActiVis, including persona development, brainwriting,
and heuristic walkthrough as part of user evaluation workshops; and use cases, heuristic walkthrough, interface walkthrough, and
survey as part of expert evaluation sessions.
Results: We derived and validated 6 data analysis use cases targeted at specific health care professionals from a collaborative
design workshop and an expert user study. These use cases led to improving the design of the ActiVis tool to support the monitoring
of patients’ physical activity by nurses and family doctors. The ActiVis research prototype (RP) compared favorably with the
Fitbit Dashboard, showing the importance of design tools specific to end users’ needs rather than relying on repurposing existing
tools designed for other types of users. The use cases we derived happen to be culturally agnostic, despite our assumption that
the local Muslim and Arabic culture could impact the design of such visualization tools. At last, taking a step back, we reflect on
running collaborative design sessions in a multicultural environment and oil-based economy.
Conclusions: 
Beyond the development of the ActiVis tool, this study can serve other visualization and human–computer
interaction designers in the region to prepare their design projects and encourage health care professionals to engage with designers
and engineers to improve the tools they use for supporting their daily routine. The development of the ActiVis tool for nurses,
and other visualization tools specific to family doctors and clinician researchers, is still ongoing and we plan to integrate them
into an operational platform for health care professionals in Qatar in the near future.

JMIR Hum Factors 2022 | vol. 9 | iss. 2 | e25880 | p. 1

(JMIR Hum Factors 2022;9(2):e25880) doi: 10.2196/25880

KEYWORDS
participatory design; user-centered design; visualization; health care professional; persona; brainwriting; heuristic walkthrough;
use case; interface walkthrough

Introduction

According to the World Health Organization (WHO) report of
2018 [1,2], lack of physical activity is the fourth leading risk
factor for mortality. Physical activity reduces the risk of
coronary heart disease, stroke, hypertension, depression, type
2 diabetes, and several types of cancer. Unfortunately, physical
activity across many countries is declining. In the context of
Qatar, researchers at Weill Cornell Medicine - Qatar (WCM-Q)
conducted a study among elementary school children between
ages 7 and 12 [3]. The authors found that 42.1% of these
children were either obese or overweight, and their sleep was
significantly shorter than children with a healthy weight. In
another study on prevalent health issues among Qatari citizens
and long-term residents [4], the authors found that 83% of the
population undertook little to no physical activity, and almost
half of the population did not do any physical exercise. Hence,
there is a need to increase the physical activity of the Qatar
population to reduce the risk of related diseases as mentioned
in the WHO 2018 report.

Many behavioral modification programs have been developed
for more than 2 decades to reduce physical inactivity [5-8].
Nowadays, technologies allow continuous recording of
individual physical activity over several days. Moreover, the
use of smartphones and wearable devices (smartwatches,
wristbands, etc) among children, adults, or older adults has
increased in the last decade. Smartphones and wearable devices
are then actively used to record, measure, and monitor body
movement and activities performed by an individual using global
positioning system and accelerometer installed on these devices
[1,9-11]. The visualization of the recorded activity data can then
show the time when an individual was the most or least active
throughout the day [12] and support monitoring and exploration
of such activities. We focus on the design of such visualization
tools in this work.

There is a growing trend in visualization studies to explore ways
to represent wearable data for self-monitoring sleep [13], analyze
data by health coaches [14] or researchers [15], evaluate
performance dashboard for sport [16], or evaluate time-based
activity graphical representations on mobile phones [17]. Some
other studies explored the best approach to visualizing the data
to support behavior change [18,19] or provided a visualization
dashboard to help patients understand their longitudinal health
data [20]. Still, the visualization of wearable data is an active
research area. A natural approach to start with is to repurpose
existing visualization tools such as the Fitbit Dashboard to
visualize data in a health care setting, but the actual needs of
health care professionals may depart substantially from the ones
of the general public self-tracking their physical activities. To
the best of our knowledge, there is no visualization tool
specifically designed to support the health care professionals
in monitoring and analyzing physical activities of patients

through their wearable actigraph data. We also could not find
a set of use cases and user roles covering such needs.

Moreover, several studies [21-23] have demonstrated the
importance of the cultural, social, and local context when
designing medical or health care technological solutions. Despite
this view, the literature on technology acceptance mostly
concentrates on highly developed North American and European
countries, and little is known about health technology use and
data visualization in the Arab world, including the Gulf countries
[24-29] such as Qatar [3,4]. Arab countries share lots of
similarities, such as cultural and religious values, language, and
lifestyle [30,31], and are quite different from North American
and European countries. Salgado et al [32] has highlighted that
culture plays a vital role from the investigation to the design or
development of new methods, theories, techniques, and systems.
Hence, cultural specificities were expected when we started this
project and we decided to follow a participatory design (PD)
approach to collect the potentially culturally specific needs of
end users.

Alabdulqader et al [33] highlighted a need to reduce the cultural
gap between technology designers and users by using a PD
approach. PD aims to design solutions that consider the local
context and culture and has been used effectively in the
health/medical domain [34-44]. PD allows researchers to involve
potential users of a product or technological solution in the
ideation, design, development, or appropriation of the solution
[35]. Kanstrup et al [35], as a part of their review, found that
workshop/group sessions/focus groups, interviews, and
prototyping have been more commonly used in PD sessions of
health information technology. We followed this approach in
our studies.

The use of opportunistic research and sampling is commonly
used in health care research as it allows researchers to use the
available participants or research instruments to perform
research chores [45-49]. To the best of our knowledge, there is
no interactive tool that has considered the needs of local health
care professionals in Qatar in their regular activities. These
activities include understanding and monitoring their patients
and helping/assisting them to improve their physical activity,
sleep, and eventually reduce obesity. Results from a previous
study [4], informal discussion with the authors [3], and an
approach of opportunistic research were used as a basis to design
the first prototype of an interactive tool (ActiVis) to support the
mentioned needs of the local health care professionals.

This paper reports on the PD and summative evaluation of a
second version of the ActiVis prototype to visualize activity
data from wearable devices, which meets the needs of local
health care professionals for monitoring the physical activity
of their patients, to improve the physical activity of the Qatar
population. We use methodologies from user-centered design

JMIR Hum Factors 2022 | vol. 9 | iss. 2 | e25880 | p. 2

[50-58] and PD for the first time to design eHealth data
visualization in Qatar.

Methods

Research Protocol and User Studies

Overview

The users and their needs increased over time as studies were
conducted as a part of this research and ActiVis was accordingly
modified and reported in different sections of this research. The
development of any technological solution is not an easy task.
It requires gathering and analysis of considerable data from the

ideation to the design, development, evaluation, and deployment
of the technology. It becomes even more challenging when the
local context needs to be considered and incorporated into the
technology. The data collection and analysis methods vary from
one study to another due to various constraints such as the
availability of the target users and the initial uncertainty in the
direction of the project, which is refined progressively through
the development cycles.

Figure 1 shows the timeline of this work, the studies conducted
with their target audience, the methods used, and the venues
where they took place. The RPs developed and the user studies
(UX) conducted are reported in Textbox 1.

Figure 1. Research Prototypes (RP) designed and developed, and User Studies (UX) conducted throughout the project. HMC-Q: Hamad Medical
Corporation - Qatar; WCM-Q: Weill Cornell Medicine - Qatar; QCRI: Qatar Computing Research Institute.

Textbox 1. Research protocols and user studies conducted.

•
RP1: The first research protocol (RP) of ActiVis was developed out of a previous design expert analysis of the requirements not reported here.

•
UX1: The first user study (UX) was a workshop conducted with nurses at Hamad Medical Corporation (the largest public health care provider
in Qatar) to gather detailed requirements, personas, and usage scenarios, to design and develop the second RP of ActiVis (RP2) together with a
set of 6 use cases targeting health care professionals.

•
RP2: A total of 3 UX (UX2.1-UX2.3) were conducted to evaluate RP2 on 3 of these use cases. Each study was targeted at 1 type of user as
follows:

•
UX2.1: First, an expert evaluation was conducted with clinical researchers at Weill Cornell Medicine - Qatar (WCM-Q). UX2.1 supported
improving the descriptions of the use cases, determining which type of health care professional users among nurses, family doctors, and clinician
researchers were the actual targets, and evaluating RP2 based on the use cases targeted at nurses and family doctors. Usability issues were also
identified as a part of that study.

•
UX2.2: Then, an expert evaluation was conducted with a family doctor visiting Qatar Computing Research Institute (QCRI) to evaluate the
second prototype RP2 based on use cases specific to that role as identified from UX2.1.

•
UX2.3: Lastly, a workshop was conducted with nurses from Hamad Medical Corporation. The purpose was to evaluate RP2 on the use case
specifically targeted at nurses and to compare RP2 with the Fitbit Dashboard as it provided similar functionalities. The study would allow
researchers to understand the differences between both dashboards from the participants’perspective and improve ActiVis based on their feedback.
In this study, Fitbit was used as a comparison because it has a well-thought design [59,60] with similar functionalities required to support the
user tasks, and it was the leading wearable technology in the consumer market at the time of the study [61].

•
RP3: These studies (UX2.1-UX2.3) led to the design specifications for a third RP not reported here.

The protocol of the studies is described in the remaining subsections, while the results of each study are presented in the “Results” section.

RP1: Visual Analytic Tool for Actigraphy Sensor Data

In 2016, one of the authors (MA) started working on a
visualization dashboard of wearable data for clinical decision
making by health care professionals. This dashboard is aimed
at supporting patients to move toward a healthier lifestyle based
on their physical activity data. Figure 2 shows parts from the
different screens of the initial visualization dashboard (ActiVis)

developed as an RP (RP1) based on extensive discussions with
health care professionals having expertise in childhood obesity
and diabetes in Qatar. The data and initial user needs to be used
to design the first prototype were collected as a part of a
previous research project [62,63]. The details of RP1 reported
in this paper are presented in the “RP1” subsection of the
“Results” section.

JMIR Hum Factors 2022 | vol. 9 | iss. 2 | e25880 | p. 3

Figure 2. ActiVis research prototype 1.

UX1: Users’ Evaluation Workshop 1 With Nurses

Overview
A first user experiment (UX1) was conducted with the nursing
staff of Hamad Medical Corporation on May 2, 2018. The
workshop was conducted to gather some of the potential users
to generate ideas for the prototype taking the local needs into
account. The objective of the workshop was to learn about
nurses’ perception of how visual analytics may enable them to
promote lifestyle change and provide better advice to patients
based on the activity data that would be collected from the
patient’s wearable (smartwatch). The session was focused on
patients with type 2 diabetes. It included a presentation followed
by a brainwriting [64] session, where nurses in groups provided
their input on desired information and computer technology
solutions to support patient lifestyle changes.

Findings
Our analysis of the data collected from this study led to the
design of 6 use cases, and the corresponding user tasks led to
the technical specifications of the visualization design that we
implemented in the second prototype (RP2) of ActiVis. It is to
be noted that use cases were developed from the perspective of
nurses who are one of the potential users of the ActiVis tool.
However, it was not clear if the description of each use case
was adequate or required some improvement, and if all the use
cases would need to be implemented in the ActiVis tool,
justifying the needs for another set of UX (UX2.1).

Participants
A total of 45 male and female participants, which included
nurses as well as nursing informatics professionals working at
Hamad Medical Corporation-Qatar (HMC-Q), attended the
workshop.

Study Protocol

The nursing staff working at HMC-Q were recruited through
an announcement by the chairperson of the nursing department,
inviting them into the workshop as shown in Figure 3 to
contribute to the development of the health care solution. The
participants were split into 4 groups (10-12 members in each)
for the brainwriting activities. Each group was provided with a
flipchart and markers in addition to in-house designed templates
and gamification cards to stimulate creativity and support groups
in the brainwriting process. The brainwriting process involved
4 stages:

•
Stage 1: Define a “Persona”—either a nurse or a patient
with diabetes. The definition must include a short
biography, goals, and objectives of the persona, as well as
challenges and frustrations.
•
Stage 2: Describe a typical scenario, either a single
encounter for the nurse or a day in the patient’s life,
highlighting issues and problems.
•
Stage 3: Imagine the technologies that can help resolve the
problems in the scenario considering the defined
characteristics of the persona. Group members then vote
for the best resolution.
•
Stage 4: Rewrite the scenario in stage 2 including the best
technology voted for in stage 3.

JMIR Hum Factors 2022 | vol. 9 | iss. 2 | e25880 | p. 4

Figure 3. User study 1 workshop with nurses.

RP2: Research Prototype 2

The design of the second version of the ActiVis RP (RP2) was
built on the use cases developed from the first user experiment

UX1. Figure 4 shows parts from the different screens of the
RP2 separated by a horizontal line while the details of RP2 are
presented in the “Results” section.

Figure 4. ActiVis research prototype 2.

UX2.1: Expert Evaluation 1

Overview
An expert review [65] study (UX2.1) of the second prototype
(RP2) was conducted at WCQ-M. The expert review study
included use cases, surveys, questionnaires, and heuristic
walkthroughs. The WCM-Q group were invited for 2 studies.

UX2.1.1: Study 1
The participants went through the use cases [66,67] developed
by the designers after analysis of the personas and usage
scenarios from the first workshop (UX1) conducted with the
nursing staff at HMC. Each participant was also asked to follow
a think-aloud protocol when performing the task described in
the use cases with the RP2 interface. Additional suggestions
were provided toward the end of the evaluation in the survey
questionnaire. The target users of the use cases were refined
based on the suggestions from the participants.

JMIR Hum Factors 2022 | vol. 9 | iss. 2 | e25880 | p. 5

UX2.1.2: Study 2
We used the heuristic walkthrough technique [68] to get
participants ’ suggestions and improve the prototype further.
The participants completed pre- and poststudy questionnaires
as well. The identified usability problems were fixed before the

updated version of the prototype was further evaluated in the
following user experiments (UX2.2).

Participants
The participants were working in the area of diabetes research
at WCM-Q. The demographic information of the participants
is shown in Table 1.

Table 1. Demographic information of the participants in UX2.1a.

Competency level in computer
Highest degree or level of school
Experience (years)
Position
Age (years)
Gender

Advanced
Doctorate
24
Physician
50-59
Male

Intermediate
Doctorate
14
Associate Director, Clini-
cal Research
30-39
Female

Advanced
Masters
10
Clinical trial Statistician
30-39
Male

aUX: user study.

Study Protocol
The study protocol used was as follows:

•
Participants were invited via email to be a part of the study.
In the email, they were informed that the study would be
conducted in-person at the campus for their ease.
•
On the day of the study, the participants were briefed about
the purpose of the study. The participants were informed
that notes would be taken during the discussion.
•
They were asked to sign a consent form before starting the
study. Once signed, they were asked to complete the
demographic information as part of the prestudy
questionnaire (I2.1).
•
The participants were asked to read through the use cases
and provide suggestions on how to improve them. For each
use case in the questionnaire (I2.2), the participants were
asked to choose their most relevant target user, followed
by a descriptive comment justifying their choice. The
comments would help in making necessary changes to the
use cases based on the recommendations when the use case
is relevant. Additionally, they were asked 3 closed-ended
questions and 1 open-ended question as described in I2.2.
•
The participants were asked to evaluate the system using
the heuristic walkthrough method [68]. A heuristic
walkthrough is an inspection technique that combines the
benefits of heuristic evaluations, cognitive walkthroughs,
and usability walkthroughs [68]. It is a 2-step process. First,
the participants evaluate the system based on a set of tasks
and answer questions for each task based on the use cases
1, 2, and 5 from I2.2. Second, the participants identify the
usability problems in the prototype and classify them using
Nielsen’s heuristics [69] broken down by types of usability

issues. The participants were provided a reporting template
form (I2.3) to ease the process. Finally, the participants
were asked to complete a poststudy questionnaire (I2.4).

Instruments Used

Overview
A total of 4 instruments were used in this study, including a
prestudy questionnaire (I2.1), a use case questionnaire (I2.2),
a usability problem reporting template (I2.3), and a poststudy
questionnaire (I2.4). The details of each instrument and the
questions included are provided in the following subsections.

I2.1: Prestudy Questionnaire
The prestudy questionnaire gathered basic information on
demographic and computer skills from the participants. The
questions 
were 
about 
gender, 
age, 
job 
position,
university/institution/company (if a student/employed), years
of experience, nationality, highest degree, and competency level
of the computer.

I2.2: Use Case Questionnaire
For each use case, the participants were asked to choose the
most relevant target user among 3 possible options, that is,
“nurse”, “clinician,” and “not relevant”. The participants were
further asked to write a descriptive comment justifying their
choice. They were also asked 3 closed-ended questions followed
by 1 open-ended question. The participants had to choose the
best option based on the 5-point Likert scale (1 for “strongly
disagree” to 5 for “strongly agree”) for each close-ended
question. The open-ended question was to provide comments
for the use case. The closed-ended use case questions (UCQs)
are reported in Table 2.

JMIR Hum Factors 2022 | vol. 9 | iss. 2 | e25880 | p. 6

Table 2. Closed-ended questionnaires I2.2 and I2.4.

Text
Category and code

I2.2 (Use cases)

It was simple to use this system
UCQ1a

I could effectively complete the tasks using this system
UCQ2

I was able to complete the tasks quickly using this system
UCQ3

I2.4 (Overall system)

Overall, it was easy to use this system
OSQ1b

It was simple to use this system
OSQ2

I2.4 (Usability)

It was easy to learn to use this system
USBQ1c

The information provided with this system was clear and easy to understand starting from a search query, navigating
by tree keyword levels, up to getting a website description with a link to the targeted website
USBQ2

It was easy to find the information I needed
USBQ3

The information was effective in helping me complete the tasks
USBQ4

The organization of information on the system screens was clear
USBQ5

I liked using the interface of this system
USBQ6

I2.4 (Usefulness)

This system has all the functions and capabilities I expect it to have, and
USFQ1d

Overall, I am satisfied with this system performance
USFQ2

aUCQ: use case question.
bOSQ: overall system question.
cUSB: usability question.
dUSF: usefulness question.

I2.3: Usability Problems Reporting Template
The template provided the participants with an opportunity to
report usability problems that need to be fixed in the prototype.
For each usability problem, they were asked to provide a
solution/recommendation from their perspective. They were
also asked to add a severity rating of the problem as 0 for no
problem, 1 for cosmetic, 2 for minor, 3 for major, and lastly 4
for catastrophe.

I2.4: Poststudy Questionnaire
The questionnaire contained 2 closed-ended and 1 open-ended
question about the overall system usage, 6 closed-ended
questions for usability, and 2 closed-ended questions on the
usefulness of ActiVis. For the closed-ended questions,
participants had to choose 1 option based on the 5-point Likert
scale (1 for “strongly disagree” to 5 for “strongly agree”). The
closed-ended questions in the 3 said categories along with the
codes assigned to each question are shown in Table 2.

UX2.2: Expert Evaluation 2

Overview
A family doctor was invited to evaluate the second prototype
(RP2) to realize the tasks of use cases corresponding to that role
from the list refined in UX2.1.1. We followed a subset of the
protocol used in UX2.1.2.

Participant
The study involved a Spanish family doctor visiting Qatar
Computing Research Institute (QCRI) during October 2018, as
part of his collaboration with a former investigator on this
project to give feedback on QCRI’s ongoing research projects
in the area of medical/health informatics. This physician was
from southern Spain where a large proportion of the population
are migrants from the Middle East and North Africa (ie, having
Arabic origins).

Study Protocol

•
The family physician was contacted through email. The
participant was invited to take part in the study to share his
experience and knowledge, and give feedback on the
ActiVis user interface based on 3 use cases refined after
UX2.1 that corresponded to the family doctor role (use
cases 1, 2, and 5 were selected in Table 3). The participant
acknowledged and agreed to be part of the study.
•
During the study, the participant was briefed about the
purpose of conducting this research and its objectives, and
then introduced to the ActiVis user interface. The participant
was allowed to have an informal discussion with the
researcher to resolve any issues or seek any clarification
before they begin the study. Written consent was also taken
to be part of the evaluation.

JMIR Hum Factors 2022 | vol. 9 | iss. 2 | e25880 | p. 7

•
The participant was informed that notes would be taken
throughout 
the 
study, 
the 
discussion 
would 
be
audio-recorded, the interaction during the user interface
walkthrough of ActiVis would be recorded through a screen
recorder application for the analysis as a backup if any point
is missed while taking notes.

•
The participant was informed to use a think-aloud protocol
while exploring ActiVis based on the use cases. This
allowed them to say out loud whatever they were thinking
about how to perform a task described in each use case on
ActiVis.

Table 3. Use cases (UX2.1).

Target user resulting from
UX2.1.1
Initial description resulting from the analysis of UX1a by the designers and evaluated in UX2.1.1

Nurse/family doctor/clini-
cian researcher
Use case 1 (Check activity level of a patient): Nurse is at her office; she gets an alert regarding patient sleep quality.
Nurse accesses data of the patient; she visualizes the sleep pattern over consecutive days to check how regular it is. She
detects irregular sleep time and duration with additional naps on certain days. In particular, she discovers the sleep du-
ration is often short, and the quality of sleep is often poor. She also discovers patient activity is low to moderate.

Family doctor/clinician re-
searcher
Use case 2 (Comparing activity between weekdays and weekends): Nurse wants to compare the average activity of the
patient across weekdays and on weekends. She wants to identify irregular sleep patterns that could cause more fatigue.
She discovers longer sleep duration during weekends. Also, notes that naps mostly occur around 4 PM during weekdays
and around 12 PM during weekends.

Family doctor/clinician re-
searcher
Use case 3 (Comparing 1 individual before and after intervention): Nurse compares the average activity of the patient
at different periods, before and after the intervention, to assess the effectiveness of the intervention. She can see the
more regular sleep pattern both during weekdays and weekends after the intervention than before it. She can also
compare biometrics such as the normalized BMI and weight, between the 2 periods, and she can identify a loss of weight
and decrease of BMI.

Clinician researcher
Use case 4 (Comparing 2 individuals [siblings] over a long period): The nurse wants to compare the body metrics and
sleep quality of Patient 1 aged 8 years and Patient 2 aged 10 years who are siblings, over a long period to detect a po-
tential family lifestyle issue. The nurse compares the average activity level on weekdays and weekends, and BMI of
Patient 1 and Patient 2. She observes that both follow a similar but abnormal pattern of BMI consistent with the average
activity level of the corresponding periods, leading to the conclusion that it is a family lifestyle issue.

Family doctor/clinician re-
searcher
Use case 5 (Comparing an individual to a group): Nurse compares the average level of activity of the patient with the
peer group of the same gender. She can see that the patient is among the overweight subgroup, although her average
activity level is similar to one of the normal subgroups, leading her to conclude that the patient may have an unbalanced
diet or another health issue affecting her weight.

Clinician researcher
Use case 6 (Comparing males and females of a group before and after intervention): Nurse compares the average level
of activity of 2 subgroups of different genders from a group before and after intervention to assess the effectiveness of
the intervention. She can see that males increase their activity level after school during weekdays, while females increased
their sleep quality, having a more stable bedtime, especially during weekends. She can also compare biometrics such
as the normalized BMI and weight, between the 2 periods and she can identify a loss of weight and decrease of BMI
more important for the male group.

aUX: user study.

Instruments Used
This expert evaluation study used 2 of the instruments (I2.1 and
I2.2) described in UX2.1.2.

UX2.3: Users’ Evaluation Workshop 2 With Nurses

Overview
The methods used to conduct this workshop were the same as
for UX1. This workshop was conducted with the nursing
informatics staff at HMC-Q to evaluate the second prototype
(RP2). The workshop was also conducted with the same
department and at the same venue as in UX1. It was expected
that some of the staff would be the same who attended the first
workshop.

The purpose of conducting this workshop was to perform a
summative evaluation of the latest version of the prototype and
compare it with the Fitbit Dashboard, gather their qualitative
feedback, and further improve the user interface.

Participants
The recruitment process of the nursing staff was the same as
for UX1. A total of 45 participants, including nurses as well as
nursing informatics professionals, attended the workshop.

Study Protocol
The staff of the nursing informatics department was assigned
at random to 1 of 4 tables, where each table could accommodate
a maximum of 10 participants. Two groups were randomly
chosen and assigned to work with the Fitbit Dashboard, while
the remaining 2 groups were assigned to work with the ActiVis
Dashboard. All the groups were provided a laptop to explore
the assigned dashboard in a web browser using temporary
credentials to log-on to the dashboard. Each group was
instructed to appoint 1 participant as a group representative
who would lead the evaluation and inform them about the tasks
to be performed. Each group was also instructed to nominate 1
participant as a group secretary who would document the entire
discussion and problem found as a part of the evaluation. Each
group was also given a task-driven walkthrough template.

JMIR Hum Factors 2022 | vol. 9 | iss. 2 | e25880 | p. 8

Instruments Used
Two instruments were used in this study. These include (1)
task-driven walkthrough template, and (2) heuristic evaluation
of the dashboard (RP2). The details of each instrument and the
questions included are provided in the following subsections.
Heuristic evaluation is a usability inspection method that uses

evaluators to identify and assess the usability problems in a user
interface as a part of the iterative design process. This method
relies on the expertise of the domain experts to identify the
usability problem in a user interface that needs to be fixed,
categorize each identified problem in the heuristics, and rate its
severity. The set of 10 heuristics by Nielsen [69] (Figure 5) is
the most commonly used in the industry.

Figure 5. UX Check chrome extension [70] showing Nielsen’s 10 heuristics [69]. UX: User study.

JMIR Hum Factors 2022 | vol. 9 | iss. 2 | e25880 | p. 9

I4.1: Task-Driven Walkthrough Template
The template contained the following 3 tasks. These 3 tasks
were derived from use case 1 (Table 3) proposed after analysis
by the designers of the results of the collaborative workshop
with nurses (UX1) and validated as a result of UX2.1 with
clinicians. Use case 1 is targeted specifically at nurses. These
task numbers would be referred to in the results of UX2.3.

•
Task 1: Search for the average number of steps for last
week.
•
Task 2: Search for average active minutes for last month.
•
Task 3: Search and describe sleep patterns from May 20 to
July 31, 2015.

Each group was asked to brainstorm about the steps needed to
complete the task. To guide on how to come up with concrete
steps, the following steps were required to complete the first
task.

•
Enter Patient’s Name/Search in dropdown
•
Navigate to Charts
•
Observe the particular chart

For each step, the group was asked to answer the following
questions:

•
Will the user realistically be trying to do this action?
•
Is the action visible?
•
Will the user recognize the action as being the correct one?

•
Will the user understand the feedback/Is the feedback
appropriate?

I4.2: Heuristic Evaluation of the Dashboard
For the heuristic evaluation, each group was instructed to
download and add the “UX Check” [70] extension in the Google
Chrome browser. This extension allows an interactive way to
identify and describe the usability problems found on the web
page. Opening the extension while staying on any page will
show the UX Check panel on the left side of the browser as
shown in Figure 5.

The extension will create the necessary regions that can be
selected using a single click of the mouse. Users first need to
identify any region that contains the usability problem. Clicking
on the region will pop-up the dialog as shown in Figure 6. The
pop-up allows users to add the heuristic problem, problem
description in the form of notes, possible recommendations to
fix the problem from their perspective, and lastly the severity
rating. The numbers and associated description of the rating are
discussed in the “Results” section. Users can save the problem
for reporting or cancel their actions. The extension provides a
facility for users to view all the identified problems by clicking
on the “View progress” link in the pop-up shown on the left
side of the web browser. They can export all the problems
identified to a Microsoft Word Document by clicking on the
“Export” link.

Figure 6. Problems description and recommendation with UX Check [70].

Ethics Approval
The ethical approval was sought from the Qatar Biomedical
Research Institute Institutional Review Board of Hamad Bin
Khalifa University, Qatar, before conducting this research
(QBRI-IRB 2018-019). The health care professionals as

potential users were involved in all the studies as part of this
research. Following the cycles of user-centered design, each
study on a prototype with health care professionals provided
feedback, which was used as a requirement to design an
improved version as the next prototype.

JMIR Hum Factors 2022 | vol. 9 | iss. 2 | e25880 | p. 10

Results

RP1: Visual Analytic Tool for Actigraphy Sensor Data

We developed 2 versions of the ActiVis interface. The first
version (RP1) is shown in Figure 7 and was used in UX1. It
was the result of the previous analysis not reported in this study.
We proposed a visualization focused on 2 generic tasks: patient
overview and comparison, inspired from the discussion with a
previous “obesity camp” project participants, and based on the
available data [62,63].

Data are body metrics (eg, BMI, weight, height) measured at
regular intervals during the obesity camp, together with
minute-based activity recordings from wearable accelerometers.

The interface supports an overview and comparison between
the data of 2 patients, or 1 patient and a group of patients. The
left panel allows selecting the patient and the body metrics
features to be displayed. The right panel shows multiple line
charts coding for each of the selected features through time
coded on the horizontal axis. Color of the line (orange or purple)
represents the selected patient or group (Figure 8). The top and
bottom rows show bar charts representing the breakdown of
activity levels averaged per day for the corresponding patient
or group (orange or purple color of the frame; see details in
Figure 9). The rightmost views show bar charts averaging the
activity level per hour across the selected time window, during
weekdays (first and fourth rows) and weekend days (second
and third rows). The selection is done by a range selection on
the central bar charts and all charts are cross-linked to focus on
the same period.

Figure 7. First version (RP1) of the ActiVis tool: the left panel is used for patient and group data selection, and filtering on body metrics and activity
features; the right panel shows the resulting display for overview and patient/patient and patient/group comparison.

Figure 8. Details of the line chart: this chart shows the evolution of the body metric of interest (vertical axis) through time (horizontal axis) for a single
patient (blue line), and a group of patients showing its minimum (orange bottom line), maximum (orange top line), and average (red line) values.

JMIR Hum Factors 2022 | vol. 9 | iss. 2 | e25880 | p. 11

Figure 9. Details of the bar chart: Each vertical bar codes for the breakdown of activity levels per day, for sleep (dark blue), sedentary (light blue),
moderate (orange), and vigorous (red) activity levels.

UX1: Users’ Evaluation Workshop 1 With Nurses

Nurses have various goals, challenges, and frustrations;
however, the results showed that they are mainly concerned
about patients’ awareness of their health condition and ways to
monitor patients between visits. They particularly need to keep
track of patients’ metrics, activity levels, and dietary habits so
that they can contact the patients to guide them or remind them
about what they have to do as per their activity prescription.
Regarding the use of technology, some nurses raised literacy
issues and others highlighted accessibility and security concerns.

Nurses highlighted that mobile health (mHealth) apps are an
effective means to influence patients’ lifestyles. The most
desirable functionalities are activity tracking, dietary advice,
and patient education. Including a chat service to facilitate
patient-nurse communication is also a viable functionality.
Social networking with family and friends is crucial to
encourage patients to improve their lifestyles. Interactivity
features such as gamification and rewarding achievements were

identified as potential ways to motivate patients. Enabling
interaction with the app and eliciting patients’feedback facilitate
tailoring contents to suit patient needs.

Outcomes of the workshop showed that recent developments
in mHealth apps meet the needs and expectations of their
potential users. This is consistent with the latest research
findings that confirmed the popularity of mHealth apps (eg,
[36]).

The analysis of the workshop usage scenarios led us to design
6 use cases reported in the left-side column of Table 3.

RP2: Research Prototype 2

Figures 10-12 show the resulting interface to support the use
cases detailed in Table 3. The interface now has 3 different
views to support detailed activity analysis of a patient (use case
1) in Figure 10, qualitative comparison of average activities
between patients and groups of patients (use cases 2-6) in Figure
11, and quantitative analysis of the same cases in Figure 12.

Figure 10. This view supports Use Case 1: Check activity level of a patient. It shows the weekly activity of a patient broken down by day. Each row
is a day, and the x-axis shows the hours from noon to noon to focus on weekly patterns of sleep (blue). The user can switch the view (top radio button)
to span from midnight-to-midnight range and focus on daily activity level (reddish color). This view gives more details of each day and night, allows
a side-by-side comparison, and supports the user in detecting activity patterns across several days.

JMIR Hum Factors 2022 | vol. 9 | iss. 2 | e25880 | p. 12

Figure 11. This view supports the qualitative pattern analysis described in Use Cases 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6. It shows a filter (top) to enable the comparison
of average weekly activity between a patient or a group (left column) to another patient or a reference group (right).

JMIR Hum Factors 2022 | vol. 9 | iss. 2 | e25880 | p. 13

Figure 12. This view supports the quantitative pattern analysis described in Use Cases 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6. It shows the quantitative distribution of two
groups of patients along different dimensions as histograms (top two rows) or combined as a color-coded scatterplot (bottom row).

UX2.1: Expert Evaluation 1

UX2.1.1: Study 1: Use Case Questionnaire

None of the participants selected an option of “Not relevant,”
so all the use cases were retained and modified based on the
participants’ recommendations.

Table 3 presents 6 use cases resulting from our analysis of UX1,
and their reassignment to the correct target user based on the
feedback of the participants in UX2.1.1.

The discussion of the results with the participants led us to
further distinguish between nurses (use case 1), family doctors
(use cases 1, 2, 3, and 5), and clinician researchers (all use cases)
types of users. Indeed, the role of a nurse is to observe that a
prescribed activity level is correctly followed by the patients to
give them reminders if needed, and to notice possible anomalies
to report to the doctor, both tasks falling under use case 1. The
role of a family doctor is to recommend treatment to the patient.

In addition to realizing the tasks assigned to a nurse, the doctor
can compare activities or biometrics of a patient between 2
periods (use case 2) to spot differences and recommend a
corrective intervention to the patient. The doctors can also
control the effect of their prescribed intervention by comparing
activity levels and other biometrics before and after it took place
(use case 3). At last, the family doctor can compare the patient
with statistics derived from groups of patients with similar
attributes (age, gender, BMI, or health condition; use case 5).
Both nurses and doctors are focused on a single patient at a
time. Finally, the clinician researcher focuses on observing
trends and patterns within and between cohorts of patients (use
case 6), generating knowledge that can guide the family doctors
to address the health issue of a specific patient. The clinician
researcher can also study more specific cases comparing them
over a long period (use case 4) and in general conduct all the
other tasks assigned to doctors and nurses for specific patients.

JMIR Hum Factors 2022 | vol. 9 | iss. 2 | e25880 | p. 14

Following this refined assignment, we selected use cases 1, 2,
and 5 for further summative evaluation in UX2.1.2 and UX2.2
with the family doctor, because use cases 2 and 3 involved
similar tasks. We also focused strictly on use case 1 for the
summative evaluation with nurses in UX2.3 as it was the only
use case targeted to them.

Table 4 presents the cumulative responses related to the use
case questionnaire (I2.2). The first column presents the 3 use
cases used in the expert evaluation study (see Table 3 for the

full forms of mentioned use cases), the short-form of 3 questions
asked for each use case is presented in the subcolumn (see I2.2
and Table 2 for the full form of each question), while the
remaining columns contain the cumulative responses in terms
of “strongly disagree”, “disagree”, “neutral”, “agree”, and
“strongly agree.” Because 3 participants took part in the study,
the maximum number of responses is less than or equal to 3.
For each use case, the participants found that they were able to
effectively, quickly, and efficiently complete the tasks using
RP2.

Table 4. Cumulative responses of the participants for use cases 1, 2, and 5.

Strongly agree
Agree
Neutral
Disagree
Strongly disagree
Use case and usability criterion

1

1
2
0
0
0
UCQ1a

1
2
0
0
0
UCQ2

1
2
0
0
0
UCQ3

2

1
2
0
0
0
UCQ1

2
1
0
0
0
UCQ2

2
1
0
0
0
UCQ3

5

1
1
1
0
0
UCQ1

1
1
1
0
0
UCQ2

1
2
0
0
0
UCQ3

aUCQ: user case question.

UX2.1.2: Study 2

Usability Problems Reporting
The descriptive comments provided by the participants as part
of open-ended questions are presented in Multimedia Appendix
1. It is to be noted that minor changes were incorporated in the
user interface of RP2 based on the participants’ comments;
therefore, no new RP was produced.

Poststudy Questionnaire
Table 5 presents the cumulative responses of the overall system,
usability, and usefulness from the participant’s point of view
as a part of the poststudy questionnaire (see I2.4 for the
questions based on the codes used in the subcolumn) using a
“clustered column chart.” The format of Table 5 is similar to
that of Table 4.

Table 5 shows the usefulness of the system from the
participants’ point of view. The participants found that the
system had all the functions and capabilities they expected it to
have, and they were satisfied with the performance of this
system.

In terms of the overall system, Table 5 shows that the
participants found that the system was easy and simple to use.

In terms of the usability of the system, Table 5 shows that the
participants found that the system was easy to learn, the
information provided was clear and easy to understand, the
information needed was easy to find, information was effective
to complete the tasks, organization of information across the
screens was clear, and lastly, they liked using the interface of
this system.

JMIR Hum Factors 2022 | vol. 9 | iss. 2 | e25880 | p. 15

Table 5. Cumulative responses of the participants UX2.1.2.

Strongly agree
Agree
Neutral
Disagree
Strongly disagree
Category and code

Overall system

2
1
0
0
0
OSQ1a

1
2
0
0
0
OSQ2

Usability

2
1
0
0
0
USBQ1b

1
2
0
0
0
USBQ2

2
0
1
0
0
USBQ3

2
1
0
0
0
USBQ4

2
1
0
0
0
USBQ5

2
1
0
0
0
USBQ6

Usefulness

1
2
0
0
0
USFQ1c

1
1
1
0
0
USFQ2

aOSQ: overall system question.
bUSB: usability question.
cUSF: usefulness question.

UX2.2: Expert Evaluation 2

The audio-taped RP2 interface walkthrough was analyzed. The
problems identified and the recommendations provided by the
participant evaluation based on the given use cases are presented
in Multimedia Appendix 2. Both problems and recommendations
were communicated to the engineers to incorporate necessary
changes in ActiVis RP2, leading to minor changes in the user
interface of ActiVis RP2 used for the UX2.3.

UX2.3: Users’ Evaluation Workshop 2 With Nurses

Fitbit Dashboard

Overview
Table 6 shows the cumulative number of “yes” and “no” against
each question for all the steps required to complete tasks 1, 2,

and 3 (see I4.1 for the task details) by all the groups using the
Fitbit Dashboard. If the answer to any question is “yes,” then
it means the group mutually agreed to the statement; however,
if an answer to any question is “no,” then it shows the
disagreement. In the latter case, they were instructed to add
more description so that the problem can be rectified in the user
interface. However, during the analysis of the filled templates
returned by the groups, it was found that some of the groups
also commented when their answer was “yes.” Such comments
mainly reflected the minor changes recommended by the group
despite an agreement to the question.

Table 6. Cumulative number of responses against each question for all the steps required to complete tasks using the Fitbit Dashboard.

Questions
Fitbit

Q4: Will the user understand
the feedback/is the feedback
appropriate?

Q3: Will user recognize the ac-
tion as being the correct one?
Q2: Is the action visible?
Q1: Will the user realistically
be trying to do this action?

No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes

2
4
1
5
1
5
0
6
Task 1: 6 steps

0
4
0
4
0
4
0
4
Task 2: 4 steps

0
4
0
4
0
4
0
4
Task 3: 4 steps

The results for each task are as follows:

Task 1
For all the steps in Q1, the participants were willing to perform
an action. For most of the steps (5/6) in Q2 and Q3, the
participants found that the action was visible, and they could

recognize that the action performed was the correct one. For
4/6 steps in Q4, the participants found that they were able to
understand the feedback, or that the feedback was appropriate.

JMIR Hum Factors 2022 | vol. 9 | iss. 2 | e25880 | p. 16

Tasks 2 and 3
For all the steps (4/4), the participants were willing to perform
an action, found that the action was visible, that they recognized
that the action performed was the correct one, and that the
feedback given toward the end of the task was understandable
or appropriate.

ActiVis Dashboard

Overview
Table 7 shows the cumulative number of “yes” and “no” against
each question for all the steps required to complete tasks 1, 2,
and 3 by all the groups using the ActiVis Dashboard.

The format of Table 7 is similar to that of Table 6. The results
for each task are as described in the following sections.

Table 7. Cumulative number of responses against each question for all the steps required to complete tasks using the ActiVis Dashboard.

Questions
ActiVis

Q4: Will the user understand
the feedback/Is the feedback
appropriate?

Q3: Will user recognize the ac-
tion as being the correct one?
Q2: Is the action visible?
Q1: Will the user realistically
be trying to do this action?

No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes

3
3
2
4
0
6
1
5
Task 1: 6 steps

2
4
2
4
3
3
1
5
Task 2: 6 steps

0
6
1
5
1
5
2
4
Task 3: 6 steps

Task 1
For most of the steps (5/6) in Q1, the participants were willing
to perform an action, for all the steps (6/6) in Q2, the participants
found that the action was visible. For 4/6 steps in Q3, the
participants were able to recognize that the action performed
was the correct one. However, for 3/6 steps in Q4, the
participants had mixed opinions; for half of the steps, they found
that they were either unable to understand the feedback, or that
the feedback was inappropriate, while for the remaining steps,
they found that they were able to understand the feedback, or
that the feedback was appropriate.

Task 2
For most of the steps (3/4) in Q1, the participants were willing
to perform an action; however, for 3/5 steps in Q2, the
participants found that the action was not visible. For 2/4 steps
in Q3, the participants had mixed opinions. For half of the steps,
some participants found that they were able to recognize the
action performed, while the other participants found that they
were unable to recognize the action performed. Similarly, a
mixed opinion was also found for Q4 (2/4 steps). For half of
the steps, some participants found that they were able to
understand the feedback given toward the end of the task, while
the other participants found that they were unable to understand
the feedback given at the end of the task.

Task 3
For 3/5 steps in Q1, the participants were willing to perform an
action, for 4/5 steps in Q2 and Q3 each, the participants found
that the action was visible and that they recognized that action
performed was the correct one. For all the steps, the participants
found that the feedback given after the task was performed was
understandable or appropriate.

Heuristic Evaluation of the Interfaces

Figure 13 shows the number of usability problems found and
the average severity ratings of the identified problems in the
Fitbit Dashboard and the ActiVis Dashboard, respectively, using
Nielsen’s 10 heuristics. The “stacked columns” represent the
“number of usability problems” (left vertical scale), whereas
the “line with markers” represents the “average severity rating
of the identified problems” (right vertical scale). Each stack
column shows the number of usability problems found based
on the 4 severity ratings, that is, cosmetic, minor, major, and
catastrophic. The axis on the left-hand side is known as the
primary axis and it is related to the “stacked columns,” whereas
the axis on the right-hand side is known as the secondary axis
and is related to the “line with markers.”

A total of 11 usability problems were identified in each of the
2 dashboards (ie, Fitbit and ActiVis). The analysis of the results
in terms of the number of usability problems found in Fitbit
shows that the recognition heuristic (n=4) was the more
commonly broken heuristic, followed by the visibility and
control heuristics (n=2 each). Similarly, the analysis of the
results in terms of the number of usability problems found in
ActiVis shows that the control heuristic (n=4) was the more
commonly broken heuristic, followed by the visibility, match,
and recognition heuristics (n=2 each).

The analysis of the results in terms of the average severity rating
shows that the majority of problems identified are minor.

The number of usability problems identified and their severity
rating provided by the participants for the Fitbit Dashboard and
the ActiVis Dashboard were the same. However, the Fitbit
Dashboard has more severe issues than the ActiVis Dashboard
in terms of visibility, recognition, error, and documentation.
Still, ActiVis needs improvement compared with Fitbit in terms
of control and match, and to solve the catastrophic visibility
issue identified.

JMIR Hum Factors 2022 | vol. 9 | iss. 2 | e25880 | p. 17

Figure 13. Usability problems identified in Fitbit and ActiVis dashboards.

RP3: Research Prototype 3

The work on this project is still ongoing. The 3 UX (UX2.1,
UX2.2, and UX2.3) of the second ActiVis prototype (RP2) led
to new and updated requirements for RP3. Since the last study,
the work on this interface has been organized in 2 different
branches. The research effort specific to the visualization
interface has been split between the different types of users
(nurses described in use case 1; family doctors in use cases 2,
3, and 5; and clinician researchers in use cases 4 and 6) with
specific charts and interactions but with a common core of data
processing functions. The developed visualization prototypes
are planned to be integrated into a platform able to read data
from different wearable devices available on the market, and
integrated into a clinic environment. User evaluations will
continue as part of the user-centered design and PD cycles.

Discussion

Principal Findings

The key finding from these PD studies is the derivation from
post hoc analysis of nurses’ workshop, and the validation by 2
physicians, 1 clinician researcher, and 1 clinician statisticians
of the 6 use cases to analyze wearable data for health care
professionals. These use cases are assigned to specific user
roles: nurses, family doctors, and clinician researchers. They
will facilitate the design and development of new data analytics
and visualization interfaces to support the particular needs of
these users.

UX1

During the PD workshop with nurses evoking their work and
relations with patients and other health care professionals, we
could not identify specific cultural needs in terms of the
visualization of wearable data for health care professionals.
Some of the persona and usage scenarios were obviously
representative of the local Arabic culture by design, and it is
also well-known that particular customs such as prayer times
and fasting during the Ramadan Holy month can impact people’s
patterns of physical activities, sleep, and diet, but none of these
aspects finally influenced the more technical use cases we
derived from these discussions. The use cases we propose ended
up being culturally agnostic (Table 3).

UX2.3

The final evaluation comparing Fitbit and ActiVis dashboards
showed there is ample room for improvement even in existing
interfaces such as Fitbit, widely available for the general public.
We only evaluated use case 1 specific to nurses and already
identified some major and catastrophic problems, with severe
ratings being more frequent with Fitbit than with ActiVis.
Although Fitbit was not necessarily designed to support this
use case, it shows that we cannot simply reuse available
interfaces to support end users in the best way. Supporting
statistical and visual analyses of wearable data from cohorts of
patients as stated in use cases targeted at clinician researchers
are not optimal or even possible with existing visualization tools
and will deserve further investigations.

In general, this project also showed how conducting PD is
necessary but still challenging. It has been difficult to plan
several of the studies in advance. The use of the opportunistic
approach allowed us to use the available local health care
professionals throughout the design, development, and validation
of RPs presented in this paper. Qatar is a country where 90%
of the population are expatriates mixing Western, Asian, and
Muslim cultures. Because of the heterogeneous culture and
origin of the population, it is challenging to study the levels of
health awareness in Qatar [71]. Nevertheless, this is crucial to
understand to develop efficient health-targeted visualizations.
The population diversity also allowed us to get feedback from
non-Qatari, non-Muslim users too. Opening to a wide range of
cultures in the same place is of interest to understand what is
common or specific to these end users. Although the interface
for health care professionals is not impacted by local culture,
we know from a previous study [72] that the interfaces involving
the patients themselves will need specific care of their local
particular health conditions (eg, diabetes or obesity) and Muslim
culture (Ramadan Holy month effect on diet, sleep, and physical
activity).

Limitations

The study has several limitations. First, a specific set of methods
from the user-centered design and PD methodologies was used.
Second, the studies were conducted with a selected list of
institutions and their experts as participants. Third, several
participants were used in each study that was mainly dependent
on multiple factors, including availability based on their routine
clinical appointments, meetings, and teaching. Fourth, Nielsen’s

JMIR Hum Factors 2022 | vol. 9 | iss. 2 | e25880 | p. 18

heuristics were used to diagnose user problems in the prototype
that need to be fixed. All these constraints could affect the
generalizability of the results. For future studies, we seek higher
diversity and a higher number of participants, and
domain-specific heuristics to get more generalizable findings.

Conclusion

This paper shows how the use of PD and user-centered design
allowed the development of a visualization interface supporting
the real needs of health care professionals in Qatar. Although
Qatar is an oil-based economy that nurtures a rich multicultural

environment, the use cases we derived from the PD studies
happen to be culturally agnostic. We hope these use cases will
serve to design future visualization and analytic systems
optimized to support the needs specific to nurses, family doctors,
and clinician researchers, beyond existing dashboards designed
primarily for the general public. This work is still ongoing. A
cluster project has now started that is funded under the Qatar
National Research Fund [73] and will support further
development and integration of these visualizations in a clinical
setting to help clinician researchers, doctors, and nurses improve
the health of Qatari citizens and residents.