Original Paper

Designing an Indoor Air Quality Monitoring App for Asthma
Management in Children: User-Centered Design Approach

Sunyoung Kim1, PhD; Yunoh Park2, BSc; Matthew K Ackerman1, MI

1School of Communication and Information, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ, United States
2Department of Computer Science, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ, United States

Sunyoung Kim, PhD
School of Communication and Information
Rutgers University
4 Huntington Street
New Brunswick, NJ
United States
Phone: 1 848 932 7585

Abstract

Background: Indoor air pollution is a well-known risk factor that triggers and exacerbates asthma, the most common pediatric
chronic disease. Using a mobile app to monitor indoor air quality could be promising in engaging children in keeping their indoor
air quality clean and healthy as secondary environmental prevention for asthma management. However, no app is available to
allow children to monitor, assess, and improve their indoor air quality.
Objective: This study aims to design a mobile app that encourages children to monitor indoor air quality and track their asthma
conditions through a user-centered, iterative design approach.
Methods: We reviewed existing apps for indoor air quality monitoring or asthma management for children and conducted two
sets of semistructured interviews with 12 children with asthma. We then iteratively created prototypes and evaluated and revised
them.
Results: Participants raised a series of outstanding questions on the prototype features and content that described their needs
and perspectives, which informed the final designs. Following the identified requirements and recommendations, we developed
two versions of the app: AirBuddy for presenting concrete information for indoor air quality and AirPet for gamifying the practice
of monitoring indoor air quality.
Conclusions: By following an iterative, user-centered design process, we developed two versions of an app to encourage children
with asthma to monitor indoor air quality and track their asthma condition. The user-centered design approach revealed two
crucial aspects that require deeper consideration when creating a child-friendly app, including balancing brevity and expressivity
and considering the longitudinal effects of gamification. As a next step, we plan to conduct a longitudinal deployment study to
evaluate the real-world effects of our apps.

(JMIR Form Res 2021;5(9):e27447) doi: 10.2196/27447

KEYWORDS
asthma; children; indoor air quality; mobile app; smartphone; user-centered design

Introduction

Background

Asthma is the most common pediatric chronic disease,
characterized by recurrent attacks of breathlessness and
wheezing. It is estimated that more than 340 million people
have asthma globally [1], and 8.4% of children in the United
States had asthma in 2018 [2]. Childhood asthma creates a

substantial burden on the affected children and their families
by requiring regular medical encounters, restricting the child’s
activities, and increasing the risk of school absences [3].

While asthma cannot currently be cured, it can be controlled
through improved health care and avoiding or reducing asthma
triggers 
from 
environmental 
factors. 
Among 
various
environmental factors that contribute to excessive asthma
morbidity, exposures to air pollutants are a crucial contributor

JMIR Form Res 2021 | vol. 5 | iss. 9 | e27447 | p. 1

to worsening the symptoms [4-6]. The relationship between
fine particulate matter and asthma morbidity is especially well
established [7]. Because children spend most of their time
indoors, indoor environments dominate exposures to many air
pollutants [8]. Thus, it is important to monitor indoor air quality
(IAQ) for asthma management [9]. However, childhood asthma
management is challenging because it requires understanding
the causes of triggers and avoiding them, with triggers being
both multifactorial and unique to each individual [10].
Moreover, it is difficult for doctors and parents to monitor the
health of children with asthma simultaneously with
environmental triggers.

Smartphones are ubiquitous, sensors have become prominently
used in mobile health (mHealth), and mobile apps offer new
opportunities for access to care and monitoring and managing
a chronic disease [11,12]. mHealth apps provide various features
to facilitate asthma management, including medication
reminders, symptom monitoring, prompt communication with
a provider, and access to tailored education, information, and
resources [13-15]. Because asthma is a chronic condition, it is
crucial to educate affected children on how to live with it, and
mobile apps can meet such needs. However, few apps offer
ways to monitor air pollutants indoors, some of the most
frequent triggers for asthma attacks, and even fewer apps are
specifically designed for children. For mobile apps to
successfully manage chronic diseases, designers must be
committed to user-centered, evidence-based design to meet user
needs. Beyond the requirements of good design and
development, the central question of designing mobile apps for
children with asthma is how to accommodate the perspectives
and needs of children and engage children in digital interactions
that foster positive outcomes for asthma management.

Objectives

The objectives of this study were to investigate children’s
perspectives and needs in the design of a child-friendly mobile
app and develop, through a user-centered, iterative design
approach, a mobile app that encourages children to monitor
IAQ.

Methods

Overview

User-centered design is an iterative process in which designers
focus on users and their needs in each phase of the design
process by putting users at the center of product development
[16]. General steps in user-centered design include evaluating
and applying relevant theory, understanding user needs and the
environment in which the app will be used, and iteratively
producing and evaluating prototypes for the final product design
[16]. This study followed the user-centered process to iteratively
design and refine a child-friendly IAQ monitoring app for
asthma management.

Participant Recruitment

Children aged 8 to 12 years with moderate to severe persistent
asthma, as determined by the National Institutes of Health
guidelines for the diagnosis and management of asthma [17],
were eligible to participate in the study. We chose the 8- to
12-year age range because children around the age of 8 years
start to understand basic terms and sentences and shift from
learning to read to reading to learn, and thus they can use digital
devices for autonomous tasks [18]. Since we planned to design
a mobile app that provides IAQ information in simple written
sentences to help children understand IAQ, we targeted children
with asthma who can read simple sentences. Thus, children
were not eligible if they could not read or speak English or if
their involvement was deemed inappropriate by the pediatrician
because of their mental and physical conditions.

After obtaining the institutional review board’s approval, we
recruited participants from a children’s hospital and
school-based health centers in an urban area. For recruitment,
we first contacted pediatricians and explained the purpose of
the study and recruitment criteria to them. The pediatricians
recommended potential participants among their patients (upon
guardian approval) who regularly visit the hospital. We then
contacted guardians of children with asthma by telephone. A
total of 12 guardians whose children met the inclusion criteria
were contacted for recruitment. All of their children were
recruited to participate in the study (6 females and 6 males,
mean age 9.8 [SD 1.6] years; Table 1). After we obtained
temporary consent to participate in the study by telephone,
guardians and their children provided consent electronically
during the interview.

JMIR Form Res 2021 | vol. 5 | iss. 9 | e27447 | p. 2

Table 1. Participant demographics.

Guardian’s highest educational attainment
Guardian’s relationship to
participant
Asthma severity
Ethnicity
Gender
Age (years)
ID

2-year college
Mother
Intermittent
Hispanic
M
12
P1

Less than high school
Grandmother
Intermittent
Hispanic
F
9
P2

2-year college
Mother
Intermittent
White
M
10
P3

2-year college
Mother
Intermittent
White
M
12
P4

University
Mother
Moderate
White
M
11
P5

Graduate
Mother
Intermittent
White
M
8
P6

University
Mother
Intermittent
White
F
8
P7

University
Mother
Intermittent
White
F
8
P8

High school
Grandmother
Intermittent
White
F
10
P9

University
Mother
Moderate
Black
M
8
P10

University
Mother
Mild
White
F
11
P11

2-year college
Mother
Mild
Black
F
11
P12

Data Collection

Reviewing Existing Apps

We conducted a review of mobile apps available in the market
that offer functionalities on IAQ monitoring or asthma
management for children to establish baseline concepts and
functionalities for our app. While we conducted an extensive
review of existing apps available on Apple’s App Store and
Google Play, we did not find any app that offered functionalities
for IAQ monitoring associated with asthma management or

IAQ monitoring for children. Thus, we selected instead two
IAQ monitoring apps, AirNow and AirVisual, and three asthma
management apps designed for children—Wheezo, a digital
stethoscope that records breathing sounds to detect signs of
asthma; AsthMe, an information repository for asthma
management; and AsthmaActionHero, a mobile diary to record
asthma 
conditions 
and 
take 
actions 
for 
asthma
management—based on the number of downloads, reviews,
and average user ratings (Figure 1). Based on a review of
existing apps, we created two sets of low-fidelity sketch
prototypes for our app (Figures 2 and 3).

Figure 1. Screenshots of apps found during app review: (a) AirVisual, (b) AirNow, (c) AsthMe, (d) Wheezo, and (e) AsthmaActionHero.

JMIR Form Res 2021 | vol. 5 | iss. 9 | e27447 | p. 3

Figure 2. Prototyping process of AirBuddy that used emojis and a bar graph from (a) sketches to a (b) wireframe to a (c) high-fidelity prototype.

Figure 3. Prototyping process of AirPet, a gamified app using egg hatching to display indoor air quality from (a) sketches to a (b) wireframe to a (c)
high-fidelity prototype.

Understanding User Needs

An important step in user-centered design is to establish a basic
understanding of the practices and needs of end users to guide
the ideation and design of an app. To obtain this, we conducted
semistructured interviews with each child. For the interviews,
we created a set of open-ended interview questions with 3 key
themes: (1) exploring how children with asthma manage and
live with their conditions, (2) investigating the experiences of
using mobile apps in general and for asthma management in
particular, and (3) learning about the current understanding of
IAQ and its relationship to asthma. In addition, we collected
participant basic demographic information including age,
gender, and asthma severity from their guardians.

All interviews were done virtually using videoconferencing
software of the participant’s choice (eg, Skype, Zoom). While
all questions were to be asked to children, we also encouraged
participant’s guardians to join the interview and share their
thoughts about the question or their child’s answer when they
wanted. Last, we displayed our low-fidelity sketch prototypes
on a shared screen, explained the key concepts of each sketch,
and asked the participants for feedback. Each interview lasted
about 30 minutes.

Iterative Design and Evaluation

Based on our prototype sketches, collected requirements, and
feedback in the previous steps, we iteratively created a set of
wireframes that were then developed into high-fidelity

JMIR Form Res 2021 | vol. 5 | iss. 9 | e27447 | p. 4

prototypes (Figures 2 and 3). We conducted one-on-one
interviews with the same group of participants to receive
feedback on the prototypes. In the interview, we first introduced
our app to participants as “a mobile app that allows you to
monitor air qualities in your home and outside, record your
asthma conditions, and find information about actions to take
for asthma management.” We displayed our prototypes on a
shared screen and asked participants to think aloud and express
their thoughts and feelings while freely exploring the prototypes
as much as they wanted.

During the interview, a participant verbally commanded their
intended interactions with a prototype cast on a shared screen.
Then, an interviewer executed the user’s interaction commands
as a form of the Wizard of Oz study. When participants had no
more ideas to share, we asked 3 questions about each screen
based on the cognitive walkthrough method, including (1)
visibility, did the user notice the correct action to take; (2)
affordance, did the user associate the correct action with the
outcome they expect to achieve; and (3) feedback, if the correct
action was performed, did the user see that progress was being
made toward their intended outcome [19]. Each interview lasted
up to 60 minutes. After completing this interview, the guardians
of participants were sent an electronic gift card for their child’s
participation.

Data Analysis

We analyzed the interview data using thematic analysis to reveal
patterns across data sets and draw out significant themes [20].
The emerging themes were continuously discussed by the
authors until data were saturated and no new information was
anticipated. First, we conducted open coding to identify concepts
that were significant in the data. The following example shows
that one participant did not understand how the egg hatching
concept relates to IAQ, and this response was coded as “unclear
concept.”

{Unclear concept} What does the air quality inside
have to do with hatching an egg? [Participant
P2]{/Unclear concept}
We then categorized the related concepts created by open coding
using axial coding. Phenomena refer to repeated patterns of
events, happenings, actions, and interactions representing
people’s responses to problems and situations. For instance,
“confusion” is a phenomenon that refers to a participant’s
incorrect or lack of understanding about the meanings of the
visual representation in the app interface. During axial coding,
the open code “unclear concept” in the example above was
categorized as “confusion” since the participant did not
understand the meaning of egg hatching. Last, we performed
the selective coding process to integrate the categories derived
from axial coding.

Results

Design Conceptualization

From the review of the existing apps, 4 trends emerged that
were prevalent or common across apps. First, all apps used vivid
colors and simple graph components for information
visualization (Figure 1a). For instance, the apps for air quality

monitoring used colored graphical components such as
speedometers, emojis, and bar graphs with color scales to
indicate the level of air quality (Figure 1b). In contrast, the apps
for asthma management allowed users to pick different emojis
and other colored graphical components to indicate the user’s
condition (Figure 1c). Second, all apps used graphic characters
and personified graphical components to make information
more engaging and fun (Figure 1d and 1e). Third, all apps
provided the features to track the history or trend of the
monitored information. For instance, graphs were used by apps
for air quality monitoring to keep track of the changes in air
quality indoors and outdoors over time, and the apps for asthma
management offered the features to record and keep track of
asthma symptoms and conditions. Last, all apps offered
informational content to encourage users to make beneficial,
real-life changes. For instance, the apps for air quality
monitoring provided information about how users should
respond to poor air quality indoors. And the apps for asthma
management provided information about how to prevent or
react to asthma symptoms.

With these themes, we came up with 2 design concepts and
created 2 corresponding sets of sketch prototypes to meet the
objectives of our app in different ways. The first concept was
a conventional form of concrete information presentation using
graphical components such as graphs, calendars, and emojis to
present the level of air qualities indoors and outdoors and allow
logging the user’s asthma condition (Figure 2a). The second
concept was gamification using the theme of raising a pet, in
which the levels of IAQ and user engagement with an app turn
into treats to feed a virtual pet. For a virtual pet, we chose 2
themes, egg hatching and planting (Figure 3a).

User Needs and Feedback on Sketch Prototypes

All participants had a decent understanding of asthma, what
triggers asthma attacks, and what to do when asthma flares up.
Regarding asthma triggers, all participants mentioned humidity
and heat (weather) as primary causes of symptom worsening,
whereas there was no understanding of the relationship between
air pollution and asthma. At best, air pollution was considered
analogous to humidity to some participants. Most participants
did not have much interest in or knowledge about air quality or
its effects on asthma. These show the importance of providing
IAQ information along with weather and humidity to help users
understand the relationships among temperature, humidity, IAQ,
and asthma.

Asthma affects your breathing and makes it harder
to breathe. Like when it gets really hot, or in my hot
showers when the room gets steamy, I have trouble
breathing. [Participant P2]
A few days ago, when I was walking with my mom,
my dad, and my brother, the air was getting humid
and dense, and it was getting hard for me to breathe.
I think humidity makes it hard to breathe, harder to
breathe sometimes. [Participant P8]
Like probably more polluted air, like more humid air
affects me more than just fine air. [Participant P3]

JMIR Form Res 2021 | vol. 5 | iss. 9 | e27447 | p. 5

The primary resources of information for asthma management
were parents and the internet. None of the participants was using
an app for asthma management or expressed any interest in
using one, which shows the importance of actively motivating
user engagement with the app.

When I have any question, my mom and dad are the
first choice. If that doesn’t work, probably the internet
because I’m not always at the doctor’s office.
[Participant P3]
I usually ask Alexa for how the weather is, like what’s
the weather today. [Participant P4]
When we showed our sketch prototypes to participants during
the first interview, the overall response was positive on both
prototypes, although they did not provide detailed feedback. It
might be because the low-fidelity prototypes missed many
details making it difficult for children to offer exhaustive
responses. All participants confirmed that both themes were
easy to understand. For sketch prototypes with traditional
graphical components, participants expressed equal preferences
on a bar graph, a calendar, and emojis. For sketch prototypes
with gamified concepts, participants expressed a preference for
egg hatching over planting.

Iterative Design for High-Fidelity Prototyping

Based on user feedback on the sketch prototypes and their
expressed needs, we iteratively created 2 sets of wireframes,
which we developed into high-fidelity prototypes. Key features
of the app include visualizing air qualities indoors and outdoors
in real time and keeping track of the user’s asthma condition.
In the system development, IAQ data will be transmitted from
a separate IAQ sensor (Figure 4, left). The outdoor air quality
data will be retrieved from an AirNow application programming
interface that provides current air quality data by zip code. A
commercialized spirometer will be provided to participants to
measure lung condition and enter results into the apps (Figure
4, right). An IAQ sensor and spirometer will be packaged with
the app.

The first wireframe, which we named AirBuddy, was created
using a combination of a bar graph and emojis to visualize air
quality indoors and outdoors (Figure 2b). Through several design
iterations and discussions within the research team, we
developed the wireframe into a high-fidelity prototype that
displays color-coded house and cloud icons to show the current
air quality levels indoors and outdoors, respectively. Also
included are weather forecast, humidity, and a color-coded bar
graph presenting the weekly trend of these data (Figure 2c). We
juxtaposed a house icon with a cloud icon so that users can
compare air quality indoors and outdoors. For the color codes,
we used the US Environmental Protection Agency’s Air Quality
Index (AQI) color codes to visually present the level of air
quality (Figure 5). For a feature for engagement, this prototype
provides a personified house character, Airic, a chatbot placed
at the bottom left corner of the navigation bar. It answers
questions regarding air quality and asthma in simple language
suitable for children and reminds them to enter spirometer
readings to the app.

The second wireframe, named AirPet, was created using a
gamification theme of egg hatching (Figure 3b). We developed
the wireframe into a high-fidelity prototype through several
design iterations and discussions within the research team that
shows a virtual egg for which hatching speed is determined by
the level of air quality indoors and daily spirometer data entry
(Figure 3c). This prototype uses the status of IAQ and whether
or not daily spirometer data is recorded as factors to affect the
speed of egg hatching, and the hatching progress is displayed
on a progress bar underneath the egg. Maintaining good IAQ
and recording daily spirometer data will hatch approximately
one egg a week. In addition, air quality outdoors and weather
information are displayed on top of the screen.

Since the concepts of these 2 prototypes are entirely
different—AirBuddy for concrete information presentation and
AirPet for abstract gamification—representing different aspects
of strengths and weaknesses in the interface design, we decided
to keep both ideas for the final system design.

Figure 4. Images of an indoor air quality sensor that measures PM 2.5, CO2, and NO2 (left) and a spirometer that measures FEV1, FEV6, and % of
personal best FEV1 (right).

JMIR Form Res 2021 | vol. 5 | iss. 9 | e27447 | p. 6

Figure 5. Air Quality Index color codes for Particulate Matters.

User Feedback on High-Fidelity Prototypes

The first few comments across all participants about our
prototypes indicated preferences toward colorful interfaces,
which confirms prior work showing that color is a distinguishing
characteristic for children’s engagement with a digital interface
[21]. Participants were all attracted to both apps for their colorful
interfaces and positively mentioned most graphical components
provided in the app.

Both have popping colors. I think it helps to get its
attention. [Participant P5]
I like it (AirPet). It is beautiful. [Participant P10]
The house [in AirBuddy] can talk! If I wanted to say,
“Hi house,” what would it say back? Hi? Can I try
it? [Participant P11]
While vivid colors were an effective component to draw
children’s attention to the app, we found it was not adequate to
use color to convey information. The meanings of colors in the
AQI color codes were green for good air quality, orange for
moderate air quality, red for unhealthy air quality, and purple
for extremely unhealthy air quality. When we asked participants
how they interpreted the meanings of different colors concerning
the level of air quality in the app, however, many participants
interpreted purple as better air quality than when it was red.
This suggests that care must be taken when using colors to
convey information in a child-friendly user interface or users
might misinterpret the information.

I think the red will stand for the highest bad air and
then the purple will be a lower level and the orange
will be lower and yellow will be lower and green will
be the best time to go outside. [Participant P7]
The colors? Green means good. Yellow means okay.
Orange means getting kind of good. Pink means kind
of bad. And then, kind of very bad for purple. And
then, red is very bad. [Participant P9]
The colors of house and cloud icons in the AirBuddy were
designed to change based on air quality levels indoors and
outdoors to present them visually. However, many participants
did not know how to interpret these colored icons until we
explained them in detail.

The cloud makes me think of the air and stuff around.
The house is just… I don’t know. It doesn’t really

make me think of air quality. It makes me think just
the house. [Participant P1]
I think the cloud is for the air quality inside, but I am
not sure what the house is. Maybe adding something
to explain what this means will be helpful. [Participant
P9]
In addition, we found that a color-coded bar graph in AirBuddy
to present the recent trend of air quality indoors and outdoors
influenced participants’perspectives on the app both positively
and negatively. The positive aspect was that most participants
easily understood the concept of a bar graph because they were
familiar with it from other contexts, such as in class or for
asthma measurement. The negative aspect was that those
different contexts where a bar graph was used made participants
perceive the app as less fun or engaging and instead more
educational and informational.

Because of this (a bar graph), it (AirBuddy) looks like
a grading type of app or something that I use in
school that gives you a report on how you do.
[Participant P7]
It (AirBuddy) looks familiar. We use something like
that in science at school and also the thing that I see
when I have to breathe into the thing, and it shows
how long I can breathe. [Participant P12]
In the design of AirPet, we applied the concept of egg hatching
to present IAQ information simply yet effectively, which turned
out to be a positive factor for participants’ initial impression of
the app. Participants expressed their preference for AirPet over
AirBuddy because AirPet’s gamification factors made
interaction with the app more engaging and fun. However, the
concept of egg hatching related to IAQ and the progress bar
was confusing and unclear to some participants.

I like this app (AirPet) better because it gives you a
better experience on how to learn about air quality
and how asthma works and how to get rid of it.
[Participant P6]
I think that the air inside is what helps you hatch the
egg. The better the air, the better the air hatches.
[Participant P7]
I think the egg would represent the air and how you
make it better. By making the egg better, you are
making your asthma better. [Participant P10]

JMIR Form Res 2021 | vol. 5 | iss. 9 | e27447 | p. 7

What does the air quality inside have to do with
hatching an egg? And, what are all these numbers
underneath the egg? [Participant P2]
Last, participants’parents expressed positivity toward the utility
of the apps for easy access to information and fostering a child’s
skill for asthma self-management.

I think any way that you can take some ownership
over your own health issues is definitely a beneficial
thing, especially since he [her son] has massive
amounts of food allergies, which also is part of what
triggers his asthma. So, I think, any way that he can
have tools to help him where I am not micromanaging
his health would definitely be good. [Participant 6’s
parent]
Sometimes you are not quite sure what could be
harming your child or what could help them. And if
you go online, there is tons of information, but I think
having it broken up by category with very concrete
examples is helpful. [Participant 7’s parent]

Final Design

The biggest concern with the AirBuddy prototype was that the
interface was too simple to convey IAQ information effectively
because it relied solely on the shape and color of an icon. To
address this issue, we separated a house icon from a cloud icon
and located a horizontal AQI color strip underneath the house
icon to indicate the current IAQ. We also added text to display
a label and numerical level of IAQ next to the house icon (Figure
6a). When a user clicks anywhere in the IAQ information pane
on a home screen, the app moves to an IAQ detail page where
a bar graph of the recent IAQ trends is located. We moved the
bar graph to a subpage so that the app can still benefit from the
target users’ familiarity with a bar graph to convey the IAQ

trend information but reduce its influence on the overall and
initial perception of the app (Figure 6b).

Next, we grouped a cloud icon with other weather conditions
to conceptualize outdoor air quality as part of outdoor/weather
information. Underneath the weather pane is a button to log
daily spirometer data. Clicking this button brings up a subpage
where a user can enter spirometer readings and review the daily
log of previous data entry (Figure 6c). Clicking the house icon
at the bottom left corner of a navigation bar will bring up a
chatting page where a user can interact with Airic, a chatbot,
both verbally and via typing, to ask any question relating to
IAQ and asthma management (Figure 6d). Last, we provided a
list of action items that the user can perform to improve IAQ
(Figure 6e).

The biggest concern with the AirPet prototype was that the link
between the concepts of egg hatching and IAQ could be
confusing to some users. We redesigned the home screen to
illustrate an egg that a house broods to hatch graphically to
address this issue. We also simplified the progress bar and added
text to display a labeled level of IAQ inside the home. In
addition, we added two clouds outside the house to represent
the level of air quality outdoors and weather information (Figure
7a). When a user clicks anywhere in the house on a home screen,
the app moves to an IAQ detail page where we located a bar
graph adopted from AirBuddy to convey the IAQ trend
information (Figure 7b).

Underneath the house on the home screen is a button to log
daily spirometer data. Clicking this button or the same button
on an IAQ detail page will bring up a subpage where a user can
enter spirometer readings and review the daily log of previous
data entry (Figure 7c). Last, we provided a list of action items
a user can perform to improve IAQ and a list of virtual pets that
were successfully hatched (Figures 7d and 7e).

Figure 6. Final design of AirBuddy: (a) home screen, (b) detailed indoor air quality information, (c) spirometry entry page, (d) chatbot Airic, and (e)
list of action items to improve indoor air quality.

JMIR Form Res 2021 | vol. 5 | iss. 9 | e27447 | p. 8

Figure 7. Final design of AirPet: (a) home screen, (b) detailed indoor air quality information, (c) spirometry entry, (d) list of action items to improve
indoor air quality, and (e) hatchery with hatched pets.

Discussion

Principal Findings

Indoor air pollution is a known risk factor contributing
significantly to adverse respiratory health in children [22]. Thus,
keeping IAQ clean and healthy is the basis of secondary
environmental prevention for asthma management [23].
However, our study showed that the affected children had little
or no knowledge about indoor air pollution or how it affects
their asthma symptoms [24]. While parents are and need to be
the primary source of information for their children’s asthma
management, the affected children must have a method for
self-management of asthma. This suggests a need for an easy
yet effective mechanism that helps ensure children’s engagement
with IAQ as part of asthma management.

In this study, we conducted a series of interviews to involve the
end users, children with asthma, throughout the process of
designing an app that promotes their engagement in monitoring
and improving IAQ and tracking daily asthma conditions
through a user-centered design approach. We iteratively revised
and improved the prototypes through this process to ensure that
children can use our app easily, effectively, and reliably. This
process has revealed 2 crucial aspects that require deeper
consideration when creating a child-friendly app, including
balancing brevity and expressivity and considering the
longitudinal effects of gamification.

Balancing Simplicity and Expressivity

A central consideration in the design of our app was how to
present IAQ information simply yet effectively so that children
can easily understand, engage in, and play with it toward
improving IAQ. The prevalent mode of presenting the level of
air quality is to use AQI values with associated color codes
(green: 0-50 for good; yellow: 51-100 for moderate; orange:
101-150 for unhealthy for sensitive groups; red: 151-200 for
unhealthy; violet: 201-300 for very unhealthy; and purple:
301-500 for hazardous). We adopted only the AQI color codes

to present the air quality status in the early version of the
AirBuddy prototype because providing numeric values might
be too complicated for children to understand. The research
team concluded that the interface would be simple enough for
children to use.

Our assumption was wrong in 2 aspects. First, the findings
showed that this prototype was too simple and brief for children
of our target age group who can handle and even seek out
complex information to interpret and contextualize the meaning.
For instance, many participants did not understand how to
interpret colored icons without detailed explanations. While
focusing on simplicity, we failed to deliver enough information
to visually present the air quality levels effectively. Second, the
findings showed that using color is powerful for children’s
engagement but might not be effective in conveying meaningful
information. Unlike adults who are conscious of the symbolic
meanings of colors, children have yet to acquire the contextual
information associated with different colors. Thus, care should
be taken when using colors to convey information to children.

These findings demonstrate that special attention should be paid
to assure a good balance between simplicity for ease of use and
expressivity for effective delivery of information when designing
a child-friendly interface. A central tenet for user-centered
design practices is that one size does not fit all, but the design
should be driven by the knowledge and perspectives of the target
users [16]. The iterative, user-centered design process with our
participants made clear that our prototype was simple enough
for children to play with but not expressive enough for
representing information, which could not have been identified
without the user-centered design process.

Longitudinal Effects of Gamification

Gamification is defined as the use of game design elements in
nongame contexts [25]. This principle has been used in a variety
of contexts for children, including but not limited to education
[26], behavior change [27], and health care [28], to make tedious
activities more engaging to children and thus increasing their

JMIR Form Res 2021 | vol. 5 | iss. 9 | e27447 | p. 9

motivation to use them [29]. Because autonomous and regular
engagement with the app is crucial to meet the goal of our app,
we adopted gamification elements in AirPet in which a user
must regularly access the app to monitor and improve IAQ and
log asthma conditions to hatch a virtual pet. The overall
responses from participants were positive, and most of them
preferred this prototype over the other one, thanks to the
gamification elements. Thus, we are hopeful that the
gamification elements would positively influence children’s
sustained engagement with our app.

However, the actual and, especially, longitudinal effects of
gamification on children’s engagement are controversial.
Numerous apps have been using gamification for children’s
engagement. And some studies even demonstrated that
gamification is statistically effective in improving children’s
engagement [30]. But other studies showed that the effect of
gamification might fade away [31] or even negatively influence
motivation, satisfaction, and empowerment as the use duration
increases [32]. This suggests that gamification is not a panacea
for all. Designers need to be cautious of potential negative
effects when applying certain gamification mechanics for
sustained engagement. In the next step, we plan to conduct a
field deployment study using the apps we designed to investigate
how gamification, in contrast to a conventional form of concrete
information presentation, influences children’s engagement in
IAQ and asthma management over time.

Limitations

Our original plan was to conduct participatory design workshops
for idea exploration and run in-person interviews to evaluate
an interactive high-fidelity prototype. However, due to the CDC
recommendations for social distancing during COVID-19, we
canceled the workshops and instead conducted all interviews
one-on-one virtually.

Our findings must be evaluated within the context of several
limitations. First, our sample size was small, and thus our

participant pool may not represent a general population. Second,
we used convenience sampling by recruiting participants from
a children’s hospital and school-based health centers in an urban
area, which also runs the risk of compromising generalizability.
Selection bias or unmeasured factors (eg, the homogeneity of
participant characteristics by living in the same geographic
regions) could have influenced the responses during the
interviews. Third, we conducted all interviews virtually due to
the pandemic, which might have affected the participants’
experience with our prototypes differently from how they would
experience them with direct interaction. We are hopeful that we
can conduct in-person interviews in a system deployment study
planned as the next step of this project.

Conclusion

This work completes the foundational stages of concept
generation, iterative design, and implementation in the
user-centered design process. These stages are fundamental to
the subsequent evaluation and deployment of the app to support
children with asthma to monitor and improve IAQ. The next
phase is to conduct usability testing of a working system with
end users to evaluate its effectiveness for children’s use before
public deployment. Our iterative design process demonstrated
that it is critical to engage potential users as early as the concept
generation phase and throughout the iterative design stages to
assure that the final app meets user needs as intended. A similar
user-centered design approach can be effectively applied in the
development and design of mHealth apps to address
self-management needs for other pediatric conditions. As a next
step, we plan to conduct a longitudinal deployment study with
children with asthma to evaluate the real-world effects of our
apps. We will investigate how different approaches—a
conventional form of concrete information presentation and
abstract gamification—influence the affected children’s
engagement with IAQ and how the increased awareness of IAQ
influences IAQ and asthma conditions.