Original Paper

Immersive Virtual Reality Avatars for Embodiment Illusions in
People With Mild to Borderline Intellectual Disability:
User-Centered Development and Feasibility Study

Simon Langener1,2,3, MSc; Randy Klaassen1, PhD; Joanne VanDerNagel1,2,3, MD, PhD; Dirk Heylen1, PhD

1Department of Human Media Interaction, University of Twente, Enschede, Netherlands
2Centre for Addiction and Intellectual Disability, Tactus Addiction Care, Enschede, Netherlands
3Nijmegen Institute for Scientist-Practitioners in Addiction, Radboud University, Nijmegen, Netherlands

Simon Langener, MSc
Department of Human Media Interaction
University of Twente
PO Box 217
Enschede, 7500 AE
Netherlands
Phone: 31 534898771

Abstract

Background: Immersive virtual reality (IVR) has been investigated as a tool for treating psychiatric conditions. In particular,
the practical nature of IVR, by offering a doing instead of talking approach, could support people who do not benefit from existing
treatments. Hence, people with mild to borderline intellectual disability (MBID; IQ=50-85) might profit particularly from IVR
therapies, for instance, to circumvent issues in understanding relevant concepts and interrelations. In this context, immersing the
user into a virtual body (ie, avatar) appears promising for enhancing learning (eg, by changing perspectives) and usability (eg,
natural interactions). However, design requirements, immersion procedures, and proof of concept of such embodiment illusion
(ie, substituting the real body with a virtual one) have not been explored in this group.

Objective: Our study aimed to establish design guidelines for IVR embodiment illusions in people with MBID. We explored
3 factors to induce the illusion, by testing the avatar’s appearance, locomotion using IVR controllers, and virtual object manipulation.
Furthermore, we report on the feasibility to induce the embodiment illusion and provide procedural guidance.
Methods: 
We conducted a user-centered study with 29 end users in care facilities, to investigate the avatar’s appearance,
controller-based locomotion (ie, teleport, joystick, or hybrid), and object manipulation. Overall, 3 iterations were conducted using
semistructured interviews to explore design factors to induce embodiment illusions in our group. To further understand the
influence of interactions on the illusion, we measured the sense of embodiment (SoE) during 5 interaction tasks.
Results: IVR embodiment illusions can be induced in adults with MBID. To induce the illusion, having a high degree of control
over the body outweighed avatar customization, despite the participants’ desire to replicate their own body image. Similarly, the
highest SoE was measured during object manipulation tasks, which required a combination of (virtual) locomotion and object
manipulation behavior. Notably, interactions that are implausible (eg, teleport and occlusions when grabbing) showed a negative
influence on SoE. In contrast, implementing artificial interaction aids into the IVR avatar’s hands (ie, for user interfaces) did not
diminish the illusion, presuming that the control was unimpaired. Nonetheless, embodiment illusions showed a tedious and
complex need for (control) habituation (eg, motion sickness), possibly hindering uptake in practice.
Conclusions: Balancing the embodiment immersion by focusing on interaction habituation (eg, controller-based locomotion)
and lowering customization effort seems crucial to achieve both high SoE and usability for people with MBID. Hence, future
studies should investigate the requirements for natural IVR avatar interactions by using multisensory integrations for the virtual
body (eg, animations, physics-based collision, and touch) and other interaction techniques (eg, hand tracking and redirected
walking). In addition, procedures and use for learning should be explored for tailored mental health therapies in people with
MBID.

(JMIR Serious Games 2022;10(4):e39966) doi: 10.2196/39966

JMIR Serious Games 2022 | vol. 10 | iss. 4 | e39966 | p. 1

KEYWORDS
virtual reality; VR; embodiment; avatar; embodied learning; body-centered; intellectual disability; addiction; user-centered design

Introduction

Background

Immersive virtual reality (IVR) has been investigated as a
treatment tool for a variety of psychiatric disorders, for instance,
in people with psychosis, addictive disorders, and eating
disorders [1,2]. However, so far, the clinical effectiveness has
only been proven in anxiety disorders, as (randomized)
controlled trials in other mental illnesses are still required.
However, the practical nature as doing instead of talking
approach makes IVR therapy appealing for people who do not
profit from existing treatments, such as people with mild to
borderline intellectual disability (MBID; IQ=50-85). People
with MBID constitute a diverse group with low intellectual and
adaptive capabilities (eg, problems in planning, problem solving,
abstract thinking, and judgment), which negatively affects the
development of essential skills for independent living. By using
the term MBID, we combine the groups mild intellectual
disability (IQ=50-69) and borderline intellectual functioning
(IQ=70-85), as they often encounter similar challenges in life,
for instance, regarding mental health treatments [3-5]. Previous
studies suggest that IVR could help to reduce learning barriers,
by making abstract concepts and interrelations graspable [6-8],
bypassing the need for a disembedded thinking [9]. In addition,
IVR for the MBID group could transfer tangible content for an
active rather than passive learning [10], thus evading the need
for excessive language use and fostering skill acquisition by
making mistakes [9]. However, applications of IVR and
knowledge about requirements in MBID remain low [11], as
few researchers have explored the interaction design using
state-of-the-art hardware [12-15]. However, turning with one’s
own body and interacting via hand-based manipulations were
found to benefit usability. Hence, implementing interaction
techniques that provide a user experience similar to that of real
life seems vital, for instance, by immersion into a virtual body.
This embodiment illusion could facilitate life-like behavior and
therefore improve the access to IVR for our group [16].

Embodiment illusions in IVR allow us to substitute the real
body with a virtual body or certain body parts, such as arms or
hands [17-19]. The phenomenon is often assessed by the sense
of embodiment (SoE) toward the virtual body (ie, avatar)
[19,20]. The “SoE toward a body B is the sense that emerges
when B’s properties are processed as if they were the properties
of one’s own biological body.” (p375) [19]. Hence, the
embodiment illusion is induced through 3 main factors: sense
of self-location, agency, and ownership [19,21]. The sense of
self-location refers to the feeling of being inside the body [19];
the sense of agency comprises the “global motor control,
including the subjective experience of action, control, intention,
motor selection and the conscious experience of will” (p7) [22];
and the sense of body ownership involves the self-attribution
to the avatar [19]. However, so far, the significance of each
factor for the illusion remains ambiguous [19]. Nonetheless,
illusions of virtual body ownership (IVBO) were found to
influence the user’s attitudes and behavior [23], which makes

them promising for enhancing therapy outcomes in groups that
hardly benefit from cognitively demanding paradigms, such as
people with MBID.

Previous findings in people devoid of MBID showed that
embodying a Black avatar can reduce racial bias and that
embodying a child can influence implicit attitudes and object
size perception in IVR [24,25]. Both refer to the proteus effect,
derived from the Greek myth of a shape shifter, describing the
phenomenon that we (humans) tend to change our beliefs and
behavior based on our (digital) self-representations [16]. For
instance, as empathy training, body swapping was used to
present power relationships between offender and victim in
sexual harassment, subsequently reducing conformity in social
pressure scenarios [26]. In addition to such implicit approaches,
explicit learning could be applied, for instance, psychomotor
addiction therapy with a focus on bodily signals (eg, cravings)
[7], by using the virtual body as a multimodal feedback system.
However, despite various studies that report on the design
requirements for such IVBO, no study has focused on people
with MBID. Hence, this study aimed to design IVR avatars for
embodiment illusions in individuals with MBID. As the spatial
immersion into the IVR avatar and implementation of plausible
actions (eg, controls) can evoke realistic behaviors [16], we
decided to look into three important components for embodiment
illusions: (1) avatar appearance, (2) controller-based locomotion,
and (3) object manipulation.

Related Studies

Overview

In the following sections, we examine related studies concerning
(1) avatar immersion, (2) controller-based locomotion, and (3)
object manipulation. Given the lack of studies in our target
group, we report on the existing evidence in non-MBID samples
to identify crucial factors for our initial prototype and immersion
design. We conclude the Introduction section with a summary
of potential benefits and barriers of embodiment illusions for
people with MBID and our research questions. Then, we
describe our user-centered design method with 3 iterations and
report the results per iteration. Subsequently, we discuss relevant
factors in the context of previous studies, limitations, and
directions for future research. Finally, we conclude our paper
with a summary of our contribution to the field.

Immersion Into IVR Avatars for IVBO

Several factors contributing to IVR avatar immersion have been
investigated to influence SoE, such as the point of view (POV;
ie, the perspective), body appearance, control, and haptics (ie,
the experience of touch) [19]. For instance, an egocentric POV
has been shown to reliably induce the sense of self-location
[27], whereas a third-person perspective tends to lower it
[28,29]. The sense of agency is induced through the experienced
control of the virtual body [19], influenced by the visuomotor
congruence between the real body and avatar [30-32], whereas
incongruences tend to lower it [33,34]. Finally, the sense of
ownership is influenced by body appearance and has been

JMIR Serious Games 2022 | vol. 10 | iss. 4 | e39966 | p. 2

induced through avatar models with different degrees of
anthropomorphism [35]. However, despite the possibilities to
feel ownership toward avatars that differ from oneself in terms
of gender and morphological characteristics [36,37], matching
gender, skin tone, and clothes can boost IVBO [38,39].
However, the SoE factors cannot be considered to be isolated
from each other, as interrelations have been identified [40], such
as influence of appearance on agency [41] and control and
haptics on ownership [42-44]. Here, recent findings showed
that primarily visuoproprioceptive congruence contributes to
the sense of agency and ownership and better task performance
[32]. Moreover, Fribourg et al [40] explored the user preferences
for 3 vital factors (ie, POV, control, and appearance), showing
the need for an egocentric perspective and high motor control
to outweigh the avatar’s appearance. However, these findings
seemed to be task dependent, with POV being relevant for
locomotion and avatar appearance when manipulating (virtual)
objects using the upper body [40,41,45].

Controller-Based Locomotion for IVR Avatars

Controller-based locomotion, as an essential component of
immersion into IVR avatars, can be divided into physical and
artificial approaches [46]. Physical techniques can be more
intuitive (ie, room scale); however, an intensive bodily
involvement and unnaturalness (eg, walking in place) may cause
the opposite effect. In contrast, artificial techniques (eg, teleport
and joystick) tend to increase the cognitive workload and are
prone to cause cybersickness (ie, motion sickness) [46,47]. As
space for natural locomotion is often limited, adding artificial
techniques of continuous (eg, controller-based) or noncontinuous
(eg, teleport-based) nature could form a viable solution [13].
Continuous approaches are preferred in open settings, whereas
noncontinuous approaches are widely used owing to their
user-friendliness [46]. However, few studies have explored
virtual locomotion in combination with IVR avatars, showing
its influences on task performance and obstacle avoidance
[48-50]. The virtual body can improve walking behavior in IVR,
with fewer collisions, more precise paths using a realistic avatar
[51], and more natural behavior [52]. Here, using walking
animations that mimicked natural behavior were preferred over
the user’s real motions (ie, walking in place); however, this
could lead to unintended steps [53]. Nevertheless, few studies
have examined the effects of virtual locomotion on the SoE
factors. Dewez et al [50] compared natural walking, walking in
place, and virtual steering and found a similar SoE, with equal
performance with or without an avatar. Consistent with previous
findings, movement incongruences between the user and avatar
animation did not break the embodiment illusion [28].

Object Interaction for IVR Avatars

Similar to avatar immersion and locomotion design, interacting
with objects and user interfaces (UIs) are essential components
for immersive self-representations. Here, using avatars
influences the interaction with objects and vice versa [45]. The
alignment of this reciprocity to design for both high SoE and
usability remains understudied in the current literature,
especially when combined with artificial locomotion. Previous
studies that used IVR avatars during interaction tasks reported
performance enhancements over controllers or virtual hands

[54], independent of the model’s human-likeness, when
comparing a realistic avatar with a generic or robot appearance
[55,56]. However, as spatial biases were found in IVR [57], the
body may operate as a reference frame [58], as the object size
perception can be altered when using avatars [59]. Here, avatars
can produce occlusions during interactions, which can affect
the usability negatively, especially when using more
anthropomorphic models [41,60]. However, using congruent
body feedback could circumvent this issue, considering that
haptics (eg, self-touch) benefits SoE and manipulation
performance [32,61,62]. Finally, identified usability barriers
are objects that are out of reach or placed low. A solution devoid
of altering the avatar or breaking the embodiment illusion could
be artificial interactions (eg, raycasting) implemented into the
avatar’s hands [45,63], allowing interaction with objects without
substantial bodily movements.

Goal of This Study

In summary, embodying an IVR avatar may improve usability
[51], spatial awareness [6,45], and (self) presence [31,64];
however, adverse effects can occur owing to an increase in
complexity [60]. Nonetheless, so far, design requirements for
such IVR avatars and the feasibility to induce IVBO have not
been explored in people with MBID. Despite the proposed use
for the treatment of psychiatric disorders, IVR applications
focusing on life skills (eg, public transport and grocery
shopping) [12,13], vocational training [65], and (motor)
rehabilitation for MBID could be beneficial [14,66]. The virtual
body may reduce the cognitive workload and enables novel
forms of visuomotor feedback, for instance, to support the
problematic hand-eye coordination of individuals with
intellectual disability in IVR [67]. So far, IVBO was mostly
investigated 
in 
controlled 
laboratory 
settings 
with
motion-capture systems or several body trackers to congruently
map the user’s bodily movements onto the virtual body.
Although these systems seem to provide the highest control,
they lack consumer-friendliness to enter care institutions, given
the high costs and difficulty in using the equipment. Here,
solutions based on inverse kinematics (IK) that use 3-point
tracking of the head-mounted display (HMD) and related
controllers could provide an alternative, as most interactions
focus on the upper body [40]. Hence, we aimed to explore
guidelines for such IVBO in people with MBID, by conducting
a user-centered development based on three factors that
contribute to functional and plausible actions [16]:

1.
How to design IVR avatars for IVBO in people with MBID?
a.
How to design a virtual embodiment illusion for people
with MBID based on IK?
b.
How to design a controller-based locomotion technique
for people with MBID?
c.
How to design a controller-based (object) manipulation
for people with MBID?

2.
To what extent do participants experience SoE during the
examined interaction task?
3.
To what extent do participants experience a sense of
presence (SoP) in the immersive virtual environment (IVE)?

JMIR Serious Games 2022 | vol. 10 | iss. 4 | e39966 | p. 3

Methods

Research Design

We conducted a user-centered design approach to explore the
3 factors for IVR avatar immersion (ie, avatar, controller-based
locomotion, and manipulation), initial feasibility of procedures,
and proof of concept of IVBO in people with MBID. For this,
we developed an IVR avatar prototype to identify design
recommendations for IVBO using 3 consecutive iterations with
end users in Dutch care facilities. Throughout these iterations,
we refined the IVR avatar system and immersion procedure
according to the participants’ needs. Hence, in this study, we
established design recommendations for the 3 components and
explored the SoE levels and SoP in the IVE to support others
in creating accessible IVR avatars.

Participants

In total, 29 adults with MBID were recruited through
convenience sampling by local therapists from an addiction
clinic for individuals with MBID and Dutch care facility for
people with MBID. Exclusion criteria included having a history
of migraine, epilepsy, visual or motor impairment, or severe
mental disorder (eg, schizophrenia, psychosis, or active
substance use disorder); susceptibility to COVID-19; proneness
to motion sickness; or inability to wear the HMD.

Interaction System

We built the interaction system with consumer hardware and
available software. The game engine Unity3D (version 2019.4
LTS; Unity Technologies) was used with the Mecanim IK and
the eXtended Reality interaction toolkit (preview; version 0.94)
packages to develop an IVBO based on 3-point tracking of the

HMD and the related 2 controllers. We implemented the three
identified components for IVR avatars: (1) customizable avatar,
(2) controller-based locomotion, and (3) object manipulation.

The customizable IVR avatar component (Figure 1) included
an egocentric embodiment illusion. The participants were able
to enter their height and arm dimensions (ie, by going into the
T-pose), customize their gender (woman or man), and select a
skin tone.

The controller-based locomotion component (Figure 2) involved
a visuomotor experience of moving in the IVE, divided into
physical and artificial approaches. The physical approach
comprised basic room-scale locomotion (2×2 m), with walking
animation when moving. Overall, 3 artificial locomotion
approaches were implemented — divided into joystick
locomotion with 45° snap turn and walking animation,
teleportation locomotion using raycasting with a projectile curve,
and a combination of both (hybrid). Haptics were used at the
beginning and when executing teleportation by using the
controller’s vibration motors. Furthermore, a teleport travel
technique that enables the transition to the different interaction
contexts by using a screen-space UI was implemented [68],
which followed the user’s rotation on the y-axis when holding
the A button.

The (object) manipulation component (Figure 3) included a
synchronous visuomotor experience to grab, pick up from low
areas, place, and throw virtual objects. We used hand animations
for grabbing (grip button) and pinching (trigger button),
including haptics, when grabbing and releasing the objects by
using the controller’s vibration motors. Raycasting on both
hands was implemented to pick up objects that are placed low
or out of reach and interact with UIs.

Figure 1. The customizable immersive virtual reality avatar: (A) egocentric perspective, (B) raycast interaction with user interface, (C) customization
of body dimensions, and (D) touching the nondominant hand with the dominant one.

JMIR Serious Games 2022 | vol. 10 | iss. 4 | e39966 | p. 4

Figure 2. The controller-based locomotion: (A) joystick locomotion with walking animation, (B) teleportation locomotion using raycasting with a
projectile curve, (C) hybrid locomotion (A+B), and (D) teleport travel to interaction tasks.

Figure 3. The controller-based object manipulation (A) grabbing objects on the "table", (B) picking-up objects using sphere-casting, (C) placement of
objects at cued locations, and (D) throwing objects into a box.

Hardware and IVE

We used an Oculus Quest HMD with 6 df, 1440×1600 pixels
per eye, 72 Hz refresh rate, and 90° field of view (FOV); touch
controllers; and a compatible IVR-laptop (Intel Core i7 9750H
central processing unit; 16 GB RAM; NVIDIA GeForce RTX
2060) with Oculus Link (beta; USB 3.1 cable).

The IVE encompassed an open-world mechanic (200×200 m)
to evaluate the system’s components. In the first room setting
(15×15×2.5 m), the participants customized the IVR avatar. In
the second room, artificial locomotion techniques were evaluated

by completing a maze (50×50×2.3 m) with 4 destinations and
obstacles to provoke different user movements. On the basis of
common game design, we used a vantage point to support spatial
understanding and reduce unease. Further, destinations were
cued using light beams of different color, with matching leading
lines on the walls [69]. In the third context (15×15×2.5 m), we
evaluated 4 basic object manipulation tasks to ensure a broad
coverage of possible IVR interactions. For this, we used 3
different objects (ie, large cylinder, cube, and small cylinder)
to grab and release each object (Figure 3A), pick up the object
from the ground (Figure 3B), place objects at another location

JMIR Serious Games 2022 | vol. 10 | iss. 4 | e39966 | p. 5

(Figure 3C), and throw all objects into a box (Figure 3D). The
corresponding task completion was detected by the system
automatically (eg, object grabbed and released), allowing users
to transition to the next task. Participants used object-spaced
UIs with low hierarchy to customize the avatar, select
locomotion approaches, and control interaction tasks. A plain
design was used to reduce bias, and we implemented landmarks
(pink in color) to aid user’s orientation in the IVE.

Measures

A semistructured interview (Multimedia Appendix 1) was
conducted after each of the 5 interaction tasks: IVR avatar
customization, teleport, joystick, hybrid locomotion, and object
manipulation. For the IVR avatar, we aimed to explore the first
impression, customization choices, usability issues, ownership
perception, and points for improvement. For locomotion, we
explored the first impression, usability issues, and impression
of the body during locomotion. The questions for all locomotion
techniques were identical. Regarding object manipulation, we
asked for the first impression, usability issues, enjoyable aspects,
and perception of the body during interaction. Finally, we
evaluated the impressions and usability issues concerning IVE,
UI interactions, and intentions for using the system.

SoE was assessed using an adapted version of the Virtual
Embodiment Questionnaire (VEQ) [20]. The VEQ is a 12-item
questionnaire assessing the SoE subscales ownership (Cronbach
α=.78), agency (Cronbach α=.76), and change (Cronbach
α=.77). In addition, 3-items assessing the sense of self-location
were adapted to this research context to extend VEQ [21,30].
Scores for each item ranged from 1 (“strongly disagree”) to 7
(“strongly agree”).

SoP was assessed using an adapted version of the Igroup
Presence Questionnaire (IPQ) [70]. The IPQ (Cronbach α=.85)
is a 14-item questionnaire assessing the SoP subscales general
presence, spatial presence (Cronbach α=.80), involvement
(Cronbach α=.76), and experienced realism (Cronbach α=.68).
Scores for each item ranged from 1 (“strongly disagree”) to 7
(“strongly agree”).

Considering the needs of people with MBID, we adapted
questionnaires in language and complexity (by using plain Dutch
language) with an expert from the field. This implies that
questions asking for 2 different concepts were reduced to one;
for example, “I felt like the form or appearance of my own body
had changed” was changed to “I felt like the form of my own
body had changed” [20]. In addition, complex formulations
were simplified; for example, “Somehow I felt that the virtual
world surrounded me” was changed to “I felt that the virtual
world surrounded me” [70].

Ethics Approval

Ethics approval was obtained from the University of Twente’s
ethics committee (RP 2020-164) and the care institution’s
scientific board.

Procedure

To comply with COVID-19 precautions, the researcher
disinfected the materials and IVR apparatus before evaluation.
Before evaluation, disinfection of hands and forearms was

required, a medical mask was used by the researcher, and a
distance of 1.5 m was maintained whenever possible.

Participants were welcomed and informed about the study
procedure before starting the experiment to comply with the
ethical principles in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki.
The researcher explained the IVR technology, controls, and
possible adverse effects. After informed consent was obtained,
the participants were immersed into the IVE. In addition to
visual in-game cues, verbal instructions were used to guide the
user through the procedure.

Before assessing the prototype version, participants found
themselves in the customization room with controller models
enabled, but deactivated avatar. First, users were asked to set
the interpupillary distance using the HMD slider for proper
vision. Then, a short acclimatization period was conducted to
enhance spatial understanding, which includes the basic
room-scale boundaries and locomotion. After the remaining
questions were answered, the assessment of the different
components was initiated.

The first task involved avatar customization (Figure 1).
Participants were instructed to go into T-pose to conduct the
scaling procedure, followed by the selection of gender and skin
tone on the UI (Figure 1B), which enabled the avatar (Figure
1A). The participants were given a maximum of 5 minutes to
explore the avatar, hand, and walking animations using
room-scale locomotion. After approximately 3 minutes, the
participants were asked to touch the nondominant hand by using
the dominant one to explore the self-location of hands through
a tactile sensation (Figure 1D). Then, users were asked to
remove the HMD, so that the extended VEQ and dedicated
semistructured interview questions can be assessed by the
researcher. After completion, participants were asked to wear
the HMD again to proceed to the next component.

The second task evaluated the controller-based locomotion
techniques to move in the IVE (Figure 2). The participants were
asked to teleport travel to the vantage point by using the related
UI (Figure 2D). Then, participants enabled the predefined
locomotion approach, that is, joystick (Figure 2A), teleport
(Figure 2B), or hybrid (Figure 2C). Following an introduction
to the technique, participants were asked to complete the maze.
In case of severe motion sickness, participants were allowed to
stop early to complete the remaining procedure. Upon
completion, participants were asked to remove the HMD to
assess the extended VEQ and corresponding interview questions.
Then, end users were asked to wear the HMD again to evaluate
the remaining locomotion techniques by following the same
procedure in an overall counterbalanced manner.

The third task included different manipulations of 3 objects in
a room setting (Figure 3). First, participants were asked to
teleport travel to the locomotion UI to enable the preferred
technique. Then, participants were instructed to teleport travel
to the manipulation tasks and move to the interactables and
related UI. The participants were instructed to (1) grab and
release each object (Figure 3A), (2) pick up the object from the
ground using raycasting (Figure 3B), (3) place objects at another
location based on cues (Figure 3C), and (4) throw objects into
a box (Figure 3D). After completion, the participants were again

JMIR Serious Games 2022 | vol. 10 | iss. 4 | e39966 | p. 6

asked to remove the HMD and the extended VEQ and related
interview questions were assessed.

Following the evaluation of the 3 avatar components,
participants were asked to provide demographic information
and to complete the IPQ and remaining interview questions.
Finally, users were debriefed and encouraged to express
remaining questions or concerns, and they were subsequently
thoroughly answered. The participants received a small
nonmonetary gift as a sign of gratitude (approximately €10 [US
$10]).

Data Analysis

Qualitative data were analyzed based on the thematic analysis
approach by Braun and Clarke [71]. To account for the research
design, we divided data sets from the iterations into three
segments each: (1) avatar customization, (2) artificial
locomotion, and (3) manipulation. In these segments, coding
was applied to the data that were transcribed verbatim to identify
themes by conducting a recursive process using Atlas.ti (version
9.1.4; ATLAS.ti GmbH). The coding process was continuously
discussed among the researchers (ie, SL, JV, and RK).
Quantitative data regarding the extended VEQ and IPQ

subscales were described for each iteration and on an aggregated
level. Descriptive analyses were conducted using RStudio
(version 1.3.1093).

Results

Sample Description

Table 1 presents the sociodemographic characteristics and
technological experience of the sample. Of the 29 participants,
5 participants (17%) terminated prematurely owing to severe
motion sickness (3/5, 60%), anxiety (1/5, 20%), or use inability
(1/5, 20%), resulting in missing experimental and demographic
data. The remaining participants (24/29, 83%) had a mean age
of 34.2 (SD 9.8) years, and most identified as male (23/24,
96%). The sample was equally composed from the 3 institutions
(8/24, 33% from each) and included participants with borderline
intellectual functioning (IQ=70-85; 13/24, 54%) and mild
intellectual disability (IQ=50-69; 11/24, 46%). The technology
experience with computers and videogames was rated high
compared with virtual reality. The following sections describe
the process that led to our final prototype and procedural
considerations identified during the design process.

Table 1. Sociodemographic characteristics and technological experience of the sample.

Full sample (n=24)
Iteration 3 (n=6)
Iteration 2 (n=12)
Iteration 1 (n=6)
Sample characteristics

34.17 (9.77)
30.83 (12.78)
36 (8.77)
33.83 (9.24)
Age (years), mean (SD)

Gender, n (%)

23 (96)
6 (100)
11 (92)
6 (100)
Men

0 (0)
0 (0)
0 (0)
0 (0)
Women

1 (4)
0 (0)
1 (8)
0 (0)
Diverse

Intelligence, n (%)

13 (54)
4 (67)
6 (50)
3 (50)
Borderline intellectual functioning

11 (46)
2 (33)
6 (50)
3 (50)
Mild intellectual disability

Institution, n (%)

8 (33)
2 (33)
4 (33)
2 (33)
Addiction clinic

8 (33)
2 (33)
4 (33)
2 (33)
Care institution

8 (33)
2 (33)
4 (33)
2 (33)
Forensic addiction clinic

Technology experiencea, mean (SD)

5.50 (1.25)
5.17 (1.47)
5.50 (1.38)
5.83 (0.75)
Computer

5.50 (1.35)
6.17 (0.98)
5.83 (1.34)
4.17 (0.75)
Video games

2.92 (1.98)
3.33 (2.66)
3.08 (1.88)
2.17 (1.47)
Virtual reality

aTechnology experience was assessed using a 7-point Likert scale, ranging from 1 (“No experience”) to 7 (“A lot of experience”).

Iterative Prototype Development

Findings From Iteration 1

Overview
Most participants (4/6, 67%) reported a positive first impression
regarding the IVR avatar system. The scaling procedure was
feasible; however, visual in-game instructions were lacking.
Here, the avatar’s congruence with one’s own self-concept was

essential, because users selected their own skin tone and gender,
reporting on the desire to replicate their own body image:

I’m really a slim puppet now. In real life, I have a bit
of a belly. [Participant 4]
Furthermore, technical issues were described, such as unrealistic
wrist movements and arm glitches and the absence of haptics
(self-touch) properties:

You cannot grasp it, so it is not yours. [Participant 1]

JMIR Serious Games 2022 | vol. 10 | iss. 4 | e39966 | p. 7

Regarding joystick locomotion, participants reported usability
issues when using the 45° snap turn, further contributing to the
prevalent cybersickness:

When you hit the wall, it gets really bad. [Participant
3]
In contrast, cybersickness was absent during teleport
locomotion:

The teleporting went better. I did feel better.
[Participant 3]
However, usability issues owing to the limited flexibility and
own pace were described:

At one point it went too fast. Then it seems too easy,
but then you have to take a step back. [Participant 5]
In contrast to the joystick approach, during teleport use,
participants missed the human-like walking illusion:

Seems like I just really walk, so to speak. [Participant
6]
The hybrid approach (ie, joystick and teleport) showed no added
value, as participants relied on their preferred technique.
However, all approaches showed a need for control habituation
and attention shift from avatar to task.

Finally, for (object) manipulation, the usability was rated
positively; however, participants reported issues with raycasting,
either because it was always enabled or because it was difficult
to hit the objects on the ground. Owing to the lack of
intuitiveness (“Normally you can bend down and grab.”
[participant 2]) and haptics, a need for control habituation was
essential:

Because it feels very different from when you’re
actually grabbing something. [Participant 3]
Of the 6 participants, 2 (33%) reported on interaction realism
(“But you know, all the movements, the behavior is indeed
real.” [participant 5]), whereas another participant missed
realistic gabbing animations by using the virtual hands instead
of the controller. The UI interaction showed good usability,
despite the need for repositioning to use the object-spaced UIs.

Changes for Iteration 2
Regarding the IVR avatar, the snap turn was refined from 45°
to 15° to remove usability issues and alleviate cybersickness.
To improve manipulations, the grabbing attachment was
changed to the avatar’s hands instead of the controller anchor,
and raycast activations were reduced to objects below 50 cm.
To enable further customization, alteration of the model’s body
dimension (size of the arm, belly, leg, and feet) was
implemented (Figure 1C). We also improved implementation
issues that led to a smaller scaling of the model. Furthermore,
we refined the accuracy of the hand IK targets for better
proprioception. Finally, as the VEQ items seemed complex for
our target group, we added 2 questions to the semistructured
interview (Multimedia Appendix 1), asking for the sense of
ownership after each interaction task and the perception of
change after the evaluation procedure.

Findings From Iteration 2

Overview
Accordant with the first iteration, replicating one’s own body
image was paramount, self-touch and physical collision were
lacking, and some animation issues (ie, arm glitches and
unrealistic leg movements) were reported. In contrast,
participants reported on the clothing, either owing to the
incongruence (“Because the suit I was wearing didn’t match
with what I was wearing.” [participant 15]) or illusion of
wearing the virtual clothes (“I was really convinced in my head,
that I was wearing it today.” [participant 10]). Technical issues
included a restricted view toward the lower body when bending
(“When I look down like that, all of a sudden, I got a belly.”
[participant 9]), which also hindered customization owing to
occlusion. Moreover, hand size adjustments and customization
aids (ie, presets) were lacking. Notably, the human-likeness was
described as mostly positive; however, a user missed the haptics
and described the uncanny valley:

I actually found that a bit creepy. Because your hands
actually looked like real hands. [Participant 10]

Regarding artificial locomotion, cybersickness and snap turn
issues remained during joystick walking. Further usability
remarks included inaccurate wall collisions with lacking haptics,
inaccurate physics (ie, weight), unrealistic foot tilting (“So when
I walked fast, my feet just shuffled.” [participant 17]),
preferences for walking using room scale, and advanced
movements (ie, running, jumping, and climbing). As in the
previous iteration, participants missed the human-like walking
illusion (“I did walk by myself but also didn’t.” [participant
13]) during teleport (“It was a little inhuman.” [participant 19]);
however, some participants habituated:

At some point when you do figure it out, yes, then it
will probably be a little easier. [Participant 11]
Nonetheless, other usability problems, such as limited range,
restricted mobility, fast pace resulting in errors, and activation
issues, were described. The required bodily turning was
perceived as ambiguous, with a participant suggesting the
addition of a snap turn. Consistent with the previous iteration,
users relied on their preferred technique for hybrid locomotion,
and all techniques showed a need for control habituation and
attention shift from body to task.

Finally, manipulation usability was rated positive; however, the
need for habituation periods for movements and controls, that
is, switching between locomotion and object manipulation,
controller assignment (“What is where? A and B, joystick.”
[participant 8]), and limited room-scale area (“If you had more
space, you could just walk there.” [participant 9]), were
described. As in the first iteration, hitting objects with raycasting
was troublesome. Furthermore, a participant reported on missing
haptics:

On the one hand, it feels very familiar and on the
other, it’s unrealistic that I don’t feel. [Participant
10]
Here, half of the participants (6/12, 50%) described the
interactions as realistic; however, few participants mentioned

JMIR Serious Games 2022 | vol. 10 | iss. 4 | e39966 | p. 8

the lack of grabbing realism and unrealistic physics or collision
resulting in occlusion. Despite needing habituation, all
participants (12/12, 100%) reported good usability regarding
the UIs.

Changes for Iteration 3
For the third iteration, we simulated bending using backward
placement of the virtual body, aiming to increase the
visuoproprioceptive congruence for more natural behavior.
Furthermore, we refined the accuracy of the IK targets and
improved the smoothness of the body rotation, by including
influences of the hand locations. Moreover, we removed arm
scaling owing to the preponderant symmetric nature of human
bodies and difficult scaling procedures. Notably, we deactivated
the HMD’s energy saving option, because we discovered
floating floor levels after reactivation, which we aimed to
account for during the iteration. To improve object manipulation
realism and remove usability issues, the idling hand animation
was refined, and objects were picked up with spherecasts instead
of raycasts (ie, magnetic toward the object). To allow further
customization, we added an option for hand size adjustment to
the related UI. Finally, we implemented a dynamic FOV
reduction (ie, vignetting) to alleviate cybersickness during
artificial locomotion.

Findings From Iteration 3

As in the previous iterations, replicating one’s own body image
through customization was key. Participants described the avatar
as human-like (“It looks real, and I also felt that I was touching
my own hand.” [participant 24]) with congruent haptics, and
33% (2/6) of the participants justified customization choices
(ie, skin tone) in contexts of social meaning:

And it’s not because I’m racist. [Participant 24]
Similar to the previous iterations, minor technical issues such
as an unrealistic wrist movement and imprecise bending of legs
remained.

Regarding joystick locomotion, cybersickness and snap turn
issues remained, but were reported to be less severe. Participants
rated the embodiment as positive, reporting on the human-like
walking illusion; however, a participant described an unrealistic
foot tilting. Furthermore, the preference for turning using one’s
own body, inaccurate wall collision, and attention shift to the
task were described. Consistent with the previous iterations,
cybersickness was absent during teleport locomotion; however,
usability issues owing to the fast pace, activation issues, and
turning using one’s own body remained:

I had to turn but I couldn’t walk. [Participant 22]
In addition, control issues that rotate the user after teleporting
were reported. However, the avatar was rated as positive, even
though participants described an ambiguous human-likeness
when teleporting and attention shift from avatar to task.
Accordant with the other iterations, all approaches showed a
need for control habituation, and the hybrid locomotion
remained mostly unused.

Consistent with the previous iterations, participants reported
positive manipulation usability despite the need for initial
(control) habituation. Only 17% (1/6) of the participants

mentioned selection issues when using the object-spaced UI,
whereas another participant preferred the screen-spaced
approach over the object-spaced one. Finally, the embodiment
during manipulations was rated as positive and human-like,
with a participant describing the feeling of haptics through the
controller’s vibration motors (“When I grabbed something, I
also felt a vibration through my hand...It really felt like I was
holding something.” [participant 19]) and unused artificial
locomotion owing to the immersion (“I forgot that I could also
walk with my joystick.” [participant 19]).

SoE Related to IVR Avatar Task

Table 2 shows the extended VEQ scores throughout our iterative
development. The contextual differences indicate that the sense
of ownership tends to increase with growing interaction
capabilities, whereas the perception of change (in the perceived
body schema) decreases. In contrast, the sense of self-location
and agency scores remained relatively stable across
measurements, with positive agency trends during interactions,
whereas self-location feelings decreased. Interestingly,
ownership and agency scores regarding teleport locomotion
were lower than those in other active contexts, which matches
the qualitative data.

The qualitative data indicate that IVBO was dependent on
habituation (“Just a matter of getting used to it.” [participant
3]), sense of agency (“He does what you do, so to speak.”
[participant 5]), self-location (“Because you are controlling that
body, so you are looking at it from the eyes of the virtual
person.” [participant 15]), customization (“Because I just chose
the same that I am.” [participant 3]), human-likeness, and
haptics (“It looks real, and I also felt that I was touching my
own hand.” [participant 24]). Throughout the iterations,
ownership perceptions ranged from overall heterogenous to
mostly positive; however, some participants remained
ambivalent:

...Because I still know this in my real body and not
that. [Participant 20]
Regarding the teleport locomotion, participants reported
heterogenous ownership feelings, illustrated by unrealistic
movements and low agency, with a participant questioning the
self-location after teleporting:

...Because you move forward so quickly I thought:
“Will that body come with me.” [Participant 19]
In contrast, joystick locomotion showed mostly positive
ownership remarks, illustrated by the human-like movement
illusions and agency through controller operation:

The movements I made with the joysticks, it made
those too. [Participant 5]
Furthermore, object manipulations showed positive ownership
remarks owing to the gain of agency, manipulation realism, and
human-likeness. In contrast, the perception of change decreased
throughout the iterations. Although some participants in the
second iteration felt lighter, smaller, or taller (“I was tall
anyway, but I felt even taller when I was there in that game.”
[participant 14]), participants in the third iteration reported only
minor remarks (“My body just felt the same all the time.”

JMIR Serious Games 2022 | vol. 10 | iss. 4 | e39966 | p. 9

[participant 20]). Notably, some participants disliked embodying
an incongruent avatar (“I don’t want to be someone else.”
[participant 18]), for example, in contexts of social interactions:

Because I think it’s important that I don’t mislead
people. [Participant 15]

Table 2. Extended Virtual Embodiment Questionnaire scores (sense of embodiment) related to iteration and task.

Object interaction,
mean (SD)
Hybrid locomotion,
mean (SD)
Joystick locomotion,
mean (SD)
Teleport locomotion,
mean (SD)
Avatar customization,
mean (SD)
Context

Sense of ownership

5.25 (2.32)
5.46 (2.28)
4.92 (2.04)
4.75 (2.41)
4.08 (1.69)
Iteration 1

5.96 (1)
5.81 (0.82)
5.62 (1.07)
4.83 (1.24)
5.15 (1.32)
Iteration 2

6.21 (0.95)
5.21 (1.44)
5.92 (1.19)
4.17 (1.72)
4.29 (1.16)
Iteration 3

5.84 (1.41)
5.57 (1.40)
5.52 (1.38)
4.65 (1.65)
4.67 (1.41)
Overall

Sense of agency

5.96 (1.50)
5.96 (1.09)
6.08 (0.61)
5.71 (2.14)
5.71 (0.75)
Iteration 1

6.15 (1.01)
6.02 (0.98)
6.17 (0.86)
5.23 (1.35)
6 (1.19)
Iteration 2

6.38 (0.89)
5.38 (1.81)
5.96 (1.10)
5.46 (1.49)
5.67 (1.24)
Iteration 3

6.16 (1.08)
5.84 (1.23)
6.09 (0.84)
5.41 (1.55)
5.84 (1.08)
Overall

Change (in the perceived body schema)

3.08 (2.78)
3.79 (2.33)
3.38 (2.22)
3.75 (2.24)
5 (1.59)
Iteration 1

2.56 (1.20)
2.85 (1.54)
3.42 (1.54)
3.06 (1.45)
3.65 (1.32)
Iteration 2

3.33 (2.04)
3.17 (2.08)
3.42 (2.06)
3 (1.74)
3.75 (1.69)
Iteration 3

2.89 (1.84)
3.17 (1.84)
3.41 (1.77)
3.22 (1.69)
4.01 (1.53)
Overall

Sense of self-location

5.83 (1.76)
5.56 (2.33)
5.50 (1.66)
5.83 (1.01)
6.56 (0.66)
Iteration 1

6.22 (0.96)
6.42 (0.61)
6.14 (0.77)
6.22 (0.78)
6.44 (0.59)
Iteration 2

5.94 (1.04)
4.94 (1.85)
5.56 (1.03)
5.06 (1.83)
5.67 (0.97)
Iteration 3

6.06 (1.17)
5.83 (1.58)
5.83 (1.10)
5.83 (1.22)
6.28 (0.77)
Overall

Locomotion Preferences and SoP

Most participants described a preference for joystick locomotion
(15/24, 63%). Few participants selected the hybrid (5/24, 21%)
or teleport locomotion (4/24, 17%). The latter was
predominantly chosen by users who had experienced (severe)
cybersickness. However, the dropouts (5/29, 17%) did not
indicate their preference, which should be considered carefully.

The general presence (mean 6.12, SD 0.90) and spatial presence
(mean 6.03, SD 0.81) were rated high compared with moderate
involvement (mean 4.27, SD 1.88) and low realism (mean 3.59,
SD 1.38) scores. The IVR environment was often described as
unrealistic and boring; hence, participants suggested improving
the graphics and realism, including some agents, objects (eg,
chair, cars, and plants), or games, to make the experience more
appealing. However, according to participant 11, this may cause
overstimulation and distress.

Discussion

Principal Findings

This study reports on the feasibility and related design guidelines
for IVBO in adults with MBID, by conducting a user-centered
design approach with 3 iterations. In contrast to previous studies

on IVR embodiment illusions, our avatar was tailored to the
needs of our vulnerable group, by gradually adding interaction
and customization abilities. In particular, we investigated the
IVR avatar with related IK, controller-based locomotion, and
(object) 
manipulation 
(Multimedia