1

Using human-­centred design to tackle 
COVID-­19 vaccine hesitancy for children 
and youth: a protocol for a mixed-­methods 
study in Montreal, Canada

Britt McKinnon  ‍ ‍ ,1,2 Krystelle Abalovi,1 Ashley Vandermorris,3,4 Ève Dubé,5 
Cat Tuong Nguyen,6 Niels Billou,7 Geneviève Fortin,1,8 Maryam Parvez,1,9 
Joyeuse Senga,1,9 Joe Abou-­malhab,1,9 Medjine Antoine Bellamy,7 
Caroline Quach,10,11 Kate Zinszer1,8

To cite: McKinnon B, Abalovi K, 
Vandermorris A, et al.  Using 
human-­centred design to tackle 
COVID-­19 vaccine hesitancy for 
children and youth: a protocol 
for a mixed-­methods study in 
Montreal, Canada. BMJ Open 
2022;12:e061908. doi:10.1136/
bmjopen-2022-061908

	
►Prepublication history and 
additional supplemental material 
for this paper are available 
online. To view these files, 
please visit the journal online 
(http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/​
bmjopen-2022-061908).

Received 10 February 2022
Accepted 16 March 2022

For numbered affiliations see 
end of article.

Correspondence to
Dr Britt McKinnon;  
​britt.​mckinnon@​utoronto.​ca

Protocol

© Author(s) (or their 
employer(s)) 2022. Re-­use 
permitted under CC BY-­NC. No 
commercial re-­use. See rights 
and permissions. Published by 
BMJ.

ABSTRACT
Introduction  To successfully combat COVID-­19 vaccine 
hesitancy and increase uptake, research has demonstrated 
that interventions are most effective when tailored to 
meet local needs through active engagement and co-­
development with communities. This mixed-­methods 
project uses a human-­centred design (HCD) approach 
to understand local perspectives of COVID-­19 vaccine 
hesitancy and develop strategies to enhance vaccine 
confidence for children and adolescents.
Methods and analysis  Project ECHO (Étude 
Communautaire sur l’Hésitation vaccinale contre la 
COVID-­19) combines population-­based surveys of parents 
and adolescents with community-­based participatory 
action research to design and pilot strategies to enhance 
COVID-­19 vaccine confidence in two underserved and 
ethnoculturally diverse neighbourhoods of Montreal, 
Canada. Two surveys conducted 6 months apart through 
primary and secondary schools are used to monitor 
vaccine acceptance and its social determinants among 
children and youth. Analyses of survey data include 
descriptive and inferential statistical approaches. 
Community-­led design teams of parents and youth 
from the two participating neighbourhoods, supported 
by academic researchers, design thinking experts and 
community partners, use an HCD approach to: (1) gather 
data to understand COVID-­19 vaccine decision-­making 
among parents and youth in their community and frame 
a design challenge (inspiration phase); (2) develop an 
intervention to address the design challenge (ideation 
phase) and (3) pilot the intervention (implementation 
phase). Strategies to evaluate the community-­
led interventions will be co-­developed during the 
implementation phase.
Ethics and dissemination  This study has been 
approved by the research ethics boards of the Sainte-­
Justine University Hospital Centre and the University of 
Montreal. Community design teams will be involved in the 
dissemination of findings and the design of knowledge 
translation initiatives that foster dialogue related to 
COVID-­19 vaccination for children and adolescents 
among community, school and public health stakeholders. 
Findings will be disseminated through peer-­reviewed 

publications, conference presentations, community forums, 
policy briefs, and social media content.

INTRODUCTION
COVID-­19 vaccination has been approved 
and is widely available in Canada for children 
aged 5 years and older—since May 2021 for 
12–15 year olds and November 2021 for 5–11 
year olds.1 Vaccinating children and adoles-
cents protects them against long-­lasting effects 
of infection (ie, long COVID-­19) and rare 
cases of multisystem inflammatory syndrome 
and severe paediatric COVID-­19.1 Moreover, 
ensuring high vaccination coverage among 

Strengths and limitations of this study

	
►Project ECHO (Étude Communautaire sur l’Hésitation 
vaccinale contre la COVID-­19) responds to calls in 
the literature to address COVID-­19 vaccine hesitan-
cy and increase vaccine equity through active en-
gagement and co-­development of interventions with 
communities.
	
►Human-­centred design (HCD) is integrated into this 
community-­based participatory research project to 
support the design and implementation of innova-
tive, accessible and effective solutions for address-
ing the complex issue of vaccine hesitancy.
	
►Involving community researchers in all steps of the 
research process and in the dissemination of find-
ings will foster increased engagement with com-
munity, school and other stakeholders and promote 
dialogue about COVID-­19 vaccination for children 
and adolescents.
	
►HCD can be a time-­consuming process, especially 
when implemented by community design teams 
who are both learning and executing the process as 
the project unfolds.
	
►The COVID-­19 pandemic and associated public 
health restrictions represent risks to our ability to 
implement the study as planned.

Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

 . 
by guest
 
 

2

young people is essential to reduce the population disease 
burden, ease pressure on healthcare systems and resume 
in-­person schooling and other activities.2

In the Canadian province of Quebec, 59% of chil-
dren aged 5–11 years had received at least one vaccine 
dose after the first 2 months of the vaccine campaign 
for children.3 Survey data suggest just 65% of Quebec 
parents intend to vaccinate their 5–11 year olds against 
COVID-­19.2 Parents with younger children report lower 
vaccine acceptance, as do parents from lower-­income 
households, from racialised groups and those born 
outside Canada.4–6 In Quebec, there is also notably lower 
vaccine coverage among children living in more mate-
rially deprived neighbourhoods.3 7 Factors shown to 
contribute to disparities in COVID-­19 vaccine coverage 
include inequitable access to vaccination services among 
disadvantaged populations, language and resource (eg, 
computer access) barriers and greater mistrust of govern-
ments and public health agencies among some equity-­
seeking groups.8

To successfully combat vaccine hesitancy, defined as ‘a 
delay in acceptance or refusal of vaccines’,9 and reduce 
inequities in vaccine uptake among children and adoles-
cents, research has demonstrated that interventions are 
most effective when tailored to meet local needs through 
active engagement and co-­development with communi-
ties.10 Community-­based participatory research (CBPR) 
approaches have been widely used to develop solutions 
that improve community health and increase health 
equity through a process of co-­learning and genuine 
partnership between researchers and communities.11 
Human-­centred design (HCD) is a problem-­solving 
approach that shares CBPR’s emphasis on co-­creation 
and bidirectional exchange of knowledge between the 
design team and the project’s intended beneficiaries 
(‘users’). HCD engages with communities and their 
needs through an iterative process of building empathy 
with the experiences of individual users, generating 
ideas for how to solve problems, and designing and 
testing out prototypes. Traditionally used more in the 
private sector, HCD has in recent years been applied 
to numerous public health problems,12–14 including to 
develop mobile apps and education materials to bolster 
vaccine uptake.15 16 Emerging evidence suggests that the 
integration of HCD into CBPR projects may lead to more 
innovative, accessible and effective solutions to address 
complex health and social issues.17 18

Study objectives
The ECHO study (Étude Communautaire sur l’Hésitation 
vaccinale contre la COVID-­19) aims to understand local 
perspectives of COVID-­19 vaccine hesitancy for children 
and adolescents in two underserved and ethnoculturally 
diverse Montreal neighbourhoods, and to co-­develop 
tailored strategies with parents, youth and their commu-
nities to enhance vaccine confidence. Specific objectives 
and subobjectives of the study include:

Objective 1: to monitor COVID-19 vaccine acceptance and uptake 
for children and adolescents
a.	 To estimate changes over time in COVID-­19 vaccine 
acceptance for children and adolescents.
b.	To identify social factors associated with vaccine accep-
tance for children and adolescents.
c.	 To explore behavioural and other characteristics asso-
ciated with vaccine hesitancy.

Objective 2: to use HCD to develop and pilot community-driven 
solutions to enhance vaccine confidence among parents and 
adolescents.
a.	 To train community-­based design teams in the HCD 
approach.
b.	To design and pilot interventions to enhance vaccine 
decision-­making and reduce other barriers to vaccine 
uptake.
c.	 To evaluate feasibility and preliminary effectiveness of 
the interventions.
d.	To document and critically reflect on the use of HCD 
methodology in community-­based vaccine hesitancy 
research.

METHODS AND ANALYSIS
Study design
This mixed-­methods project combines population-­based 
surveys to monitor vaccine acceptance and its determi-
nants with CBPR to design and pilot strategies to enhance 
vaccine decision-­making for children and youth.2 17 
Parent-­led and youth-­led community-­based design (CBD) 
teams are supported by researchers, design thinking 
experts, and community partners to apply an HCD 
approach to: (1) gather data to understand COVID-­19 
vaccine decision-­making among parents and youth in 
their community and frame a design challenge (inspi-
ration phase); (2) develop an intervention to address 
the design challenge (ideation phase) and (3) pilot 
the intervention (implementation phase) and evaluate 
acceptability and feasibility. The ECHO project is being 
conducted over a 12-­month period (figure 1).

Study setting
The study takes place in two neighbourhoods of Montreal, 
Canada’s second largest city located in the French-­
speaking province of Quebec. Residents of the two neigh-
bourhoods, Montréal-­Nord and Parc Extension, have been 
disproportionally affected by the COVID-­19 pandemic 
and have among the lowest rates of COVID-­19 vaccina-
tion in the city, especially among children and teens.19–21 
Montréal-­Nord has approximately 84 000 residents and is 
one of Montreal’s poorest and most racially diverse neigh-
bourhoods.22 Home to one of Canada’s largest Haitian 
communities and a sizeable North African population, 
two-­thirds of the neighbourhood’s residents were either 
born abroad or have at least one parent who was born 
abroad.22 Parc Extension has a population just under 30 
000 and is one of the densest, most culturally diverse and 
poorest neighbourhoods in Montreal. A neighbourhood 

Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

 . 
by guest
 
 

3

Open access

of choice among newcomers to Canada, 90% of residents 
were born outside Canada or have one or two immigrant 
parents, with most coming from South Asian countries 
(India, Pakistan and Bangladesh) and Greece.22 23 The 
mother tongue of two-­thirds of Parc Extension residents 
is neither French nor English and 10% speak neither 
language.

Participants and methods
Objective 1: to monitor COVID-19 vaccine acceptance and uptake 
for adolescents and parental vaccine acceptance for children
We will use online questionnaires to collect data from 
parents of primary school students aged 5–11 years and 
from secondary school students aged 14–18 years in the 
two study neighbourhoods. Six public primary schools 
(out of 16 total) and 2 public secondary schools (out of 4 
total), with an equal number of each per neighbourhood, 
were randomly selected to participate. We excluded a 
priori two public schools that serve unique student popu-
lations: one primary school for children with intellec-
tual/developmental disabilities and one small secondary 
school that supports older students who had previous 
difficulties within the educational system. For the former, 
decision-­making around vaccines likely involves different 
considerations for the parents of students with disabili-
ties, while the latter school did not include our full age 
range of interest.
Students aged 14 years and older attending one of the 
two sampled secondary schools are eligible to participate 
in the online questionnaire. This age cut-­off was selected 
because adolescents 14 years and older do not require 
the consent of a parent or guardian to be vaccinated in 
Quebec.24 In addition, parents or guardians of all chil-
dren aged 5–11 years attending one of the participating 
primary schools are eligible to participate. Surveys are 
being conducted in January 2022 (baseline) and June 
2022 (follow-­up). All questionnaires are available to 
participants in French and English, and the parent ques-
tionnaire is also available in Arabic, Urdu and Punjabi. 

ECHO community design team members (ie, parent and 
adolescent ECHO team members from the two neigh-
bourhoods) were involved in adapting, translating and 
piloting the questionnaires.

Questionnaires
The parent questionnaire focuses on assessing COVID-­19 
vaccine uptake and intentions and understanding the 
reasons parents are likely or unlikely to accept vaccination 
for their child(ren). It includes an adapted version of the 
5C scale, which assesses 5 psychological antecedents of 
vaccination (confidence, complacency, constraints, calcu-
lation and collective responsibility).25 Questions about 
household COVID-­19 infections and vaccination status, 
knowledge about COVID-­19 infection and vaccines, and 
sources of vaccine-­related information are also included, 
along with basic parent and child health characteristics 
(eg, chronic diseases and mental health diagnoses). 
Where possible, questions are based on existing vali-
dated surveys and scales, including Statistics Canada’s 
COVID-­19 Vaccination Coverage Survey26 and Quebec’s 
National Institute for Public Health Surveys on vaccine 
acceptance for children.2 Social determinants of interest 
include parental education, race/ethnicity, language(s) 
spoken at home and place of birth, which are measured 
using questions adapted from the Canadian Population 
Census.27

The adolescent questionnaire measures vaccine uptake 
and focuses on understanding the reasons for receiving 
or not receiving the COVID-­19 vaccine. The question-
naire includes basic sociodemographic and health ques-
tions for the adolescent and members of their family. As 
with the parent questionnaire, the adolescent question-
naire collects information about household COVID-­19 
infections and vaccination history, knowledge and beliefs 
about COVID-­19 infection and vaccines, and sources of 
vaccine-­related information. We further included ques-
tions to understand how the pandemic has impacted 
adolescents’ mental health and quality of life. The youth 

Figure 1  Timeline for ECHO study. ECHO, Étude Communautaire sur l’Hésitation vaccinale contre la COVID-­19.

Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

 . 
by guest
 
 

4

version of the MacArthur Scale of Subjective Social Status 
is used to assess socioeconomic status.28 29 Both question-
naires are available in online supplemental appendix 1.

Data collection and management
Questionnaire data is being collected and managed using 
the Research Electronic Data Capture application, a 
secure, web-­based software platform designed to support 
data capture for research studies.30 The surveys can be 
accessed through a unique web link or by scanning a 
QR code using a computer, tablet or smartphone. Only 
authorised personnel from the research team can access 
these data.

Statistical considerations
Sample size calculations are based on vaccine uptake data 
for children and adolescents living in the two neighbour-
hoods.21 Averaged across the two neighbourhoods, 58% 
of children aged 5–11 years are unvaccinated. Based on 
this, we estimate that a sample size of 187 parents will 
enable detection of a 25% decrease in the per cent of 
children unvaccinated between baseline and follow-­up 
surveys. Similarly, as 26% of adolescents are unvaccinated 
in the two neighbourhoods,21 an estimated sample size of 
586 is needed to detect a 25% decline in the per cent of 
unvaccinated teenagers between baseline and follow-­up. 
Both calculations are based on power of 80% and a two-­
sided significance level of 95%. Using the eligible student 
populations of the sampled primary and secondary 
schools, we require response rates of 6% and 28% among 
parents and adolescents, respectively, which are reason-
able targets based on our previous COVID-­19 research in 
Montreal schools.31

We will use descriptive and inferential approaches to 
analyse survey data. Analyses will describe and compare 
rates of vaccine acceptance and uptake for children and 
youth between baseline and follow-­up. We will examine 
reasons for non-­vaccination among adolescents and 
parents and reasons parents are likely or unlikely to vacci-
nate their children, as well as the psychological anteced-
ents of vaccination. Exploratory analyses will examine 
socio-­demographic (eg, socioeconomic status, parental 
education level, race/ethnicity and primary language 
spoken) and other determinants of vaccine acceptance.

Objective 2: to use HCD to develop and pilot community-driven 
solutions to enhance vaccine-related decision-making among 
parents and adolescents

Recruitment and training of community-based design teams
We recruited 2 youth CBD teams, each comprised of 4 
students aged 14–17 years from the participating secondary 
schools, and 2 parent CBD teams, each comprised of 4 
parent residents from each neighbourhood. The posi-
tions were advertised through local community organ-
isations and schools, and via social media. Interested 
parents and youth participated in 15-­minute interviews 
with the study team to gauge their motivation, relevant 
lived experiences and sense of service to their schools 

and communities. The 8 students and 8 parents selected 
as CBD team members receive compensation for their 
work on the project (approximately 5 hours/week for a 
6-­month period) and are considered study collaborators. 
Team members reflect the diversity of their neighbour-
hoods—many are immigrants from different parts of the 
world (eg, Algeria, Ivory Coast, Palestine, Afghanistan 
and India) and together they speak at least 12 different 
languages. Each of the 4 CBD teams has a dedicated 
mentor from the study team who coordinates team 
communication and meetings and provides dedicated 
support for their team’s project. The mentors are public 
health graduate students from diverse backgrounds who 
bring expertise in qualitative and CBPR methods and 
lived experiences in the project neighbourhoods.
In-­person and virtual HCD workshops for the CBD 
teams are held approximately monthly through the 
various stages of the 6-­month HCD process (see figure 2). 
Workshops are led by a collaborator with design thinking 
expertise, with support from academic researchers and 
other individuals with relevant local and substantive 
expertise.

HCD process
CBD teams and their community-­based and academic 
partners engage in a three-­step HCD process,32 as 
depicted in figure 2 and as described below.

Inspiration phase
During the first phase, CBD teams begin by gathering 
information to better understand COVID-­19 vaccine 
decision-­making in their communities using existing data 
and local resources. Teams then collect primary data via 
semi-­structured interviews. Parent teams conduct inter-
views with parents of unvaccinated children aged 5–11 
years and youth CBD teams interview unvaccinated youth 
aged 14–18 years, all from their respective communities. 
Recruitment of interview participants uses different types 
of purposive sampling, including convenience and snow-
ball sampling.33

CBD team members are trained on interviewing tech-
niques and prepare interview guides with the support of 
the research team. Interviews are conducted in pairs (one 
interviewer and one note taker) and take place in person 
or via Zoom depending on public health guidelines. 
Interviews are audio recorded with the permission of 
participants. The choice of interviewers, use of translators 
and other factors are always considered to ensure privacy 
and confidentiality and increase the validity of interview 
findings. Each CBD team completes 12–15 interviews.
CBD teams are trained to synthesise data from the 
interviews in a collective sense-­making approach using 
empathy maps (figure 3).34 Teams use empathy maps to 
create personas that capture the needs, motivations and 
pain points of a potential group of users with shared char-
acteristics. The empathy maps are also used to develop 
point-­of-­view statements that include information about 
users, needs and insights (eg, (user) needs a way to (verb) 

Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

 . 
by guest
 
 

5

Open access

because (surprising insight)). Once the teams clearly 
articulate their users’ points of view, they can begin to 
define the design challenge that needs to be addressed.

Ideation phase
With the design challenge and personas’ points of view 
firmly in mind, the teams then move into the solution 
space. Teams generate ideas during facilitated brain-
storming sessions that encourage a wide array of ideas to 
stimulate innovative solutions. Through a democratised 
decision-­making process, teams vote on the ideas they 
want to prototype and test with users.
Initial prototypes are made rapidly using craft materials 
and storyboards. Storyboards develop visual representa-
tions of a user’s journey through a possible solution to 
a problem.18 The first low-­fidelity prototypes allow the 
teams to test the major concepts of their solution and 
engage the user in a process of co-­creation whereby their 
input is solicited and incorporated in further iterations. 
The prototypes are tested with 12–15 users per team. A 
second round of testing is undertaken with a subset of 
the first round of users and additional new users, again 
targeting 12–15 users per team.

Implementation phase
In this phase, CBD teams finalise their prototypes, fabri-
cate them to a higher fidelity and pilot their interventions. 
Prior to finalising their prototypes, teams analyse current 
solutions to address vaccine hesitancy in the community 
and speak to experts in the field for additional learnings. 
The interventions developed by parent teams will be pilot 

tested among parents at the two primary schools and 
those developed by the youth teams will be pilot tested 
among students at their secondary schools.
Teams also develop plans for monitoring and evalua-
tion during the implementation phase. This includes 
reflecting on the team’s theory of change about how the 
prototype will create positive change and defining a set 
of indicators to measure effectiveness. Both quantitative 
and qualitative indicators are included. Quantitative indi-
cators may rely on survey data collected for objective 1, 
which provides pre-­intervention and post-­intervention 
information on knowledge and attitudes around vaccina-
tion from a sample of parents and students. Each team 
will have a budget of $C15 000 to design, implement and 
evaluate their intervention.
In addition to evaluation of the four interventions 
developed using HCD, we will use field notes, document 
reviews (eg, meeting minutes and weekly mentor activity 
reports), briefings and qualitative data collection tech-
niques to document and critically reflect on the use of the 
HCD methodology in community participatory research 
on vaccine hesitancy. Focus groups and in-­depth inter-
views with CBD team members and mentors, respectively, 
will be carried out to understand experiences and lessons 
learnt in applying HCD in this project.

Data management and analysis
Interview data collected by CBD teams will include audio 
recordings and notes taken during interviews. Password 
protected files containing participant contact information 

Figure 2  HCD phases for the ECHO study. ECHO, Étude Communautaire sur l’Hésitation vaccinale contre la COVID-­19; HCD, 
human-­centred design.

Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

 . 
by guest
 
 

6

(name, email and phone number) are kept separately 
from interview notes and audio recordings and linked 
only via a numeric identifier. Only authorised personnel 
from the research team can access interview data.
Data are analysed through the HCD process by iden-
tifying themes and translating these themes into design 
opportunities.32 Empathy maps, inspiring stories and 
other information collected from users are shared among 
team members to identify key themes by identifying 
patterns, compelling insights, surprises, etc. Themes are 
then used to develop insight statements: short, memo-
rable phrases that ascribe meaning to the themes and help 
identify important elements of the solution. These insight 
statements are translated into design opportunities, 

which describe key elements of the solution and that will 
be further refined as teams begin to build and test their 
prototypes.

Patient and public involvement
Parents and adolescents from the two project neigh-
bourhoods are involved as co-­researchers throughout 
the study. They are integral members of the research 
team, whose activities include designing interview guides, 
conducting interviews with community members, partic-
ipating in co-­design sessions, assisting with survey prepa-
ration and recruitment, and designing and supporting 
knowledge translation activities. Additional community 
members—parents, adolescents, health professionals 

Figure 3  Empathy map example from the ECHO study. ECHO, Étude Communautaire sur l’Hésitation vaccinale contre la 
COVID-­19.

Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

 . 
by guest
 
 

7

Open access

and community leaders—are also involved in co-­design 
sessions during the ideation and implementation stages 
of the project.

ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION
This study has been approved by the research ethics 
boards (REBs) of the Saint-­Justine University Hospital 
Centre (MP-­21-­2022-­3733), the University of Montreal 
(2021–1315) and, for the survey, the three participating 
school boards. Due to the iterative nature of the research 
process, amendments to the current research protocol 
are submitted to the REBs as data collection tools and 
evaluation strategies are developed. Standard procedures 
for obtaining informed consent prior to any data collec-
tion are followed for all survey and interview participants. 
Youth participants aged 14 years and older provide their 
own consent to participate.
Knowledge translation (KT) for the study will promote 
dialogue related to COVID-­19 vaccination for children 
and adolescents and raise awareness about COVID-­19 
vaccine inequities. Parent and youth CBD teams will be 
involved in the dissemination of findings and the design 
of KT initiatives that foster dialogue among community, 
school and public health stakeholders. Dissemination 
strategies will leverage technology, including webinars, 
social media platforms, research snapshots and policy 
briefs, and will engage new and existing community 
organisation and public sector partners. Study findings 
will also be disseminated in reports, conference presen-
tations and peer-­reviewed publications. Community 
researchers will be given the opportunity to be included 
as co-­authors on any publications that include data from 
their projects.

Author affiliations
1Centre de recherche en santé publique, Université de Montréal, Montreal, Québec, 
Canada
2Division of Epidemiology, Dalla Lana School of Public Health, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada
3Department of Adolescent Medicine, Hospital For Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada
4Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada
5Centre de recherche du CHU de Québec, Université Laval, Québec, Québec, Canada
6Département de médecine, Université de Montréal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada
7The Humanos Institute, Montreal, Quebec, Canada
8Département de médecine sociale et préventive, Université de Montréal, Montreal, 
Québec, Canada
9Department of Public Health, School of Population and Global Health, McGill 
University, Montreal, Québec, Canada
10Département de microbiologie et immunologie, Université de Montréal, Montreal, 
Québec, Canada
11Département de Pédiatrie, CHU Sainte-­Justine, Montreal, Québec, Canada

Contributors  The study design and concept were conceived by BM, KZ, AV, CQ, ED, 
CTN and NB. BM wrote the first draft of the protocol. All other authors (KA, AV, ED, 
CTN, NB, GF, MP, JS, JA-­m, MAB, CQ and KZ) were involved in revising the paper 
for important intellectual content, approving the final version of the manuscript and 
agreeing to be accountable for all aspects of the work.

Funding  This study has been externally reviewed and funded following a 
competitive grant application and review process by the Canadian Institutes of 

Health Research (GA3-­177723). The funder played no role in the preparation of this 
protocol paper.

Patient and public involvement  Patients and/or the public were involved in the 
design, or conduct, or reporting, or dissemination plans of this research. Refer to 
the Methods section for further details.

Patient consent for publication  Not applicable.

Provenance and peer review  Not commissioned; internally peer reviewed.

Data availability statement  No data are available.

Supplemental material  This content has been supplied by the author(s). It has 
not been vetted by BMJ Publishing Group Limited (BMJ) and may not have been 
peer-­reviewed. Any opinions or recommendations discussed are solely those 
of the author(s) and are not endorsed by BMJ. BMJ disclaims all liability and 
responsibility arising from any reliance placed on the content. Where the content 
includes any translated material, BMJ does not warrant the accuracy and reliability 
of the translations (including but not limited to local regulations, clinical guidelines, 
terminology, drug names and drug dosages), and is not responsible for any error 
and/or omissions arising from translation and adaptation or otherwise.

Open access  This is an open access article distributed in accordance with the 
Creative Commons Attribution Non Commercial (CC BY-­NC 4.0) license, which 
permits others to distribute, remix, adapt, build upon this work non-­commercially, 
and license their derivative works on different terms, provided the original work is 
properly cited, appropriate credit is given, any changes made indicated, and the use 
is non-­commercial. See: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/.

ORCID iD
Britt McKinnon http://orcid.org/0000-0002-3109-5474