Improving Sleep Awareness: Design
and Development of an M-Health App

Mafalda Monteiro, Marina Moreira, Telma Arzileiro, and Pedro Amado

Abstract The current research on M-health shows a poor quality of sleep in
Portugal. This paper presents the development of a high-ﬁdelity visual prototype
of a mobile application—Moon App—that aims to improve the user’s sleep through
self-assessment. Developing it was the result of our concern surrounding the lack of
sleep being experienced in today’s society. The app intends to offer both informative
and practical content, and also to promote a self-analysis of the user sleep perfor-
mance. By establishing a connection between the users’ dreams or nightmares, and
theoverallqualityofthesleep.Consideringthesegoals,thefeaturesweredeﬁnedwith
the objective of giving the user a distinct experience in the ﬁelds already mentioned.
The methodology adopted consisted mainly of an User-Centered Design approach
to software development and evaluation: an initial analysis of the state of the art of
other mobile applications within the sleep domain; exploratory data-gathering inter-
views with end-users; the information collected was used for the development of
the features, based on a persona and scenarios of use; and ﬁnally we’ve conducted
usability tests on the prototype. The feedback of the dream log and the calendar
features implemented was positive. The majority of users would use these features
to register their dreams and use the log to self-access their sleep quality history.

Keywords Invision studio · Interaction design · Mental health · Usability
evaluation

M. Monteiro · M. Moreira · T. Arzileiro · P. Amado (B)
Faculty of Fine Arts, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal

M. Monteiro

M. Moreira

T. Arzileiro

P. Amado
i2ADS–Research Institute of Art, Design and Society, Porto, Portugal

© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license
to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2021
N. Martins et al. (eds.), Perspectives on Design and Digital Communication,
Springer Series in Design and Innovation 8, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-49647-0_10

161

162

1
Introduction

Before conceptualizing Moon App, it was important to understand furthermore the
raising phenomenon of M-Health applications and perceive what could be signiﬁcant
to develop on this vast topic.
In the matter of M-Health, Prof. John Orzechowski, clinical assistant professor
at UIC, tells how “Mobile Health continues to reach heightened interest levels and
activity across the globe”. He says that,

(…) its solutions hold the promise to provide new, innovative care access and delivery
models that produce better outcomes, and that M-Health is being viewed increasingly by
many as an important technology metaphor to achieving a patient-centric paradigm change.
(Orzechowski 2014)

After realizing the importance of developing an app surrounding the quality of
sleep, due to observing data providing further acknowledgment of the increasing
of unhealthy sleeping routines, it was decided to work on the matter of the dream.
It was a mutual goal to approach this topic with a less explored area on mobile
applications since there were already many well accomplished on the sleeping ﬁeld.
On the following sections we’ll showcase data concerning the sleep habits of the
current society provided by platforms such as DECO; Afterwards, focusing on the
premise of the app, there will be shown studies surrounding the connections between
dreaming and sleep routine; With the purpose of studying the current market, it will
be shown our research on existing applications of the same ﬁeld to compare their
weaknesses and strengths; Closing our research, it will be presented the concept of
our application and the features developed; Usability tests were conducted on May
to evaluate the experience of possible users and then we provide the results and the
improvements realized after analyzing the data collected.

2
M-Health as a Tool for Behavior Change

We understand that the connection between sleep quality and electronic devices
presents an open space for discussion. The debate upon the relationship between
mobile devices and sleep quality is a worldwide matter that focuses mostly on the
problematic use of mobile devices, nevertheless, recent studies show us that a core
subject to be explore is how to relate with them.
A research conducted by Shin et al., Mobile Phone Interventions for Sleep Disor-
ders and Sleep Quality: Systematic Review, reveals that m-health applications can be
beneﬁcial to improve sleep disorders and sleep quality. Through a strict study selec-
tion criteria of research articles, published between 1983 and 2016 and a primary
selection of 2674 articles from four electronic databases (PubMed/Medline, Scopus,
Web of Science and EBSCOhost), the researchers focused only on mobile phone
interventions to determine the effectiveness of mobile technology in sleep quality,

163

quantityandsleepdisorder.Theresult“supportstheevidencethatmobiletechnology-
based interventions are an effective tool to improve symptoms of sleep disorders and
quality of sleep than traditional intervention without a mobile phone” as well as the
potential of mobile devices as a tool for behavior change.
Grigsby-Toussaint et al. evaluated the role of m-health applications has a tool for
motivating behavior change. To examine the integration of behavior constructs in
sleep applications, a selection of 330 unique applications were found in the Google
Play Store and iTunes App Store, in September 2015. The descriptive analysis of
sleep applications performed by the researchers reveals that although a few embodied
features to support behavior change, at the time of the selection app process, “an
opportunity exists to encourage sustainable sleep hygiene practices using mobile
phones Grigsby-Toussaint et al. (2017).”
As far as our best knowledge, considering the lack of research that aims to inves-
tigate directly the effectiveness of m-health applications in sleep quality, the above
researches represent major references to minimize our concerns regarding not only a
non-problematic use of mobile devices before sleep, furthermore the potential bene-
ﬁts of m-health applications. Therefore, as a growing market m-health applications
represents an opportunity to take advantage of mobile phones to meet users’ needs.

3
Sleep/Sleeping Habits Today

A survey made by Deco Proteste (DECO 2016) veriﬁed certain concerning numbers
about the common sleeping habits of the Portuguese: two-thirds responded that, on
average, they didn’t have a good night of sleep. These numbers have duplicated since
the last survey made by the same source back in 2004, which reveals a tendency of
worst sleeping habits by the Portuguese in 12 years. These habits seem to progres-
sively affect the daily life and routines since 4 in 10 answered that the lack of sleep
made them experience concerning somnolence that inﬂuenced their productivity and
increased risks of accidents (Garbarino et al. 2016). These tendencies, veriﬁed glob-
ally, need to be treated as a major global problem since the lack of sleep is not only
associated with short-term negative effects such as accidents and illnesses but is also
associated with a decrease in the general well-being.1 The quality of sleep and the
nightmare frequency have a direct relationship to well-being (Blagrove et al. 2004).
In 2019, a survey published by the Portuguese newspaper Público revealed more
recent statistics concerning these matters (Mendes 2019). In this article, the pulmo-
nologists Susana Sousa and Silvia Correia explain that even with the increasing
awareness of the connection of bad sleeping habits with diseases, most people don’t

1In 2003, professor and dream researcher Allan Hobson explain that even when humans dream, the
brainisactive.Throughexperimentshedefendsthatunderstandinghowwecreatedream´snarratives
helps to understand the nature of consciousness and that dreams offer insight into humans waking
lives. His research focuses not only on the dream’s story itself but also in correlation with dreamer´s
daily life experience.

164

attribute to healthy sleep the same importance as to healthy eating habits, or regular
exercise.
With the statistics already mentioned, it leaves no doubt that this is an issue that
needs to be tackled in the current young generations, as this problem will aggravate
in the future. There is a necessity of raising awareness for better sleeping habits and
studies surrounding the sleeping matter.

4
Connection Between Dreams and Quality of Sleep

On the ﬁrst research, at a North-American sleep research platform, Sleep Foundation,
canbefounddozensofarticlesdiscussingeverythingsurroundingthesleepingmatter.
At the most researched topics on the website, it is found at ﬁrst place the following
article questioning, “Do dreams affect how well you sleep?”, which provides further
acknowledgement how this connection between sleeping and dreams raises questions
andcuriosityofmanypeople.Althoughthearticleclaimsthatdisturbingdreamsdon’t
affect how much time a person spends in different stages of sleep or the number of
times it is awakened, there is still a concern that as they mention, (…) “there’s no
question that nightmares have ramiﬁcations that last even after you wake up (…)
those scary images can affect your mood and behavior the next day, causing the
equivalent of a bad-dream hangover Sleep Foundation (2019).”
Following this statement, the article tells that a person may feel less well rested as
an aftermath of how long it takes to fall back to sleep after experiencing a nightmare.
They concluded by referring furthermore how dreaming impacts an individual’s
well-being, and how it content can change people’s sleeping experience, arguing
that, “Research shows that good sleepers often describe their dreams as being more
pleasant and joyful, while people who suffer from insomnia tend to have fewer
positive emotions associated with their dreams” (…)
As there are studies about those possible connections, there are plenty of other
questions about this topic that remain scientiﬁcally unanswered. Perhaps more
complex to study is the actual content of the dreams, do they matter? Do they mean
anything? Questions like these are answered in an issue of New Scientist magazine,
in the article, “Dreams decoded: 6 answers to the mysteries of the sleeping mind”,
written by Rowan Hooper, who states that dreams play a key role in boosting creative
thought, memory, learning and even mental health (Hooper 2018a, b). Answering
the question if dreams have any meaning, Hooper states:

(…) what you dream about and the emotional tone of the dream probably reﬂects what your
brain considers important. Research shows that if you play Tetris all day long, your brain
will decide that Tetris is what you need to dream about. If you are anxious about something,
your brain may well give you a dream with anxiety as the dominant emotion. (Hooper 2018a,
b)

He further explains Mark Blagrove’s view on the topic, about how analyzing your
dreams could be therapeutic and insightful, nevertheless Hooper states that further

165

experimentations would be needed to test whether dreams convey important personal
information.
Considering the following information provided by these resources, it was a
mutual goal to approach the quality of sleep matter with a less explored area on
mobile applications. Dreams represent something signiﬁcantly personal to everyone,
and learning about the connections of each dreams with daily life is a responsibility
of each individual. Developing an application had to have the concern of providing
a platform adaptable to everyone’s experiences.

5
Moon: A Concept Application

The Moon application gives the user exercises and instructions for a better sleep
routine. It explores the possible connections between our dreams and the quality of
our sleep. The goal is to context the theme throw an analysis in order to provide an
insight able to contribute to the development of the app and future advances. (Hobson
2002). Here, the developer team, being only specialized in Design, haven’t searched
for a scientiﬁc approach, but have given priority to designing the user experience in
the development of a self-analysis tool for the users’ sleeping health. The app presents
three main features: (a) the ﬁrst presents exercises and instructional plans to the users,
aiming to promote better sleeping habits; (b) the user is invited to record/track his
dreams in a dream log in order to promote a deeper insight on his dreams; (c) the
ﬁnal overall dream log activity can be viewed or reviewed in a global calendar.
In a ﬁrst approach to the theme, a search was conducted on the Google Play
Store, to understand what the market had to offer in the M-Health/Sleeping area.
After choosing three key applications,2 the aim was to study the features already
accomplished by those apps and see what it would offer to the user. A ﬁnal app
was chosen to serve as a study case. Interviews with Shleep3 users were made to
understand what strengths and elements could be improved in a future app. This
also allowed for the development of the personas, scenarios and the development of
original features in a User-Centered Design approach (Cooper et al. 2014). Then the
steps to develop Moon were presented through those interviews, which resulted in
the present prototype application. To evaluate the usability of the app, two separated
sessions with potential Moon users were developed. This was essential to test these
features and understand what the user needed.

2The choice criteria of these key applications was based on the availability to test, considering their
potentiality in further analysis.
3Mobile application. Available online at https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.shleep.
shleepb.

166

6
State of the Art in Sleep Monitoring Mobile Applications:
An Analysis of Three Study Cases

In terms of the digital applications universe, mostly directed to the sleeping area, a
considerable number of apps were found in which the aim was to improve and control
the user’s sleep. We’ve searched Google Play Store using the keyword “sleep” in
January 2020. From the ﬁrst twenty-ﬁve applications presented were selected eight as
study cases, all have English as their reading or audio language. Their characteristics,
positive and negative, were considered in the conception of Moon. Their names are
Pzizz,4 Sleep,5 Sleepo,6 Sleep Away,7 Sleep Monitor,8 Sleep Time,9 Sleep Town10 and
Tide.11 Almost all of this sample presents sound as one of their features, four of
them use relaxing and calming sounds as the main feature and a way of improving
the sleep quality (they are Pzizz, Sleep, Sleepo and Tide). Two of them also use
meditation as an immersive space for relaxation. Another feature that has proven to
be common is the alarm clock, ﬁve apps in this sample offer an option for the user
to set the bedtime and wake up time. Three of them also monitor sleep habits and
analyze patterns to calculate sleep cycles, in order to present the user the best time
to go to bed and the time to wake up, feeling healthy (they are Sleep Away, Sleep
Monitor and Sleep Time). One important characteristic veriﬁed in this analysis is
the distance created between the user and the electronic device during sleep time.
Although there is an interaction between the two, this action is never direct, in a
way that the user doesn’t need to continuously touch or look at his device to use the
app. This brings us to another one of the applications selected, who presents features
that challenge the user to ﬁght his phone addiction (this app is Sleep Tow). The app
aims to maintain a regular sleep schedule for the user and avoid the contact between
him and the electronic device during sleep hours. Through the search conducted of
the apps analyzed we identiﬁed another application that shows characteristics very
close to what we intend to develop. The app’s name is Shleep, the only coaching
sleep app that we could ﬁnd, also offers relaxing sounds and meditation exercises
to help the user to establish a calm environment for sleeping. This app presents two
characteristics that we ﬁnd very useful in the sleeping matter, the learning concept
through lessons about healthy sleep habits and the practical content like breathing
exercises and tips to help the user fall asleep.
After an initial analysis of the online information and initial testing of the apps
in the mobile environment, we’ve gathered certain characteristics of the applications

4Idem at https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.pzizz.android.
5Idem at https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.bendingspoons.sleep.
6Idem at https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=net.relaxio.sleepo.
7Idem at https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.samuelbanas.sleepaway.
8Idem at https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.sleepmonitor.aio.
9Idem at https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=ru.olegﬁlimonov.sleeptime.
10Idem at https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=seekrtech.sleep.
11Idem at https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=io.moreless.tide.

167

Table 1 Analysis of the applications studied

studied and compared them in the table presented next. We used the symbol positive
(+) to indicate those applications where the aspect presented on the top of the table
exists and the symbol negative (−) in those where it doesn’t (Table 1).
After the analysis and use of the three applications, Shleep was the app chosen as
a case of study. We have selected and conducted 13 interviews with users of this app.
All the information collected until this point was used to plan how Moon could answer
the real user’s needs, using the strengths of the applications studied and minimizing
their weaknesses. The ﬁrst feature presented is the center of the app—the sleeping
plan. It consists of different plans of audio with informative and practical content
(each plan presents a different theme). To avoid direct contact, distract, or excite
the user in relaxation times, the device’s screen is turned off once the user starts to
listen to the audio. Every time the user ﬁnishes a plan he or she gets a badge. This
gamiﬁcation element presents a way to motivate and promote the constant use of
the app (Lister et al. 2014). The badges come in the form of characters with distinct
personalities. Another main feature is the dream log. Resembling a diary for dreams,
users can also share it with friends. This feature allows the user to classify his dreams
or nightmares. Then this information is presented in the calendar which allows for the
user to compare in a temporal scale the periods in which more dreams or nightmares
were registered (Fig. 1).

168

Fig. 1 Application structure, Moon sitemap

7
Development and Evaluation of Moon: A High Fidelity
Interactive Prototype in Invision Studio

From the data gathered in the initial research and interviews, we knew that the
persona’s goals consist of sleeping better and at a regular schedule. The persona
also aims to feel more energetic to complete the tasks that are asked of him during
the day. Having trouble to fall asleep the persona feels that anxiety and stress may
be inﬂuencing negatively his sleeping hours. The main occasion for the persona to
use the app it’s at the end of the day, speciﬁcally before turning into bed. Another
possible use case scenario is in the morning, after waking up, this way the persona
can register the dream(s). Having this persona’s desires, needs and behaviors as a
primary target user in mind, the app’s system architecture and visual design were
developed (Fig. 2).

Fig. 2 High ﬁdelity visual prototype of Moon

169

8
Main Features and Prototype

From the state of the art review and through the studies made, the main features
of the app were implemented to then be tested with users. One of these features,
already presented, is the sleeping plan that works along with the badges. Through
the study of other applications, it was decided to encourage motivation and so the
badges represent distinct characters so that the user would want to collect a speciﬁc
one. The dream log is another important feature. It was developed to correlate the
dreams and nightmares in a personal dreams’ archive. The calendar was thought of
so that the users could perceive visually their dreams/nightmares through different
periods of their life’s. These three features can be engaging to the user experience
and can also allow a self-evaluation. Keeping in mind the study cases, it’s intended
for Moon to be capable of providing informative content but also entertainment to
the user (Figs. 3, 4 and 5).12

Fig. 3 High ﬁdelity visual prototype of Moon: Audio Task

Fig. 4 High ﬁdelity visual prototype of Moon: Dream Log

12It’s important to note that the application aims to educate the users about the tools necessary to
improve their quality of sleep, the app encourages the users to progressively detach from electronic
devices, as it is known their inﬂuence on sleep. With that concern, the app presents features such

170

Fig. 5 High ﬁdelity visual prototype of Moon: Calendar

9
Usability Evaluation

A primary analysis of the initial 13 interviews of the apps analyzed revealed that
most of the people who were interviewed had irregular sleeping habits and the belief
that if they could improve sleeping habits it would also improve their health.
Moon is a high-ﬁdelity visual prototype designed and implemented in Invision
Studio. After a primary analysis of the mobile prototype app, concerns were iden-
tiﬁed and required clariﬁcation during the usability tests, such as the possibility to
rearrange the visual sequence of the audio clips to provide easy ﬂowing progress. It
was necessary, as well, to prove whether or not the user found interest in consulting
the badges from the feature dream log, and also if verifying, consulting and adding
dreams were eligible tasks through the dream log and the calendar.
The usability tests of the prototype Moon were conducted in two sessions, each
withﬁveparticipantsfollowingtheguidelinesproposedbyRubinandChisnell(2008)
in a classic “one on one” usability evaluation test session. The participants were
students and student-workers, with ages ranging 20–44 years old. The tests took
place, in a controlled academic environment for all the participants.
The interviews were conducted using a structured script, designed in advance.
It started with a brief introduction to the subject matter, in which every participant
consented to be recorded and ﬁlmed for the purposes explained. Using the “thinking
aloud” technique suggested by Rubin and Chisnell the participants were invited to
share their thoughts throughout the usability tests in order to supply a further insight
of the experience and to correlate it with the observed behavior.
The usability tests were conducted upon three distinct scenarios, each one corre-
sponding to a speciﬁc group of tasks matching the features in analysis. The tasks

as black screen while listening to audio and lessons about using a phone mobile at night, it was
important as designers to create an educative app that could also provide an enjoyable collective
learning experience.

171

goals and respective scenarios were described to the participants equally and before-
hand. Each session was held individually and lasted, approximately, ﬁfteen minutes
each, followed by a debrieﬁng session interview and SUS Questionnaire (Brooke
1996).

10
Results and Discussion

The ﬁrst batch of usability tests provided a signiﬁcant upgrade to the prototype.
While allowing the developers to compare one session to another, it became clear
that not only were the improvements necessary, but they also allowed verifying that
the concerns related to the ﬁrst session were suppressed.
Analyzing the data collected from the global usability tests it is possible to conﬁrm
that the progress of the three features impacts the way participants engaged with the
app.
Through the badges, it was expected to encourage the participant’s curiosity by
describing badges or characters. The users were asked to explore this feature and,
at the ﬁrst session, the average time spent on this task was 1: 08 min while at the
second session there was an increased average time of 1: 40 min. This happened
because the guidance on the second session was null, this factor gave us a hint about
the accessibility of the badges collected, as Participant X hinted: “I really like the
illustrations, I am going to explore everything”.
A further improvement would be a button who leads the user (after ﬁnishing a
plan) directly to the badges.
During the ﬁrst test, the calendar presented constraints regarding the navigation
of one month to another with a swiping action as all of the 5 participants referred.
This interaction was changed to a simple tap interaction and tested. In the second
usability test, none of the participants referred to this as an issue. The calendar proved
to be a way of self-evaluation of sleeping habits useful to provide data related to the
participant own life, as Participant Y mentioned out loud: “(…) to have a notion of
how you are mentally and create a connection with other things in life”.
So far, the results of the usability tests revealed that the prototype is on the right
path, aware that there is yet much work to do and feeling positive about directions
for further development.

11
Conclusion

The Moon app’s ﬁrst steps were accomplished by the study cases of apps highly
presented on the market. Observing those features determined what would be best
to implement on an app concerning sleeping habits, it was a goal to use the strengths
of the apps studied and minimizing their weaknesses.

172

Following those premises, we created Moon with its focus on improving the
quality of sleep of the users and providing an opportunity for the user to study the
possible connections of their dreams and sleeping habits.
The two sessions of usability evaluation were signiﬁcant to evaluate the user
overall experience and validate the relevance of the features developed for the end-
users. The feedback provided in the usability sessions was positive on key features
like the dream log and calendar. Users have also shown curiosity and the motivation
to engage in a self-analysis of their own dreams while saving and sharing them with
close ones. The tests revealed some weaknesses on the navigability of the app that
soon was improved upon to favor the overall users’ experience.
We believe that it will be necessary for future studies to establish a long-term
positive effect on the continuous use of such an app. Further usability tests will
also be necessary since the short time provided wasn’t enough to shape a strong
view of the features mentioned above. And, if the concept proves valid and relevant
in the present national/local context, this mobile app should be developed as a fully
functional mobile application either in native code (such as Java or Swift for Android
oriOS)orindevice-independenthybridWebtechnologies(HTML,CSS&JavaScript
packaged with development frameworks such as Cordova or PhoneGap).
Althoughthismobileapplicationconcepthasbeendevelopedtoimprovetheusers’
well-being through dream analysis, we believe that this architecture of self-awareness
through logs, insights through calendar visualization, and motivation for the posi-
tive reinforcement through gamiﬁcation elements such as badges can be applied
to other areas such as learning or physical exercise. Nevertheless, the development
of the Moon app aims to, in the future, work more profoundly on the sleep-dream
connection, to study a part so abstract of the human essence.