Original Paper

A Personalized Physical Activity Coaching App for Breast Cancer
Survivors: Design Process and Early Prototype Testing

Francisco Monteiro-Guerra1, MSc; Gabriel Ruiz Signorelli1,2, MSc; Shreya Tadas3, MSc; Enrique Dorronzoro Zubiete4,
PhD; Octavio Rivera Romero4, PhD; Luis Fernandez-Luque2, PhD; Brian Caulfield1, PhD

1Insight Centre for Data Analytics, School of Public Health, Physiotherapy and Sports Science, University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland
2Salumedia Tecnologias, Seville, Spain
3Insight Centre for Data Analytics, School of Computer Science, University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland
4Computer Engineering School, Universidad de Sevilla, Seville, Spain

Luis Fernandez-Luque, PhD
Salumedia Tecnologias
Salumedia Tecnologías S.L.U., Avda. República Argentina
nº 24 Edificio Torre de los Remedios, 5ª planta módulo A
Seville, 41011
Spain
Phone: 34 656930901

Abstract

Background: Existing evidence supports the many benefits of physical activity (PA) in breast cancer survival. However, few
breast cancer survivors adhere to the recommended levels of activity. A PA coaching app that provides personalized feedback,
guidance, and motivation to the user might have the potential to engage these individuals in a more active lifestyle, in line with
the general recommendations. To develop a successful tool, it is important to involve the end users in the design process and to
make theoretically grounded design decisions.
Objective: This study aimed to execute the design process and early prototype evaluation of a personalized PA coaching app
for posttreatment breast cancer survivors. In particular, the study explored a design combining behavioral theory and tailored
coaching strategies.
Methods: The design process was led by a multidisciplinary team, including technical and health professionals, and involved
input from a total of 22 survivors. The process comprised 3 stages. In stage 1, the literature was reviewed and 14 patients were
interviewed to understand the needs and considerations of the target population toward PA apps. In stage 2, the global use case
for the tool was defined, the features were ideated and refined based on theory, and a digital interactive prototype was created.
In stage 3, the prototype went through usability testing with 8 patients and was subjected to quality and behavior change potential
evaluations by 2 human-computer interaction experts.
Results: The design process has led to the conceptualization of a personalized coaching app for walking activities that addresses
the needs of breast cancer survivors. The main features of the tool include a training plan and schedule, adaptive goal setting,
real-time feedback and motivation during walking sessions, activity status through the day, activity history, weekly summary
reports, and activity challenges. The system was designed to measure users’ cadence during walking, use this measure to infer
their training zone, and provide real-time coaching to control the intensity of the walking sessions. The outcomes from user testing
and expert evaluation of the digital prototype were very positive, with scores from the system usability scale, mobile app rating
scale, and app behavior change scale of 95 out of 100, 4.6 out of 5, and 15 out of 21, respectively.
Conclusions: Implementing a user-centered design approach for the development and early evaluation of an app brings essential
considerations to tailor the solution to the user’s needs and context. In addition, informing the design on behavioral and tailored
coaching theories supports the conceptualization of the PA coaching system. This is critical for optimizing the usability,
acceptability, and long-term effectiveness of the tool. After successful early in-laboratory testing, the app will be developed and
evaluated in a pilot study in a real-world setting.

(JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020;8(7):e17552) doi: 10.2196/17552

JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 7 | e17552 | p. 1

KEYWORDS
user-centered design; physical activity; coaching; behavior change; mobile app; mobile phone; breast cancer; usability

Introduction

Background

According to the current findings, physical activity (PA) is the
most well-established lifestyle factor associated with breast
cancer survival [1]. Rapidly accumulating research demonstrates
that routine exercise throughout and after treatments offers
multiple benefits for breast cancer survivors, including
prevention of cancer recurrence, mitigation of treatment side
effects (such as lymphedema and fatigue), and improvement of
their physical function and quality of life [2-4]. Despite the
growing evidence supporting PA in breast cancer survivorship,
only a minority of these individuals adhere to the recommended
levels of PA [5,6]. Novel and engaging strategies are needed to
ensure that participants are adhering to PA that is of high enough
intensity and frequency to meet the PA recommendations.

Mobile health (mHealth) has emerged as an important tool for
health behavior change interventions [7]. Currently, mobile
devices can accurately measure PA at any time and place,
creating opportunities to provide real-time tailored support and
motivation toward an active lifestyle [8]. In line with this,
mobile apps for PA coaching have emerged and have been
investigated as a platform to motivate people to be active
through recommended goals, feedback on activities performed,
and potentially enjoyable experiences [9,10]. An increasing
body of evidence indicates that these technology-based
interventions may be well received by breast cancer survivors
and hold promise for PA promotion initiatives [11-13].

An underlying challenge of these technology-supported
interventions is the high attrition rates, with users stopping the
use of these systems after a few days or weeks [14-16]. Among
the factors associated with user abandonment are that apps are
largely targeted at generally healthy individuals and do not
address the specific needs of the end users [17]. Studies with
breast cancer survivors suggest that the direction of PA systems
should meet the detailed requirements of this particular
population [13,18], who may be less motivated to engage in PA
and who face unique barriers to reaching the recommended
level of PA [19,20]. These include physical (eg, fatigue, weight
gain, and neuropathy), environmental (eg, lack of knowledge,
job and family obligations, and weather), and psychosocial (eg,
low confidence and emotional imbalance) limitations [19,20].
Related literature supports the use of a user-centered design
(UCD) approach, which focuses on the users and their needs
and is considered a prerequisite for useful technology being
associated with an increase in the success of these systems
[21,22]. Furthermore, it is suggested that breast cancer survivors
want a PA app experience targeted not only to their needs on a

group level but also tailored to each individual user [13,23,24].
In line with this, personalized or tailored coaching mechanisms
can be leveraged to help create experiences that are
individualized for each user [25,26]. These are believed to
influence the user’s attention and contribute to long-term
engagement and adherence to these apps [27]. In addition,
theory-based behavior change methods have been shown to
influence 
the 
effectiveness 
of 
technology-supported
interventions [7] and should be considered in the design of tools
that aim to increase PA [8,26].

Currently, a few PA apps reported in the literature target breast
cancer survivors [11,24,28,29]; however, these seemed to be in
the early stages of development and evaluation and lack proper
reporting of design decisions. Only the papers describing the
Bounce app presented clear details on the design process,
behavioral theory foundations, and features [24,30]. Further
research is needed to better understand the design of mobile PA
interventions for breast cancer survivors and how to create a
more tailored and engaging experience to increase long-term
adherence of these users with the coaching systems.

Objectives

This paper aimed to report on the UCD of a personalized PA
coaching app for breast cancer survivors that targets the needs
of breast cancer survivors at both the group and individual
levels. The system is grounded on existing theory, models, and
empirical evidence on personalized coaching, behavior change,
and linear progression exercise training. The paper describes
the 3 design stages of the tool: (1) user and context research,
(2) app conceptualization and early prototyping, and (3)
prototype testing.

Methods

User-Centered Design Process

A UCD approach was followed. UCD is considered a
prerequisite for useful technology and a successful intervention
[21,31]. The process involves a multistage, problem-solving
process that investigates the needs, desires, and limitations of
users to increase the success rate of usability in computerized
systems [22].

The proposed design stages were based on Shah’s
methodological framework [31] and on implementations of such
an approach in different studies [32,33]. The design process so
far involved 3 stages (Figure 1): stage 1—user and context
understanding, stage 2—conceptualization and early prototyping,
and stage 3—prototype testing. In stages 4 and 5 (future work),
a functional prototype will be developed and then pilot tested
for potential feasibility in real-life settings.

JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 7 | e17552 | p. 2

Figure 1. Schematic of the app’s user-centered design process.

Multidisciplinary Team

A multidisciplinary team guided the design process and included
5 members from different backgrounds and expertise: FG, OR,
EZ, and ST have an engineering background (biomedical,
computer, electronic, and computer science engineering,
respectively) and have experience in the fields of digital health
apps, human-computer interaction, participatory health
informatics, and user experience; GS has a sports science
background, with expertise in the field of PA in oncology.
Matilde Mora Fernández also has experience in the field of PA
in oncology and provided useful insights to the team at different
stages of the design process.

Theoretical Foundation

To guide the design process, we used applicable behavior change
theory, with the aim of increasing the long-term effectiveness
of the PA system [34]. Appropriate theoretical frameworks
(self-determination theory [SDT] [35] and social cognitive
theory [SCT] [36,37]) and constructs were identified from
related work and empirical evidence to highlight factors,
barriers, and determinants that brought important insights into
the design of the solution. In addition, to facilitate the design
and reporting of theory-based components, the Coventry,
Aberdeen, and London-Refined (CALO-RE) taxonomy of
behavior change techniques proposed by Michie et al was
considered [38]. The CALO-RE taxonomy has been used
particularly in PA and healthy eating interventions. It has been
reported as a useful tool for researchers to design effective
interventions as it provides a more straightforward and simple
approach to identifying the factors most likely to create positive
effects on PA behavior change [38].

Personalization theory was also explored in the tool design,
which may help increase the intended effects of the app
communication and, in that way, increase the effectiveness of
the behavior change intervention [27]. Op den Akker et al [25]
proposed a model for real-time tailoring of PA coaching apps,
which defined 7 different methods of personalization. A more
recent review by Monteiro-Guerra et al [26] provided a detailed
analysis of the existing personalized PA coaching apps and
strategies, which provided useful insights for the design of the
solution proposed in this work.

Participant Recruitment for User Studies

The inclusion criteria for research participants were (1) to be
oncology patients with a history of breast cancer that finished

primary curative treatment (surgery, radiotherapy, and
chemotherapy), (2) to be aged more than 18 years, (3) to own
and use a mobile phone or smartphone, (4) to have the ability
to read and speak Spanish, (5) to have no known impairments
or comorbidities, and (6) to have no restrictions on PA. The
participants were recruited from a specialized oncology clinic
by placing a phone call to the eligible individuals identified in
the patient database. Recruitment was conducted until saturation
of results was reached, which was considered when there was
no new information (themes) arising from the qualitative data.

This study was approved by the Research and Ethics Committee
of Junta de Andalucia in Spain. Subjects’ agreement for
participation was obtained through an informed consent process.

Stage 1: User and Context Research

In the first stage, thorough research was performed on the needs
and requirements of breast cancer survivors regarding content,
expected benefits, features, and personalization and motivational
aspects of the proposed tool. For this purpose, we performed
(1) a qualitative study with the target users and (2) a review of
related literature, from which we identified the consequences
for the design of our solution.

Semistructured interviews were conducted with 14 breast cancer
survivors. Three of the team members, FG, OR, and EZ, were
involved in this study. The interviews involved a combination
of open-ended questions on PA adherence and technology
interest and a slideshow presentation with examples of PA app
features to obtain participants’ thoughts and opinions on the
featured content. The interviews were audio-recorded,
transcribed verbatim, and analyzed using thematic content
analysis [39]. For the purposes of this paper, only an overview
of the main insights gathered from the aforementioned
qualitative study is presented here.

A rapid literature review was performed on February 2019 to
complement the findings from the user study on (1) barriers and
facilitators for PA; (2) attitudes, needs, and preferences from
breast cancer survivors on PA apps; and (3) information on
behavioral theory used in PA interventions for breast cancer. A
combination of medical and technological keywords was used
in the search string: breast cancer AND app* AND mobile OR
smartphone AND physical activit* OR exercis* OR walk*. The
searches were performed on 3 web-based databases, PubMED
Central, Association for Computing Machinery digital library
(ACM), and Scopus, with the use of the selection criteria. Then,
a title and abstract review was performed. Other relevant papers

JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 7 | e17552 | p. 3

were identified through a snowballing process by screening the
reference list of the included ones for related papers [40].

Stage 2: Conceptualization and Early Prototyping

The goal of this phase was to conceptualize the idea of the app,
to define a list with potential functionalities, and to create a
low-fidelity prototype.

Conceptualization

After the analysis of the literature and clinical guidelines, a
high-level concept of the tool was proposed, which is defined
as the global use case. The global use case was designed to
facilitate communication of the idea of the tool to the design
team, without giving too much direction to their thoughts [32].
It was defined by the authors FG, OR, EZ, and GS in a design
session, based on the knowledge gathered from the literature,
and validated by Matilde Mora Fernández, the collaborator
expert in PA and breast cancer survivorship. The validation
process relied on a discussion with Matilde Mora Fernández,
which revised the global use case and provided suggestions to
refine it. The global use case described on a high level the main
objectives of the tool, the technological platform, and essential
requirements.

The ideation process to elicit features for the mobile app
consisted of 2 group sessions with FG, OR, EZ, and GS. The
first session was introductory, where the results from stage 1
were discussed and clarified to each of the team members. The
second session involved feature elicitation, followed by sorting
and selecting features. Each session lasted for 45 min to 1 hour.
A brainstorming technique was implemented using the affinity
wall method [41]. First, the team members were asked to read
through the global use case and the list of user needs and
requirements, which was made visible to everyone in 1 slide,
and then, for 15 min each member individually wrote their ideas
for potential features. Once the ideas were submitted, similar
ideas were combined, resulting in a preliminary list of features.
The criteria-based evaluation [42], which uses a decision matrix,
was used to choose the main ideas, based on the considerations
from stage 1. The criteria used for feature ranking were based
on the strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats analysis
[43]. On the basis of the ranking given and team agreement, the
top ideas for features were selected.

These ideated features went through a refinement phase, which
involved an iterative process of analyzing design considerations
from stage 1, to further specify the app functionalities. In this
process, 2 researchers (FG and OR) identified a list of
requirements and preferences from breast cancer survivors that
were related to each of the elicited features. In addition,
considerations were taken from the CALO-RE taxonomy [38],
which presents 40 techniques and the psychological constructs
each purport to change. We have considered the model of
personalization in real-time PA coaching apps [25], which
proposes 7 concepts or strategies to adjust the different
properties of communication to the users. These design
considerations were listed and mapped to each of the main
features to help refine the app functionalities and how they
needed to be designed. Furthermore, we followed the model on
linear progression training and the insights from the experts in

exercise and cancer to construct the foundations of the training
plan for the app.

Prototyping

On the basis of the ideas generated, the team started the
prototyping phase. This phase consisted of the creation of a
digital and interactive low-fidelity prototype, in which priority
was given neither to content nor visuals [44]. The wireframes
were created by FG using the NinjaMock software and were
then transferred to the Proto.io software to simulate the
interactions between the buttons and screens. The prototype
was then reviewed by the rest of the team, which provided
suggestions for improvements through the software. The
objective of this low-fidelity prototype was to facilitate idea
communication and to perform early evaluations, which were
conducted in stage 3 of the design process.

Stage 3: Prototype Testing

The third stage of the process sought to explore an early
evaluation of the system, involving both user and expert testing.
The evaluation was directed toward assessing the usability,
quality, and behavior change potential of the concept ideated.

User Evaluation

Usability relates to the extent to which a system can be used by
the end users to achieve specified goals with effectiveness,
efficiency, and satisfaction. Indicators for these are error rate,
task completion time, and a satisfaction rating questionnaire,
respectively [45,46]. In this study, a mixed methods approach
was followed for usability testing [47,48]. The study was led
by FG and OR. The test was conducted in a laboratory setting,
which involved the end users interacting with the prototype
created in stage 2. A think-aloud procedure was performed. The
participants first completed an initial questionnaire covering
demographics, technology use and interest, and PA level. Then,
after a short explanation, the participants performed 7
predetermined tasks with the interactive prototype. Participants
were asked to verbalize their thoughts while completing the
tasks. Interactions with the prototype and the participants’
comments were recorded using the AZ Screen Recorder app.
In addition, the researcher FG observed the participants
throughout their task performance, registering the user’s
comments and suggestions, the number of errors, the task
duration, and any indication of needing assistance or confusion.
The number of errors was calculated as the number of times
there was an erroneous interaction (eg, the task required the
user to find the information tab and the user clicked on the
profile button). Task duration was calculated from the moment
the researcher presented the task until the task was completed,
only considering when the task was performed without errors.
In addition, participants valued the complexity of each task
using the single ease question (SEQ), which is a scale to rate
tasks from 1 (very difficult) to 7 (very easy) [49]. All
participants completed the Spanish version of the system
usability scale (SUS) [50], a 10-item questionnaire used to
quickly and accurately assess the usability of a system. Higher
scores indicate better usability.

At the end of the session, a short interview was performed to
address the users’ understanding of particular features and

JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 7 | e17552 | p. 4

information provided by the app, the general opinions on the
app and its usefulness, and if there was anything missing in the
app.

Expert Evaluation

An expert evaluation was performed with the mobile app rating
scale (MARS) [51] and the app behavior change scale
(ABACUS) [52] to assess the quality of the app and the potential
for behavior change, respectively. The MARS was used to
examine app elements, such as engagement, functionality, utility,
aesthetics, and information. This scale includes 23 items across
5 categories, with each item scored using a series of questions
on a 5-point ordinal scale response. An overall functionality
score out of 5 was derived using this scale. The ABACUS scale
comprises 21 items and was used to examine the potential
behavior change of the app in relation to goal setting, action
planning, barrier identification, self-monitoring, and feedback.
Two technical experts, with previous experience using these
tools, performed the evaluation of the concept based on the
low-fidelity prototypes and a document detailing the app
functionalities.

Analysis

The SUS, MARS, and ABACUS scores were calculated
following the standard procedures for each scale. The SUS mean
and SD were calculated for the scores across all participants.
In addition, the mean and SD of SEQ ratings and task duration,
across all participants, were calculated for each particular task
and for all tasks. For each evaluator, a MARS score out of 5
was calculated under 3 of the 4 sections of the scale. Some of
the aspects covered by the scale, including the section of design
aesthetics, were not considered due to the use of a low-fidelity
prototype. The mean of these scores produced an overall score
for each evaluator, and the mean of the overall scores for each
evaluator provided an overall score for the app quality. The 2

evaluators also identified the presence of ABACUS items under
each of the 4 sections of the scale. Discrepancies were discussed
between the expert evaluators until an agreement was reached.
The number of items identified, out of 21 possible items, was
added to provide an overall score for the app’s behavior change
potential.

The audio data, from the think-aloud procedure and the short
user interviews, were transcribed, anonymized, and translated.
The transcripts were, then, analyzed by FG and OR to identify
the salient aspects about usability issues, functionalities liked
by the users, and suggestions for improvements.

Results

Participant Characteristics for User Studies

The first user study (interviews in stage 1) was held with 14
participants and the second (usability in stage 3) with 8
participants. In study 1, the participants’ ages ranged from 43
to 69 years, with a mean of 52.8 (SD 8.8) years, and in study
2, it ranged from 38 to 63 years, with a mean of 48.4 (SD 8.0)
years. The number of years since diagnosis ranged from 2 to
11.5, with a mean of 5.2 (SD 2.9) for participants in study 1,
and from 0.5 to 4.5, with a mean of 2.3 (SD 1.6) in study 2. In
general, participants were educated and employed, were very
interested in technology, had ready access to technological
devices, and had shown high usage of a variety of technology
functionalities. Participants’ access to technology and usage
can be found in Multimedia Appendix 1. According to the
international physical activity questionnaire-short form [53],
most participants had at least a moderate level of PA. However,
when looking at the activity type and intensity, 57% (8/14) of
participants in study 1 and 50% (4/8) in study 2 did not adhere
to the PA guidelines [54]. Participant characteristics are
presented in detail in Table 1.

JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 7 | e17552 | p. 5

Table 1. Participant characteristics.

User study 2 (n=8), n (%)
User study 1 (n=14), n (%)
Characteristic

Marital status

N/Aa
4 (29)
Single

N/A
10 (71)
Married

N/A
0 (0)
Divorced

Education

1 (13)
1 (7)
Basic school

2 (25)
2 (14)
High school

0 (0)
2 (14)
Higher education

5 (63)
9 (64)
University or college

Current employment status

1 (13)
3 (21)
Not working

7 (88)
11 (79)
Employed

8 (100)
10 (71)
Receiving pharmacological treatment

8 (100)
11 (79)
Indication for PAb

IPAQ-SFc level

3 (38)
1 (7)
High

5 (63)
11 (79)
Moderate

0 (0)
2 (14)
Low

4 (50)
6 (43)
Adheres to PA guidelines (>150 min per week=moderate activity or >75 min per

week=vigorous activity)d

Interest in technology

8 (100)
12 (86)
Agree or strongly agree

0 (0)
2 (14)
Neutral

0 (0)
0 (0)
Disagree or strongly disagree

Self-reported skill with technology

7 (88)
9 (64)
Agree or strongly agree

1 (13)
5 (36)
Neutral

0 (0)
0 (0)
Disagree or strongly disagree

"I like to experiment with new technology"

6 (75)
7 (50)
Agree or strongly agree

2 (25)
5 (36)
Neutral

0 (0)
2 (14)
Disagree or strongly disagree

aN/A: not applicable.
bPA: physical activity.
cIPAQ-SF: international physical activity questionnaire-short form.
dInformation inferred from IPAQ-SF answers.

Stage 1: User and Context Research

User Needs, Requirements, and Preferences for Physical
Activity Apps

The findings from the qualitative study with 14 breast cancer
survivors provided insight on barriers and motivators for PA
and opinions on a variety of app-based intervention

characteristics. From the literature review, we have included 5
papers to provide a more complete perspective on the barriers
and facilitators of PA [19,20,55-57] and 11 papers with at least
some information regarding the attitudes, needs, and preferences
of 
breast 
cancer 
survivors 
on 
PA 
apps
[12,13,18,23,24,29,58-62]. These included papers on user studies
with the Bounce app and the Smart After Care app, both
designed for breast cancer survivors, which provided relevant

JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 7 | e17552 | p. 6

insights to the design. An overview of the barriers and
facilitators for PA in breast cancer survivors is provided in
Textbox 1.

The list of requirements taken from our interviews and related
work is presented in Table 2.

Textbox 1. Overview of barriers and facilitators for physical activity in breast cancer survivors.

•
Barriers

•
Lack of time

•
Consequence of job and family responsibilities

•
Lack of confidence

•
Low motivation

•
Physical limitations

•
Fatigue, lymphedema, joint pain, muscular pain, neuropathy, and weight gain

•
Current physical activity (PA) level compared with pretreatment

•
Lack of information/support for PA

•
Lack of information on the type and amount of PA recommended

•
Fear and uncertainty of starting exercising without guidance

•
Misconceptions about PA

•
Fear of potential side effects

•
Emotional imbalance

•
Not feeling good

•
Stress or anxiety

•
Access to facilities

•
Inconvenient timetable or distant location

•
Seasonal weather

•
Facilitators

•
Reserve time during the week for PA

•
Knowing and perceiving the benefits

•
Being nudged to be more active

•
Support to overcome insecurities

•
Emotional support

•
Tailored information

•
Prescription of PA by the health care professionals

•
Training plan tailored to their needs and PA level

•
Clear and realistic objectives

•
Quantify activity performed

•
Having an active family

•
Support from family and close friends

JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 7 | e17552 | p. 7

Table 2. Overview of breast cancer survivors’ requirements and preferences for physical activity apps.

Literature review—additional insights
From user study
Type

General intervention charac-
teristics
•
•
Preference for walking activities (most appeal-
ing and main form of exercise)
Activity monitoring and feedback
•
Preference for information on steps, calories, distance, pace,
and duration of activity
•
Other liked activities included resistance train-
ing and yoga
•
PAa prescription and goal setting
•
Feedback on time spent in various intensities of
activity
•
Scheduling tool and activity reminders
•
Tailored experience
•
Evidence-based content
•
Progress monitoring and visualization
•
Attractive design
•
Straightforward representation of activity performed and
incremental improvements
•
Friendly graphic displays
•
Possibility to integrate with wearable activity
trackers
•
Preference for daily and weekly progress feedback
•
Information on how their progress translates into physiolog-
ical processes (eg, benefits for weight management)
•
Preference for more straightforward representa-
tions of numerical data (compared with having
gamified themes)
•
Simplicity and ease of use
•
Mixed reactions toward a game-like design (eg, points, re-
wards, avatars, and competitions)
•
Suggestions for integration of a Newsfeed
•
Information on benefits and harms/risks of exer-
cise for breast cancer survivors
•
Consider strategies to manage emotional challenges (eg,
encourage connecting with counselor and include relaxation
and meditation exercises).

Personalized experience
•
•
Incremental levels adjusted to the user experi-
ence
Adaptive activity plan and goals
•
Progressive but attainable goals
•
Change intensity or amount of exercise program
to reflect user’s improvement
•
Customizable exercises and exercise schedule
•
Targeting user characteristics (eg, age, treatment types, and
preferences)
•
Ensures correct execution of exercises
•
Target value-based goals
•
Sensitive to PA level and physical limitations/injuries
•
Suggestions for integration of a symptom
tracker
•
Individualized progress feedback
•
Targeting user’s situational/external context (eg, weather
and location)
•
Suggestions for tracking energy level, how they
feel, and sleep quality
•
Personalized recommendations
•
Interface simulating a virtual coach

Positive communication
•
•
Casual and concise tone
Motivation/encouragement
•
•
Encouraging prompts during activity
Motivational messages
•
Recognition for achievements
•
Positive tone
•
Absence of pressure
•
Just enough reminders and notifications

Social connectedness (varied
opinions)
•
•
Role-model narratives
Involvement of family and close friends
•
•
Mixed reactions toward connecting with other peers (eg,
social networking, competitions, or ability to see others’
progress)

Preference for a more private experience

•
Ability to connect with a professional (eg, a psychooncolo-
gist and/or an exercise trainer)

Trustworthiness
•
•
N/Ab
Transparent data privacy and security

•
Developed with and validated by clinical/health experts
•
Include contact information of people involved in the app
development

Data sharing and portability
•
•
Ability to keep an electronic record of their
workouts on the app
Optional and customizable data sharing
•
Willingness to share with health care professionals
•
Ability to download data to a PCc

•
Extensive yet passive data collection

aPA: physical activity.
bN/A: not applicable.
cPC: personal computer.

JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 7 | e17552 | p. 8

Behavioral Theory for Physical Activity Interventions
in Breast Cancer

From searching the literature for appropriate behavioral
foundations for design, there seems to be little consensus on
optimal theories and theory integration techniques to change
PA behaviors in this population [63-65]. According to some
studies, the transtheoretical model of behavior change, SCT,
and SDT are the most appropriate models for behavioral
interventions for breast cancer survivors [2,18]. In our
qualitative study, the findings suggest that the motivational
factors and determinants of PA adherence in breast cancer
survivors are in line with the constructs of SCT (self-efficacy
and expected outcomes) and SDT (competence, autonomy, and
social relationships). Together with the CALO-RE taxonomy
of behavior change, these insights will facilitate the integration
and reporting of behavior change techniques in our solution.
The psychological mediators identified in our user study and
associated CALO-RE techniques are presented in Multimedia
Appendix 2.

Stage 2: Conceptualization and Early Prototyping

Global Use Case

The high-level concept of the tool is defined as a real-time
coaching system to support and motivate breast cancer survivors

to increase adherence to PA; that is smartphone-based; that
simulates the interactions with a PA coach; that ensures that
users engage in activities of high enough intensity to meet the
PA recommendations; that provides a tailored experience, on
a population level and on an individual level; that focuses on
walking activities; and that is based on the PA guidelines and
recommendations for breast cancer survivors. The ultimate goal
of the tool is to help breast cancer survivors reach and maintain
the recommended levels of PA.

App Functionalities

One of the main steps of this stage 2 was the ideation process,
which resulted in the specification of 7 main app features and
their respective refined subfeatures (see Table 3). An extended
version of the table, including design considerations from stage
1 and from the CALO-RE taxonomy used for feature refinement,
is presented in Multimedia Appendix 3.

Details on the PA program and the personalized coaching system
are provided in the following sections. The interactive
low-fidelity mock-ups (translated from Spanish to English) are
shown in Figures 2 and 3, including the main screens and the
guided session simulation, respectively.

JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 7 | e17552 | p. 9

Table 3. List of app functionalities.

Subfeatures (refined based on considerations from stage 1 and the CALO-

REa constructs)

General description (ideated)
Main features (ideated)

Information about PA program, guidelines and potential benefits for the
users; a plan that sets the number of activities per week and its duration
and difficulty; a weekly activity schedule; baseline assessment for current
PA level; assessment of perceived difficulty; adjustable plan level; push
notifications and reminders for activities scheduled; push notifications
and reminders to review the plan and reschedule activities.

Activity program guided by the PAb guidelines
and recommendations for breast cancer sur-
vivors; based on linear progression training; with
adaptable levels; visually represented by an ac-
tivity schedule; includes reminders for activity.

Training plan

Present the user with clear daily objectives in the main screen; set
achievable but challenging goals; progress bars; inform of long-term
benefits of achieving goals; present automatic adaptation to the user’s
profile information, progress, user’s perceived fatigue and perceived dif-
ficulty; notifications of goal adjustments; weekly goal adjustment.

Activity objectives adjusted to the user.
Adaptive goal setting

Predefined walking sessions; guidance to meet the session plan; intuitive
interface to provide session information; shows the session progress (time);
shows the user’s pace in real time through a glanceable visual display;
sends cues to control the pace; provides positive reinforcement and
recognition; coaching cues are in textual and audio format; shows
achievements when the session is concluded with a breakdown of the
session: steps taken; calories burned; distance walked and session duration.

In-session or ”workout” coaching; visual and
easy to understand; combines real-time monitor-
ing, feedback and motivation.

Real-time monitoring,
feedback, and motiva-
tion during activity ses-
sions

Screen with numeric representations of active time: steps taken, calories
burned and distance walked; progress bar showing progress toward the
daily goal; option to manually entry activity; encouraging pop-up messages.

Feedback on the total activity performed until
that point in the day and progress toward the
daily goal.

Activity status through
the day

History screen; bar chart representation of daily activity in relation to the
goal; week-by-week information.
Tracking past activity; graphic display; simple
and intuitive.
Activity history

Weekly activity reports; presents a breakdown of the activity performed
during the week; bar chart representation comparing current week activity
with previous weeks; communicates progress in the plan; encourages users
to follow the program; provides tips according to the user’s physical bar-
riers; informs users of PA benefits.

Descriptive summary of the activity performed
during the week and the overall progress in the
program; tips for improvement; motivation to
be active and to follow the program.

Periodic summary re-
ports

—d
Unexpected activity challenges.
Challengesc

aCALO-RE: Coventry, Aberdeen, and London—Refined taxonomy.
bPA: physical activity.
cTo be considered in future iterations of the prototype.
dNot available.

JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 7 | e17552 | p. 10

Figure 2. Screenshots of the main prototype screens. (a) Welcome screen; (b) profile screen; (c) coach (main) screen on session day; (d) coach (main)
screen on a step goal day; (e) MyActivity screen, with information on the user’s current activity status; and (f) history screen, with information on past
activity and access to the weekly summary reports.

JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 7 | e17552 | p. 11

Figure 3. Screenshots of the simulation of a guided session. (a) Presession perceived tiredness, (b) example instruction for session phase duration and
pace, (c) example cue to keep up the pace, (d) example cue to slow down the pace to the ideal zone of the current phase, (e) postsession perceived
session difficulty, and (f) session achievements in the coach screen.

Physical Activity Program

From the evidence on the topic of PA and breast cancer, it is
known that the beneficial effects associated with PA are more
pronounced with moderate or vigorous intensity compared with
mild intensity physical activities [66]. Breast cancer survivors
are recommended to perform at least 120 to 150 min per week
of moderate to vigorous activity [54]. This means that a common

activity such as walking, which breast cancer survivors have a
general preference for, if done at the right intensity and for the
right time, can be sufficient to reach the minimum recommended
levels of PA. Furthermore, walking is an activity that people
can do everywhere and that nowadays can be easily monitored
using smartphone technology. Hence, a training program was
developed, which targets walking activities and aims to guide

JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 7 | e17552 | p. 12

these individuals to reach and maintain the amount and intensity
of activity recommended in the guidelines.

The activity program was based on the model of linear
progression training to allow for difficulty adjustment according
to the user’s actual PA level [67]. It will be integrated into a
future functional version of the prototype in the form of a
training plan. Adjustments will be made session by session, and
involve, first, changing the session volume and, in the following
session, changing the intensity level. There will be different
difficulty levels in the plan: beginner, intermediate, adapted,
and advanced. The activity plan will include 3 guided training
sessions per week (with controlled intensity), with a minimum
duration of 30 min per session. In addition, the user will be
encouraged to reach a daily step goal that is adjusted weekly.
The objectives in the plan will be gradually more challenging
and adjusted regularly. Figure 2 depicts how these training
specifications will be represented in the coach tab.

On the basis of the work of Tudor-Locke et al [68], walking
cadence or walking pace will be measured to infer the training
zone (intensity) of the activity being performed. Hence, based
on this and on linear progression training, the training format
will be defined as a number of training phases or traits with a
certain duration, each on a specific training zone inferred from
the walking pace—slow, medium, or fast (see example of
session format in the coach tab screenshot, Figure 2).

From the training program specifications, some of the tool
features were refined (eg, the coach tab and schedule, in Figure
2, and the real-time guided sessions to control the user’s walking
pace, in Figure 3).

Personalized Coaching System

The results from stage 1 highlighted the importance of exploring
a personalized coaching experience. Therefore, the coaching
system in the app will combine a number of strategies proposed
in the model of real-time personalization in PA coaching apps.
The different characteristics of the app that will be considered
for the creation of a personalized experience are described
below.

Virtual Coach

A human-like interface between the user and the app will
simulate the interactions with a real coach (see virtual coach
representations, Figures 2 and 3). It will serve as a sender or
source of all the communication provided by the system through
a variety of forms: general information, support, tips, activity
feedback, motivation, and summary reports. It will provide
clear, concise, and positive communication. Such a strategy is
expected to increase the feeling of trust and credibility, increase
motivation, and increase the feeling of personalized experience
and interaction

Targeted Feedback

The app will provide feedback on the activities of the user
(number of steps, distance, and calories burned), estimate
calories spent by the user based on the user’s characteristics,
inform the user of their daily personalized goals and progress
toward their goal, integrate the user’s name in the
communication provided by the coach, provide feedback in a

weekly summary report considering the user’s progress in
current and past weeks, and provide tips according to the user’s
physical burdens.

Adaptive Activity Plan and Goals

Because these individuals vary in PA level and progress and,
particularly in this population, there might be physical
constraints due to side effects of both cancer and treatment, the
app will integrate a rule-based module that adjusts the step goal
and training session objectives in line with the model of linear
progression training. This will be done considering the user’s
baseline level, progress, the user’s perceived fatigue level
(presession), and the user’s perceived session difficulty level
(postsession).

Real-Time Training Session Guidance

This feature will allow to coach users through the guided
sessions, in real time. The coach instructional messages or cues
will be designed to be clear, concise, and positive, using short
and easy messages, and related to the visual content. It will
provide feedback on the user’s pace in relation to the ideal pace
set for each of the session phases, sending cues to slow down,
speed up or to keep pace, inform on time progress through the
different phases and the whole session, and give positive
reinforcement. Regarding representation, the feedback will be
presented in textual, audio, and visual forms. The visual form
will use a glanceable display (representing a speedometer) that
will provide feedback on the current user’s pace. The needle
will represent the current user cadence and each color zone at
a certain pace (slow—green, moderate—blue, and fast—pink).
In addition, a progress bar will be used to indicate the current
time, total session time, and progress through the different
training phases (including the demarcated color zones). Figure
3 depicts an example real-time guided session simulation.

Stage 3: Prototype Testing

This stage of the process sought to explore an early evaluation
of the interactive mock-ups, involving both user and expert
testing. The evaluation was directed toward assessing the
usability, quality, and behavior change potential of the concept
ideated.

User Evaluation

In the task-based session, participants’ overall results on the
posttask SEQ questionnaire revealed that all tasks were easy or
extremely easy to complete, with a mean of 6.6 out of 7 (SD
0.5). Participants’ mean duration in completing the tasks was
4.6 (SD 1.2) seconds. The overall mean number of task errors
was 0.3 (SD 0.4). Participants suggested that if they had previous
practice, they would have easily completed the tasks without
errors. Table 4 gives further details on the task-based session
results.

The mean SUS score was 95 (SD 6.3) out of 100, which can be
considered above average (above a score of 68). The score
obtained can be converted to a percentile rank above 95%, which
is interpreted as grade A+. This means that the prototype has
higher perceived usability than 95% of all products tested with
this scale (Multimedia Appendix 4).

JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 7 | e17552 | p. 13

From the short usability interviews, overall, the participants
were very satisfied with the usability of the app, finding it very
intuitive and easy to use. Furthermore, some participants
suggested that an app like this would help them to get motivated
to do PA, find time to do more activity, serve as a companion,

provide support, and make them comply with the PA plan. In
addition, participants reported some usability problems and
suggested a number of improvements or additional app features.
The information synthesized from the short interviews is
presented in Textbox 2.

Table 4. Task-based session results.

Observations
SEQa

score,
mean (SD)

Completion
time in seconds,
mean (SD)

Errors,
mean
(SD)

Participants
with errors, n
(%)

Task description
Tasks

This was the task with more user errors. Participants
suggested the task was easy and that errors were associat-
ed with a lack of attention (eg, not taking a look at the
whole screen before interacting with the prototype) or
due to the lack of a first interaction experience with the
prototype.

6.5 (0.5)
4.8 (1.8)
1.0 (1.1)
4 (50)
Which steps should
you take to get to the
profile screen?

Task 1

A generally easy to complete task. Errors were associated
with participants going to the History tab instead of the
MyActivity tab. This confusion originated from the ambi-
guity on how the task was posed, which made both an-
swers correct in some way. In addition, it seemed that the
purpose of the MyActivity tab was only clear after having
a first look at it.

6.3 (1.2)
4.1 (3.1)
0.4 (0.7)
2 (25)
Which steps should
you take to find the
amount of activity
you have done so far
today?

Task 2

This task had the lowest SEQa score and was the one that
took longer to complete. Participants suggested that
finding the rescheduling button was easy, but the process
of setting the new schedule was not clear.

5.8 (1.0)
6.5 (4.3)
0.5 (0.9)
2 (25)
Which steps should
you take to resched-
ule an activity ses-
sion from Friday to
Saturday?

Task 3

A generally easy task. Error due to lack of attention (eg,
not taking a look at the whole screen before interacting
with the prototype) or due to the lack of a first interaction
experience with the prototype. Participant pressed the
MyActivity tab instead of the Start Session button. In
addition, in the session simulation, some participants
thought the green color was for fast pace and pink for
slow pace, when in reality it was the opposite.

6.6 (0.5)
4.6 (2.7)
0.1 (0.4)
1 (13)
Which steps should
you take to start and
finish a guided ses-
sion?

Task 4

Very easy. No issues.
7.0 (0.0)
2.5 (0.8)
0.0 (0.0)
0 (0)
Which steps should
you take to find the
activity you have
done so far this
week?

Task 5

Very easy. No issues.
7.0 (0.0)
5.0 (2.3)
0.0 (0.0)
0 (0)
Which steps should
you take to find your
activity history from
last week?

Task 6

Considered very easy. Error was associated with a lack
of attention (eg, not taking a look at the whole screen
before interacting with the prototype) or due to the lack
of a first interaction experience with the prototype.

6.8 (0.4)
5.0 (3.3)
0.1 (0.4)
1 (13)
Which steps should
you take to find the
user manual?

Task 7

aSEQ: single ease question.

JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 7 | e17552 | p. 14

Textbox 2. Aspects highlighted by participants in the task-based session and interviews.

•
Usability issues

•
The session plan phases understood as different session alternatives.

•
Issue with understanding the purpose of MyActivity tab.

•
The scheduling process not clear.

•
The purpose of the session icon in the history tab, to distinguish session days from step goal days, is not clear.

•
Green and pink zones of the speedometers associated with the opposite pace zones (eg, some participants thought green was for fast pace
and pink for slow pace).

•
Issue associating the current screen to the corresponding buttons at the bottom.

•
Positive perceptions

•
Easy to use and straightforward.

•
Guided session.

•
Prescription of an activity plan.

•
Quantification of activity, knowing calories spent, distance, and steps.

•
Validation by professionals, based on evidence.

•
Access to activity history.

•
May motivate the user to comply with the training.

•
May serve as a companion.

•
May reinforce motivation for physical activity.

•
Suggestions for improvements

•
Change text font.

•
Improve graphic design.

•
Include feedback information on time spent walking.

•
Include recommendations and examples of resistance exercises.

•
Include optional short training.

•
Include ‘free training’, the option to do guided sessions on days without a scheduled session.

•
Include the option to download data to the computer to view annual progress.

•
Induce the user to relate the app and physical activity as another part of the treatment, but one that is fun.

•
Include audio feedback during the guided sessions.

•
Include training or an explanation of how the app works (user manual or guide).

•
Include reminders for activity.

•
Include sleep and weight tracking.

Expert Evaluation

Although not all aspects from the MARS could be addressed,
because of the low-fidelity design of the prototype at this stage,
the app quality mean score was 4.6 (SD 0.4) out of 5. In
particular, for each of the sections on engagement, functionality,
and information, the app mean scores were 4.2 (SD 0.6), 4.8
(SD 0.4), and 4.9 (SD 0.1) out of 5, respectively (Multimedia
Appendix 5). Regarding the ABACUS scale, the app scored 15
out of 21 possible behavior change techniques (Multimedia
Appendix 6). These results suggest good quality and potential
for behavior change of the proposed concept.

Discussion

Principal Findings

In this study, we describe a UCD process for the development
of a PA coaching app for breast cancer survivors. To our
knowledge, this is the first work combining, and reporting in
detail, the use of behavioral theory, personalized coaching
strategies, and linear progression training for the design of a
PA app for breast cancer. The design team gathered the user
requirements and insights from experts in exercise and cancer
and translated these into the concept of the solution. The concept
was refined based on the theoretical foundations, and its viability
was confirmed by the technical members of the team. An

JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 7 | e17552 | p. 15

interactive low-fidelity prototype of the tool was created and
assessed in both user and expert evaluations. The user-centered
process provided insight into the needs and preferences of the
end users on PA apps, which will increase the likelihood of
success of the proposed solution.

This tool was designed to simulate the interactions with an
exercise coach. It includes an adaptive walking regimen and a
number of personalized coaching features that aim to support
and motivate users to adhere to it, with the ultimate goal of
helping them to progressively reach and maintain the
recommended levels of activity for breast cancer survivors. The
main functionalities of the system include a training plan and
schedule, adaptive goal setting, real-time feedback and
motivation during walking sessions, activity status through the
day, activity history, weekly summary reports, and activity
challenges. One of the main features of the concept proposed
is the ability to provide live coaching during the guided walking
sessions, monitoring the user’s cadence (through the built-in
sensors in the phone), and providing real-time guidance and
encouragement to keep the pace within the ideal training zones
and to follow the session plan. This particular strategy ensures
that users are doing an activity of high enough intensity and
duration to meet the PA recommendations.

With regard to personalization, the app aims to (1) provide an
automatic and reliable way of providing adaptive training and
(2) provide personalized coaching for each user, considering a
variety of individualization factors that include the users’
personal characteristics (eg, name, age, height, and weight),
physical burdens or barriers, baseline PA level, progress,
perceived fatigue level, and perceived difficulty. For this
purpose, a number of personalization strategies were used, which
included a combination of feedback, user targeting, goal setting,
and self-learning [26]. Other factors for individualization,
including the user’s preferences, routine, and the external
context (location and weather), will be considered for integration
in upcoming iterations of the solution.

The concept covers, at least in some form, 21 out of the 40
behavior change techniques defined in the CALO-RE taxonomy
[38]. Some techniques were identified for possible inclusion in
future iterations of the concept (eg, C25—involve a written
agreement, 
C27 
and 
C33—prompt 
self-talk, 
and
C36—encourage stress management), and others were excluded
as they were not in line with the user requirements and context
(eg, C28—facilitate social comparison and C32—fear arousal).
The use of this taxonomy helped in the concept design and in
specifying the behavior change components of the tool, which
may facilitate future reporting and evaluation of a
technology-based PA intervention.

The results from prototype testing with users and experts were
promising, with high scores for usability, quality, and behavior
change potential. Several considerations can be taken from these
evaluations to inform the future refinement of the prototype,
which include further exploring engagement strategies,
particularly related to entertainment, customization, and
interactivity, and to consider other behavior change techniques,
such as providing the ability to export data from the app, to
suggest restructuring social or physical environment, and to

assist with distraction or avoidance. Other system functionalities
that might be considered in the future are, for example, to
include resistance exercises in the activity program and app, to
share experiences with close friends or family members, and to
enable data sharing with health care professionals.

Comparison With Previous Work

There is a growing trend in the design of PA coaching systems
that are aimed at individuals with chronic conditions. The
solution presented here attempts to address the particular needs
and requirements of breast cancer survivors for PA apps by
taking a UCD approach for the conceptualization of the tool.
Few are the systems in the literature designed with such a
purpose, with only 4 apps identified that had some component
of PA coaching for these individuals [23,24,28,29]. Compared
with such apps, our solution targets aerobic exercise, specifically
walking, which has been suggested as the preferred activity for
these individuals. This allowed us to explore a design that
addressed in detail the particular user requirements and
preferences associated with such activity type. Although the
integration of a component for resistance training might be
considered in the future, we believe that it would necessarily
bring 
other 
considerations 
for 
design 
and 
different
implementation requirements, some of which have already been
reported in previous work [24]. Another differentiating factor
of this work relies on the attempt to create a personalized app
experience for these users, a need that was reported recurrently
in related literature on PA apps in breast cancer survivorship.
Furthermore, we used the CALO-RE taxonomy, which provided
important considerations for the integration of behavior change
techniques in the tool design.

Despite some similarities in app functionalities compared with
those reported for other populations, the solution proposed in
this work differs in some ways and has characteristics that are
more particular for breast cancer survivors. For example, studies
on a healthy population [69,70] and for people with osteoarthritis
[71] have highlighted the importance of social and game-like
features (eg, competition). In a study with multiple sclerosis,
participants were also interested in gamification and wanted,
particularly, a tool focused on fatigue management [72]. Our
requirements for breast cancer survivors were not directed
toward playful and social experiences or fatigue management,
which is similar to the findings of a study on chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease patients [73]. Besides, our concept has some
characteristics that are more specific to the needs and
preferences of our target population, which include a tool for
managing time for PA (scheduling feature); a PA program,
monitoring and feedback targeted specifically at walking
activities; and a personalization system that considers the user’s
individual characteristics and progress to adjust training and
communication provided by a virtual coach.

Related literature reports on key design requirements for a
successful PA coaching solution. For example, Consolvo et al
[74] demonstrated the importance of giving users proper credit
for activities, providing personal awareness of the activity level,
supporting social influence, and considering the practical
constraints of users’ lifestyles. Bielik et al [75] built on those
recommendations and highlighted that these systems should

JMIR Mhealth Uhealth 2020 | vol. 8 | iss. 7 | e17552 | p. 16

also ensure fair play, provide a variety of motivational tools,
provide feedback on activities done, provide short-term and
long-term motivation, provide the possibility of integration with
existing solutions, and protect users’ privacy. Our concept of
the tool seems to be in line with most of these recommendations.
The design requirement related to the user’s privacy is an aspect
that also came up in the user research stage and that will need
to be carefully considered in the development stage, particularly
considering the level of personalization proposed for this system.
In addition, as stated by Matthews et al [76], better system
credibility support features (eg, trustworthiness, expertise,
authority, third-party endorsement, and verifiability) need to be
incorporated in PA mobile apps if they aim to achieve the
highest level of persuasiveness. Such characteristics were also
highlighted in our findings from the initial stage of design.
Hence, we believe that pointing out to the users that this app
was created in collaboration with other breast cancer survivors
and professionals, having content based on the evidence, and
simulating the interactions with an activity coach, might increase
their trust and, therefore, their interest in the system.

Little is known about how to translate and apply the many
high-level theory and design recommendations to these systems.
In this paper, we have tried to present in a clear and practical
way the UCD of a mobile PA coaching app based on foundations
from behavior change and personalization constructs. We expect
this to facilitate future research on the design of mHealth
solutions, particularly PA coaching systems.

Limitations

The results of the studies with the end users should be
considered with caution because of the small sample size. To
complement the results of the qualitative study, which included
14 participants, we looked into the literature and compared it
with related work. Regarding usability assessment, it is known
that tests with 5 participants are able to uncover 85% of usability
issues [77,78]. In our study, we had the involvement of 8
participants, and therefore, we think most usability issues have
been revealed.

The system evaluation was performed with a low-fidelity
prototype, which might have limited the outcomes from the
testing stage in some way. For example, interaction of the user

with the prototype was limited to the main screen interactions,
which did not allow a real simulation of the functionalities
provided by the app. In addition, the analysis of some of the
testing scales was restricted to the current stage of the prototype.
On the other hand, the fact that we have performed such
comprehensive early testing provided us with important insights
that will feed the next stages of the design and development
process.

Future Work

From the concept created in this work, we have started the
development process of a functional prototype. The next steps
involve more iterations on the concept and further feature
refinement to detail the app content, integrate the PA program,
integrate an appealing graphic design, and perform further
system evaluation. Once the functional prototype is developed,
a 2- to 3-week pilot study with breast cancer survivors will be
performed to assess potential acceptability, usability, and
feasibility.

Conclusions

Centering the design on the end users, breast cancer survivors,
and their context revealed valuable requirements and
considerations to be taken into account for the design of a tool
that aims to address their specific PA needs and motivate these
individuals to increase their PA levels. This is essential for
increasing the usability and acceptability of the tool.
Furthermore, informing the process on the theory and constructs
used in tailored PA coaching interventions provided important
design insights, which may contribute to the effectiveness,
long-term adherence, and acceptability of the system.

At this stage, we have confirmed good usability, quality, and
behavior change potential of the prototype in a laboratory
setting. A functional prototype will further be tested in pilot
and feasibility studies in a real-world environment before it can
go through more controlled trials evaluating long-term
effectiveness.

This paper details the UCD process for a PA coaching app for
breast cancer survivors, which may inform other researchers
and developers working in similar mHealth tools.