Disability and Rehabilitation: Assistive Technology

ISSN: 1748-3107 (Print) 1748-3115 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/iidt20

Adapting a group-based, multimodal aphasia
treatment for telehealth – co-design of M-MAT
Tele

John E. Pierce, Annie J. Hill, Dana Wong, Rachelle Pitt & Miranda L. Rose

To cite this article: John E. Pierce, Annie J. Hill, Dana Wong, Rachelle Pitt & Miranda L. Rose
(2025) Adapting a group-based, multimodal aphasia treatment for telehealth – co-design
of M-MAT Tele, Disability and Rehabilitation: Assistive Technology, 20:1, 239-246, DOI:
10.1080/17483107.2024.2366423

To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/17483107.2024.2366423

© 2024 The Author(s). Published by Informa
UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis
Group

View supplementary material 

Published online: 05 Jul 2024.
Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 2038
View related articles 

View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 2 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=iidt20

Research Article

Disability and Rehabilitation: Assistive Technology
2025, VOL. 20, NO. 1, 239–246

Adapting a group-based, multimodal aphasia treatment for telehealth – 
co-design of M-MAT Tele

John E. Piercea 
, Annie J. Hilla 
, Dana Wonga 
, Rachelle Pittb and Miranda L. Rosea 

aAphasia CRE, La Trobe University, Melbourne, Australia; bQueensland Health, Brisbane, Australia

ABSTRACT
Multi-Modality Aphasia Treatment (M-MAT) is an effective group intervention for post-stroke aphasia. 
M-MAT employs interactive card games and the modalities of gesture, drawing, reading, and writing 
to improve spoken language. However, there are challenges to implementation of group interventions 
such as M-MAT, particularly for those who cannot travel or live in rural areas. To maximise access to 
this effective treatment, we aimed to adapt M-MAT to telehealth format (M-MAT Tele). The 
Human-Centred Design Framework was utilized to guide the adaptation approach. We identified the 
intended context of use (outpatient/community rehabilitation) and the stakeholders (clinicians, people 
with aphasia, health service funders). People with aphasia and practising speech pathologists were 
invited to co-design M-MAT Tele in a series of iterative workshops, to ensure the end product was 
user-friendly and clinically feasible. The use of co-design allowed us to understand the hardware, 
software and other constraints and preferences of end users. In particular, clinicians (n = 3) required 
software compatible with a range of telehealth platforms and people with aphasia (n = 3) valued 
solutions with minimal technical demands and costs for participants. Co-design within the 
Human-Centred Design Framework led to a telehealth solution compatible with all major telehealth 
platforms, with minimal hardware or software requirements. Pilot testing is underway to confirm 
acceptability of M-MAT Tele to clinicians and people with aphasia, aiming to provide an effective, 
accessible tool for aphasia therapy in telehealth settings.

IMPLICATIONS FOR REHABILITATION
•	
We applied the Human-Centred Design Framework to ensure that the adaptation of Multi-Modality 
Aphasia Therapy (M-MAT) for telehealth was suited to the end users and context of use
•	
Compatibility and accessibility were valued by stakeholders over technological sophistication, an 
important consideration for similar design projects in rehabilitation
•	
If shown to have similar clinical effectiveness as the in person M-MAT protocol, M-MAT Tele will 
offer a highly feasible group treatment option for people with aphasia in remote locations or 
who are unable to travel

Approximately one third of strokes result in aphasia, an impair­
ment of language processing that affects speaking, comprehen­
sion, reading and writing [1]. People with aphasia experience 
profound impacts on quality of life and mood [2,3], low rates of 
return to work [4], and higher levels of relationship breakdown 
[5]. Therefore, effective rehabilitative interventions for people with 
aphasia are crucial.

Multi-Modality Aphasia Treatment (M-MAT) is an aphasia 
intervention provided by a speech pathologist to groups of 
two to three people with the aim of improving language and 
communication [6]. In M-MAT, participants practise production 
of verbal phrases and sentences through interactive card 
games. These games progress through specific verbal requests 
from participants, a concept known as language action games 
[7]. The clinician guides participants in the use of non-speech 
modalities—namely gesture, drawing, reading and writing—to 
facilitate successful verbal production of target words, phrases 
and sentences (For detailed descriptions of M-MAT procedures, 
see Pierce et  al. [8]; Rose et  al. [9]). As a group-based 

intervention, M-MAT is vastly more efficient than traditional 
1:1 service models. Recently, a large, Phase III randomised 
controlled trial showed that M-MAT is effective in improving 
communication-related quality of life, word retrieval, and 
everyday communication in people with aphasia when pro­
vided at a high intensity of 30 h in 2 weeks (3 h × 10 days), 
compared to usual care [9]. However, there are multiple bar­
riers to conducting high intensity interventions such as M-MAT 
for people with aphasia. Frequent transport to therapy ses­
sions places a high burden on family and carers [10], while 
for stroke survivors without family or friends to transport 
them, cognitive, language and motor symptoms can make 
both public transport and driving challenging, if not impos­
sible [11]. In addition, it can be challenging for speech pathol­
ogists to find two to three people with the same aphasia 
severity within driving distance of each other to form a group 
for M-MAT. This is particularly the case in rural, regional or 
remote areas within geographically large countries such as 
Australia, meaning that people with aphasia who live outside 

© 2024 The Author(s). Published by Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group

CONTACT John E. Pierce 

 Aphasia CRE, La Trobe University, Melbourne, Australia
 Supplemental data for this article can be accessed online at https://doi.org/10.1080/17483107.2024.2366423.

https://doi.org/10.1080/17483107.2024.2366423

This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/), 
which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, and is not altered, transformed, or built upon in any 
way. The terms on which this article has been published allow the posting of the Accepted Manuscript in a repository by the author(s) or with their consent.

ARTICLE HISTORY
Received 6 December 2023
Revised 22 May 2024
Accepted 1 June 2024

KEYWORDS
Aphasia; multi-modality 
aphasia therapy; 
telerehabilitation; co-design; 
telehealth; rehabilitation

240

of cities are considerably less likely to benefit from this effec­
tive treatment.

Amongst the range of recent technological advances for people 
with aphasia [12], telehealth is an option that can improve acces­
sibility of treatment. Telehealth expands the availability of services 
to people living rurally and to those who have difficulty travelling 
[13]. For caregivers, telehealth can alleviate the considerable bur­
den of transporting their family member to treatment. Service 
provision costs are also lowered [14] and demand for physical 
treatment space at health services may be reduced. Currently, 
there are very few evidence-based telehealth treatments for apha­
sia. In a recent systematic review of telerehabilitation in aphasia, 
just five studies with an experimental or quasi-experimental design 
(that is, with a control group) were reported [15]. Following the 
unprecedented expansion of telehealth during the COVID-19 pan­
demic, telehealth is likely to remain a standard component of 
care delivery and more evidence-based aphasia telehealth options 
are therefore needed [13]. There are also very few group-based 
telehealth treatments for aphasia – only five of 23 studies in a 
recent scoping review involved group treatments [16]. Yet, group 
interventions offer comparable outcomes [17] at a significant cost 
saving [18]. Thus, a successful adaptation of M-MAT for telehealth 
administration could provide an evidence-based, group treat­
ment option.

In this project we aimed to adapt the evidence-based, 
in-person, group intervention M-MAT to an online format 
(M-MAT Tele). The objective was an adaptation that is accessible 
for and acceptable to patients and speech pathologists and 
therefore able to be readily implemented in clinical settings, 
while also retaining the key components of the original 
in-person treatment.

Method

The adaptation of M-MAT for telehealth delivery was conducted 
through application of the Human Centred Design Framework 
[19]. Human Centred Design focuses on the user’s needs and 
requirements in the design process in order to promote a usable, 
accessible and effective end result. A user-centric approach is 
especially valuable when users have unique needs and is therefore 
highly relevant to people with aphasia, whose communication 
disability often necessitates special adaptations to ensure tech­
nology is fully accessible [20,21]. The Human Centred Design 
approach was also valuable in ensuring that M-MAT Tele would 
meet the requirements of the second key user group, speech 

pathologists, which would in turn, promote implementation in 
clinical settings.

A central component of the original, in-person M-MAT is the 
use of multiple communication modalities to facilitate verbal lan­
guage rehabilitation (i.e., use of a cueing that includes gesture, 
drawing, reading and writing). Treatment also requires specifically 
designed picture cards of the target words and written examples 
of the sentences in which the words are used. Both the multi­
modal aspect and the group language action games (Table 1) 
required careful translation into telehealth form to preserve treat­
ment fidelity of the in-person treatment and maintain participant 
motivation. Therefore, prior to initiation of the design process, a 
task analysis was conducted to outline the key activities and 
elements involved in M-MAT [11]. The M-MAT protocol was care­
fully evaluated, considering the materials used and therapist and 
participant requirements at each step. Potential technical functions 
that might fulfil each requirement were also listed. As an example, 
for the game Go Fish, each participant is dealt five cards at ran­
dom, and participants should not be able to see one another’s 
cards, yet the therapist needs to be able to view all participants’ 
cards. Clear audio is required for participants to request cards 
from one another, a method of changing player scores is needed, 
and new cards are assigned at random from the remaining stack. 
For the multimodal cues, the therapist needs to model and view 
participants’ gestures, drawings and writing. This might be 
achieved through pre-prepared photographs or videos, through 
a whiteboard function, or by holding paper up to a web camera. 
The M-MAT task analysis is attached as Supplemental Appendix A.

The Human Centred Design Framework does not rigidly specify 
a process but describes four activities that should be iteratively 
undertaken [19,p.5):

1.	
Understanding and specifying the context of use
2.	
Specifying the user requirements
3.	
Producing design solutions
4.	
Evaluating the design.

These four stages are described in this paper within the 
method (1–2) and results (3–4) sections, though as design was a 
cyclical process, the steps occurred non-linearly.

Understand and specify context of use

The context of use outlines the users and stakeholders, their 
characteristics, the goals of the system being designed, and the 
environment in which it is expected to be used [19]. The intended 
goal of M-MAT Tele is rehabilitation of people with post-stroke 
aphasia, delivered remotely by qualified speech pathologists. More 
specifically, M-MAT Tele is likely to be used with outpatients in 
the subacute and chronic stages of stroke recovery (2–6 and 
>6 months post stroke respectively). Speech pathologists are there­
fore most likely to be working in outpatient or community ser­
vices. They are likely to be familiar with technology and telehealth 
service delivery but not necessarily with group treatment or group 
telehealth treatment. People with aphasia who will participate in 
M-MAT Tele are likely to do so from home. We were cognisant 
that, as with all telehealth, M-MAT Tele would not be acceptable 
or desirable to all people with aphasia, as some prefer exclusively 
in-person treatment. Target users were therefore thought to be 
those who used tablets or computers in some form prior to their 
stroke. Other key stakeholders included health service managers, 
funding bodies, and caregivers/family of people with aphasia, 

Table 1.  Brief description of games found in M-MAT (original, in person 
protocol).

Game
Description
Go Fish
Participants ask each other for specific cards to form pairs
Memory
Participants turn over cards from a face down grid, 

describing each card. The aim is to form pairs.
Bingo
Participants turn over cards from a central pile, describing 

each one. Participants mark off cards on their board; 
the first to mark off all cards calls “Bingo” to win.
I Went Shopping
A storytelling memory game where players describe cards 

they’re “buying” in a specific sequence, adding new 
items with each turn.
Who Am I?
One participant thinks of an occupation related to a 

random card they are given; other participants ask 
questions to guess what the occupation is.
Snap
Participants take turns to place cards on to a central pile, 

describing each one. Participants slap the pile when two 
identical cards are laid down, aiming to collect all cards.

ADAPTING M-MAT TELE
241

though these stakeholders will not directly use M-MAT Tele and 
were not considered target users.

Understanding user requirements

With the planned context of use established, we sought 
co-designers representative of the key users to participate in the 
development process: people with aphasia and speech patholo­
gists. Three co-designers from each user group were sought, a 
pragmatic decision based on (a) project resources and (b) the 
ability to meaningfully involve co-designers throughout the proj­
ect. There is minimal research on the ideal number of co-designers 
for a project [22]. However, some qualitative feedback suggests 
that many with acquired brain injury prefer smaller groups for 
this purpose [23,24].

Inclusion criteria were developed according to the target users 
outlined above. For people with aphasia, the criteria were:

1.	
Willing to use videoconference
2.	
Diagnosed with aphasia from a stroke
3.	
Aged 18 years or over
4.	
Sufficient communication ability to provide informed con­
sent and express views/opinions.1

Co-designers were purposively sampled to include at least one 
participant from a rural, regional, or remote area and at least one 
participant who had previously received rehabilitation over 
telehealth.

For speech pathologists, inclusion criteria were (1) practicing 
speech pathologist with experience working with aphasia; (2) 
experience in providing telehealth. We also sought at least one 
co-designer who had previously provided M-MAT in-person.

Ethical approval for the study was received from La Trobe University 
Human Research Ethics Committee (#HEC22031). All participants gave 
informed consent, with appropriate modifications made to the written 
materials to make them accessible to people with aphasia.

Co-designers participated in initial workshops of two hours, 
with speech pathologists and people with aphasia in separate 
workshops. These workshops were held online over videoconfer­
ence, which allowed a spread of geographical location and also 
primed co-designers’ views on the use of this medium. People 
with aphasia were enabled to access and participate in the online 
workshops through additional communication supports such as 
the use of images, visual rating scales, multiple choice responses 
and written key words.

During the initial workshops, co-designers were asked to 
describe the existing context of their telehealth use; that is, when 
and where they conduct/receive rehabilitation over telehealth, or 
where they would prefer to do so, what hardware and software 
they use and would be willing/unwilling to use, and how often. 
In addition, an example video of in-person M-MAT was shown to 
participants to prompt their views on a telehealth adaptation, 
including potential challenges, necessary and desirable features, 
cost constraints, and other comments. The workshops were 
semi-structured, with both specific and open-ended questions 
and time for general comments and thoughts. Topic guides from 
the workshops are available in Supplemental Appendices B and C.

Results

Six co-designers were successfully recruited to the project. 
Relevant demographic details are shown in Tables 1 and 2. All 

participants were white, native English speakers. People with apha­
sia were distributed across age, location, and experience with 
telehealth, though all were male. Speech pathologists were expe­
rienced in providing telehealth and in working with aphasia. They 
were located in three different states – an important characteristic 
given each Australian state has its own health system require­
ments. All speech pathologists were female, which is grossly rep­
resentative of the Australian speech pathology workforce (97%). 
One had previously conducted in-person M-MAT (Table 3).

Clinician user requirements

The use of telehealth at clinicians’ workplaces varied considerably; 
one was a specialised telehealth service prior to COVID, which 
provided training and loan devices to patients; others were rap­
idly required to switch to telehealth during the COVID-19 pan­
demic, with mixed continuation of telehealth vs in-person services 
since. For telehealth delivery, clinicians used desktop computers 
with single or dual screens, inbuilt and external web cameras, 
and headphones with microphone. Two clinicians did not have 
access to a document camera, limiting this as an option for 
demonstrating drawing and writing examples for M-MAT Tele. 
They reported that their clients commonly used tablets, some­
times smartphones, and rarely computers. Except at the special­
ised telehealth service, clients were expected to provide their 
own device. The importance of helping clients position their 
device for telehealth was emphasised, as many hold it on their 
lap which would limit the clinician’s view of gesture and facial 
expression.

Telehealth platforms varied by state and each included different 
features. Table 4 contains a summary of supported features for 
relevant platforms, adapted from Vuong et al. [21]) and based on 
clinician and researcher exploration of platforms in June 2022. 
Screensharing was the only feature common across all platforms, 

Table 2.  Key demographic data for co-designers with aphasia.

Sex
Ethnicity
Age
Location

Experience with 

aphasia 
telehealth
PWA1
M
White, native 

English 
speaker

60–70
Rural Tasmania
Extensive 

– ongoing 
weekly 
sessions
PWA2
M
White, native 

English 
speaker

80–90
Metro 

Queensland

Limited – one 

session

PWA3
M
White, native 

English 
speaker

40–50
Metro Victoria
Extensive 

– ongoing 
weekly 
sessions

Table 3.  Key demographic data for clinician co-designers.

Sex
Ethnicity
Location
Clinical setting

Experience 
with aphasia 

telehealth

SP1
F
White, native 

English 
speaker

Victoria
Outpatient rehab
>2 years

SP2
F
White, native 

English 
speaker

South 

Australia

Outpatient rehab 

– specialised 
telehealth 
service

>3 years

SP3
F
White, native 

English 
speaker

New South 

Wales

Outpatient rehab
>2 years

242

meaning that relying on options such as chat, virtual whiteboard 
and cursor control would limit the suitability of M-MAT Tele. 
Clinicians expressed a preference for software being contained 
within a single window, as switching between multiple windows 
could become complex and confusing.

Additional important points raised by clinicians were:

•	
Text should be large enough to be viewed on client tablets.
•	
The difficulty of typing on touchscreens for many clients.
•	
The challenge in clients holding up paper to the camera, 
as they often misjudged the position of the camera.
•	
Significant time required to get some clients logged on 
and with other troubleshooting.

Clinicians reported that their workplace would consider funding 
software or hardware of up to “several hundred dollars,” but more 
than that would need justification. Importantly, clinicians worked 
in IT environments that often restricted the use of executable 
files or installation of software. They were open to using a group 
approach to rehabilitation, though concerned that if one partic­
ipant required extensive technical support, it would waste the 
therapy time of the remaining two. Overall, they recommended 
simplicity wherever possible; specifically, fewer logins, installations, 
pieces of equipment and technical demands on clients were pre­
ferred wherever feasible.

User requirements of people with aphasia

The co-designers with aphasia attended the initial workshop with 
a caregiver for support. One co-designer rated in-person and 
telehealth treatment as equal, and the others preferred in-person 
if forced to choose, but all reported positive perspectives of tele­
health for aphasia. Positives included not having to travel and 
clinicians not wearing masks on telehealth, as opposed to 
in-person appointments during COVID-19 restrictions, which aided 
their comprehension. In past experiences of telehealth, co-designers 
had used Apple iPads and/or laptops, therefore the built in camera 
and microphone had been used. They preferred not to use head­
phones. Co-designers described the telehealth platforms they had 
used in the past and it was determined they had used Zoom, 
QHealth telehealth portal and Microsoft Teams.

The co-designers reported sitting in various places in their 
house during telehealth, including at tables and desks, on the 
couch or even in bed. All felt that if a desk was needed for hand­
writing and drawing, this would be acceptable. Finding a quiet 
place in the house was not problematic for these co-designers. 
With regards to group therapy, they expressed concern that more 
reticent participants might miss out on therapy but were satisfied 
that this might not be an issue within M-MAT as it is turn-based. 
In terms of the help required to use videoconferencing, they 
reported needing someone on site with them to provide trouble­
shooting support for technical or communication issues.

The co-designers were asked about their experiences and pref­
erences with specific features that had potential for use in 
M-MAT Tele:

•	
Typing (e.g., into chat or other software) – No issues were 
raised with typing itself. However, in some videoconference 
software, the chat window is difficult to open and then 
gets in the way of the videoconference image and can 
be difficult to close.
•	
Handwriting and showing the paper to the camera – par­
ticipants were happy to do this, including one participant 
with upper limb hemiparesis, but discussed that individ­
uals would find typing or handwriting preferable depend­
ing on age and profession.
•	
Sharing their screen – with support from a family member 
or caregiver, co-designers had shared their screen with 
the clinician in the past or were happy to attempt this.
•	
Controlling the clinician’s screen/cursor control – All were 
happy to try or had used with some success.
•	
Drawing on a digital whiteboard – All were happy to try 
or had used with some success.

Despite a willingness to try many videoconferencing features 
such as using cursor control or chat boxes, co-designers recom­
mended minimising the technical demands on the participants 
with aphasia where possible. Co-designers expressed a willingness 
to pay for hardware and/or software for M-MAT Tele if it was 
beneficial to their communication but felt strongly that those 
with aphasia who could not afford to pay should not be disad­
vantaged; overall, avoiding specialised equipment or software 
where possible was recommended.

Table 4.  Support for features on commonly used telehealth platforms as of June 2022.

Share screen 
– browser window

Share screen – other 

application
Chat box
Remote control
Whiteboard
Display video
Zoom©
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
QHEALTH Telehealth 

must be in a 
separate window

when using in 
groups)

Overall support for 

feature

Mostly supported
Supported
Limited support
Very limited 

support

Limited support
Supported

ADAPTING M-MAT TELE
243

Producing design solutions

Following the initial workshops and task analysis, the authors 
synthesised the findings to a list of required and desirable fea­
tures. Based on the required and desired features, and considering 
the user requirements and context, a draft of software and process 
was developed, avoiding designs that would limit broad usability. 
The suggested solution was envisaged to run in an internet 
browser, thus not requiring installation. Rather than having par­
ticipants log in to a game hosted on a server, which would require 
passwords/logins and hosting, the games would be controlled by 
the clinician who would share their screen. While this 
clinician-control approach would limit the games that could be 
integrated, it would simplify use by putting the burden of tech­
nology on the clinician and also create an imperative for partic­
ipants with aphasia to communicate – in order to participate in 
the games, they would need to request a card or turn. It would 
also eliminate hosting costs and password database management 
and reduce integration of videoconferencing. With this approach, 
the software could be kept low cost or free.

Not all games from the previous in-person intervention [9] 
were suitable for the clinician-controlled approach. Go Fish 
requires participant to have cards that the other players cannot 
see, which is not possible with a single shared screen. Four games 
from the in-person intervention were included in the software 
draft – Snap, Bingo, Memory, and Who am I – and an additional 
game was proposed called Guess the Card. In Guess the Card, 
participants would select cards within a grid and place tokens 
on them. A random card would be chosen as the winner and 
any player with a token on the card would receive points. This 
proposed game includes an imperative to make verbal requests 
that is the key element of language action games [7]. Cues were 
to be pre-recorded, to minimise starting and stopping of screen­
sharing and to improve standardisation of the cues provided to 
participants.

A mock-up of possible software was developed to present 
to the co-designers, first on paper and then using Microsoft 
PowerPoint. This allowed a visual representation of the software 
and some simulation of the software through animations. During 
a second workshop, co-designers with aphasia were shown the 
mock-up and assisted to rate the five games on enjoyability 
and complexity. Open ended feedback on improvements was 
also sought. Three of the games were unanimously endorsed 
(Bingo, Memory and Guess the Card) while two received mixed 
feedback. In the clinician workshop, co-designers were positive 
about the games but gave detailed advice on the cues, example 
sentences and visual layout. Ultimately, three games were cho­
sen for development, based on direct feedback, observations 
of use during workshops, and additional consideration of sta­
tistics from the in-person COMPARE trial: Analysis of data from 
over 2000 h of M-MAT conducted during the COMPARE trial 
showed that Bingo and Memory were chosen by participants 
for 19% and 22% of sessions respectively, while Who Am I and 
I Went Shopping were chosen for only 13% of sessions com­
bined [9].

Evaluating the design

When all co-designer input had been considered, a design brief 
was sent to software developers. Throughout the development 
process, six additional meetings were held with co-designer 
groups to review each iteration: 3 h total for clinicians and 3 h 
total for people with aphasia. As the navigation, cues, and games 

became more functional, the experience became a more concrete 
and accurate simulation of the final product. This meant that 
input by the co-designers became more targeted, particularly for 
those with aphasia who could experience details of treatment 
process rather than imagine it. A large proportion of the feedback 
was related to the user interface and visual elements. Flaws in 
the visual design became apparent, such as elements moving too 
quickly to be seen during screensharing, items being too small, 
and highlights of active elements being too subtle. Clinician 
co-designers also suggested that word classes be coloured differ­
ently on the sentence frames, e.g., spaces for nouns to be red, 
verbs blue, etc.

One challenge with the workshops was the limited time to 
experience the games – meetings were typically 1 h, leaving only 
about 15 min for trialling each game, whereas in treatment, par­
ticipants have at least an hour to play each game. The games 
Bingo and Memory were visually similar as they both have a 
central grid of cards. This led to difficulties for the co-designers 
with aphasia understanding that a new game was being played 
with different rules, particularly given the short game duration in 
these meetings. To aid with visual signalling of a new game, a 
unique colour theme was suggested for each game and matched 
to the game icon on the main menu. This was helpful, although 
further testing will confirm whether new users can distinguish 
these games.

Co-designers also requested changes to the game functionality. 
Rather than a simple “[player 1] won!”, they suggested a popup 
screen that included an image of a trophy or medal. They also 
wanted to be able to view the final board and scores prior to 
starting a new game. Initially, the two cards flipped over in 
Memory automatically turned back over after several seconds, but 
clinicians felt this would not give enough time for users to attempt 
to memorise the shapes beneath them. A manual button to turn 
cards back over was therefore added.

Further evaluation is required through pilot testing of the 
intervention.

In total, the development process took six months to complete, 
producing software with a treatment protocol that meets key user 
requirements (see Figure 1 for screenshots); most significantly, 
compatible with the majority of telehealth platforms, minimal 
hardware and software requirements, maximal ease of use for 
participants, and inclusion of key elements of in-person M-MAT 
including multimodal cueing, language action games, multiple 
card sets and example sentence frames. Pilot testing is underway 
to further refine M-MAT Tele in preparation for clinical trials of 
efficacy and effectiveness. Table 5 shows the key intervention 
elements from the task analysis and a summary of the way in 
which they were adapted.

Discussion

The Human Centred Design framework was extremely valuable in 
designing M-MAT Tele for users with aphasia, who have highly 
specialised needs, and speech pathologists, who would ultimately 
make decisions on using M-MAT Tele or not. Thoroughly describing 
the context of use allowed us to consider the end environment 
in which M-MAT Tele would be used, which subsequently allowed 
us to select appropriate co-designers to provide user input. 
Understanding user requirements, including software limitations, 
cost, hardware, and preferences, was crucial to guiding the design 
process. It meant that we avoided inclusion of features that might 
have been innovative and useful but also excluded a portion of

244

intended users, such as software requiring installation or the use 
of a graphics tablet for drawing and writing.

Our solution meets requirements for the project, according 
to (1) the intended context of use, based on the overall project 
aims, (2) key intervention ingredients of the original in-person 
intervention protocol, gathered through the task analysis, and 
(3) the user requirements, which were either explicitly reported 
by co-designers or observed by the researchers during testing 
of prototypes. However, in fulfilling the specifications for broad 
compatibility and ease of use, there was a trade-off in that 
M-MAT Tele did not include some sophisticated potential fea­
tures. For instance, M-MAT Tele might have considered incor­
porating advanced technology such as computer gesture 

therapy (e.g., Marshall et  al. [25]) but such a feature would 
require shipping hardware to participants and/or installation of 
additional software, both of which could create barriers to 
implementation.

During the design process, valuable suggestions were raised 
by co-designers that could not be included in the final product. 
For example, customisable targets were suggested by clinicians, 
where the group would choose the words and sentences to 
practise during M-MAT Tele, but this required creation of an 
additional portal for clinicians to upload images, gesture videos 
and drawings, which was not feasible within the timeline and 
budget of the project. However, it was valuable to hear these 
suggestions from users as it allowed us to consider implementing 

Figure 1.  M-MAT tele software screenshots.
(a) Screenshot of the homepage for M-MAT Tele. (b) Screenshot of the memory game within M-MAT Tele.

ADAPTING M-MAT TELE
245

them in future versions should funding allow. Past investigation 
of speech pathologists’ preferences for digital aphasia resources 
has shown that clinicians typically suggest a large number of 
ideal features [26,27]. Discussion of whether suggested items are 
“essential” versus “desirable” [28] and ranking in order of priority 
could be useful approaches to manage suggestions in future 
developments.

As experienced by Spelter et al. [20], our co-designers outlined 
the need for a visually simple, uncluttered interface, yet there 
were a high number of features that need to be available and 
reached within as few clicks as possible. Conflicts between sim­
plicity of the user interface and the features are often present 
during technology design. For users with acquired brain injury, a 
“narrow-deep” interface (simpler layout with more screens to prog­
ress through) may result in fewer errors than a “broad-shallow” 
interface (more features available with fewer screens) [29]. 
However, individual preferences for each interface differ, poten­
tially based on experience with technology and cognitive profile. 
By putting the burden of navigation and use on the clinician, we 
were able to add some complexity compared to a system for 
direct use by people with aphasia.

Many policy frameworks do not require ethical approval for 
inclusion of consumers in co-design activities, as the role is not 
one of a passive research subject and should not involve vulner­
ability or risk. However, this is not universally agreed [30,31]. Given 
the personal experiences of telehealth that we discussed, along 
with the linguistic disability present in aphasia, the research team 
erred on the conservative side and gained ethical approval and 
informed consent from all co-designers. On reflection, this may 
not have been necessary and may even have implied reduced 
power on the user representatives’ side.

A larger sample size would have been beneficial in ensuring 
maximum feasibility and usability of M-MAT Tele. Using a maximal 
sampling approach did ensure representation across several 
important categories such as location, experience, and aphasia 
severity. However, all participants were white, native English 
speakers, limiting the diversity of the input for this project. People 
with aphasia who are also from a non-dominant ethnosocial 
background or language community can face additional disad­
vantages on top of the language disability [32,33]; thus, such 

voices are an important missing element. The project also lacked 
the input of women with aphasia.

In summary, involvement of end users from the beginning of 
the project, which is regarded as essential for technology devel­
opment in aphasia [34], has produce an acceptable, widely com­
patible tool. Next, we plan to test M-MAT Tele in a Phase I proof 
of concept study with a small cohort, collect user experience of 
both therapists and participants, and measure preliminary therapy 
outcomes. If found to be effective in treating aphasia, M-MAT Tele 
will be offered to clinicians free of charge and this collaborative, 
user-centred process will maximise the chances of implementation 
in clinical practice.

Note

	 1.	
Note that by “communication ability,” we refer to commu­
nication using any modality; people with more severe apha­
sia who could communicate with gesture, drawing or writ­
ing were not excluded.

Disclosure statement

No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).