ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 28 September 2018
doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2018.00226

1

Edited by:
Sue Ellen Levkoff,
University of South Carolina,
United States

Reviewed by:
Lisa Tisdale Wigfall,
Texas A&M University, United States
Iffat Elbarazi,
United Arab Emirates University,
United Arab Emirates

*Correspondence:
Mirjam Pot

†Present Address:
Annerieke Heuvelink,
Philips Research, Eindhoven,
Netherlands

Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Public Health Education and
Promotion,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Public Health

Received: 31 March 2017
Accepted: 25 July 2018
Published: 28 September 2018

Citation:
Pot M, Ruiter RAC, Paulussen TWGM,
Heuvelink A, de Melker HE, van
Vliet HJA and van Keulen HM (2018)
Systematically Developing a
Web-Based Tailored Intervention
Promoting HPV-Vaccination
Acceptability Among Mothers of
Invited Girls Using Intervention
Mapping. Front. Public Health 6:226.
doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2018.00226

Systematically Developing a
Web-Based Tailored Intervention
Promoting HPV-Vaccination
Acceptability Among Mothers of
Invited Girls Using Intervention
Mapping

Mirjam Pot 1,2*, Robert A. C. Ruiter 2, Theo W. G. M. Paulussen 1, Annerieke Heuvelink 3†,
Hester E. de Melker 4, Hans J. A. van Vliet 4 and Hilde M. van Keulen 1

1 Child Health, Netherlands Organization for Applied Scientiﬁc Research (TNO), Leiden, Netherlands, 2 Department of Work &
Social Psychology, Maastricht University, Maastricht, Netherlands, 3 Perceptual and Cognitive Systems, Netherlands
Organization for Applied Scientiﬁc Research (TNO), Soesterberg, Netherlands, 4 Centre for Infectious Disease Control,
National Institute for Public Health and the Environment, Bilthoven, Netherlands

Background: Currently, the eHealth ﬁeld calls for detailed descriptions of theory-based
interventions in order to support improved design of such interventions. This article
aims to provide a systematic description of the design rationale behind an interactive
web-based tailored intervention promoting HPV-vaccination acceptability.

Methods:
The 6-step Intervention Mapping (IM) protocol was used to describe the
design rationale. After the needs assessment in Step 1, intervention objectives were
formulated in Step 2. In Step 3, we translated theoretical methods into practical
applications, which were integrated into a coherent intervention in Step 4. In Step 5,
we anticipated future implementation and adoption, and ﬁnally, an evaluation plan was
generated in Step 6.

Results: Walking through the various steps of IM resulted in a detailed description of
the intervention. The needs assessment indicated HPV-vaccination uptake remaining
lower than expected. Mothers play the most important role in decision-making about
their daughter’s immunization. However, they generally feel ambivalent after they
made their decisions, and their decisions are based on rather unstable grounds.
Therefore, intervention objectives were to improve HPV-vaccination uptake and
informed decision-making, and to decrease decisional conﬂict among mothers of
invited girls. Computer-tailoring was chosen as the main method; virtual assistants
were chosen as a practical application to deliver interactive tailored feedback.
To maximize compatibility with the needs of the target group, a user-centered
design strategy by means of focus groups and online experiments was applied. In
these, prototypes were tested and sequentially reﬁned. Finally, efﬁcacy, effectiveness,
and
acceptability of
the
intervention were tested in a
randomized
controlled
trial. Results showed a signiﬁcant positive effect of the intervention on informed
decision-making, decisional conﬂict, and nearly all determinants of HPV-vaccination
uptake
(P
<
0.001).
Mothers
evaluated
the
intervention
as
highly
positive.

Discussion: Using IM led to an innovative effective intervention for promoting HPV-
vaccination acceptability. The intervention maps will aid in interpreting the results of our
evaluation studies. Moreover, it will ease the comparison of design rationales across
interventions, and may provide leads for the development of other eHealth interventions.
This paper adds to the plea for systematic reporting of design rationales constituting the
process of developing interventions.

Keywords: HPV-vaccination acceptability, intervention mapping, eHealth, web-based intervention, design
rationale

BACKGROUND

Too
often
design
rationales
of
behavioral
intervention
programs are poorly described, leading to so-called “black
box” evaluations (1). Currently, there is call in the eHealth ﬁeld
to open these black boxes. The scientiﬁc literature still provides
detailed descriptions of how interventions are evaluated, but
hardly ever of what exactly is being evaluated (2). Moreover,
information about when and how decisions are made throughout
the process of intervention development is often incomplete or
even completely lacking (2, 3). Intervention development is a
complex and laborious process which requires a large scale of
decisions to be made along the way. This goes far beyond the
decision about which behavior change techniques to include
in an intervention (2, 3). We consider all of the decisions to
represent valuable knowledge for the scientiﬁc community
and for intervention developers who like detailed background
about the conditions for (in)eﬀectiveness of an intervention.
Consequently, all decisions that were made during intervention
development should be reported.
Hence, this article aims to provide a detailed, systematic
description of the design rationale behind an interactive
Web-based tailored intervention promoting HPV-vaccination
acceptability. This paper encompasses all decisions that were
made during the process of intervention development. A
systematically developed and well described intervention enables
the identiﬁcation of active ingredients, improvement of existing
interventions, future intervention development, and large-scale
dissemination (1, 4). In addition, it facilitates comparison
between interventions, for example for reviews and replication
of studies (5–7). After all, the usefulness of systematic reviews
depends on the quality of the studies included (3). Finally, it
contributes to theory development by providing insight into
causal mechanisms (3, 4, 7–9). We used the Intervention
Mapping (IM) protocol, which provides a highly structured
approach in describing an intervention program and its
development (10).

METHODS

IM is a systematic process for developing theory- and
evidence-based health promotion interventions. The IM protocol
describes the pathways from problem identiﬁcation to solution
(10). The six steps of IM comprises several tasks, each
of which integrates theory and evidence. The deliverable

of completing the tasks within a step serves as a guide
for the subsequent steps. Although IM is presented as a
series of steps, Bartholomew Eldredge et al. (10) emphasize
that
the
planning
process
is
iterative
instead
of
linear,
meaning that intervention planners move back and forth
between the various tasks and steps. By explicitly reporting
all decisions and considerations throughout the intervention
process, IM makes the intervention development process
transparent.
Step 1 concerns the conduction of a needs assessment and
formulation of the overall goals of the intervention. In this
step, the health problem, behavioral, and environmental causes
of this problem, and related determinants are identiﬁed. The
intervention goal is the desired outcome of the intervention.
In Step 2, performance objectives and change objectives
are formulated. Performance objectives (POs) specify the
(sub)behaviors that must be performed by the target group in
order to reach the intended goal. Change objectives (COs) outline
the speciﬁcs of behavioral determinants to be targeted so the
target group is enabled to reach the performance objectives. COs
are formed by crossing the POs with the determinants. This
results in a matrix which can be seen as the core of the design
rationale. Step 3 is about the design of the intervention program
in terms of generating program themes, components, scope and
sequence. The scope is the breadth and amount of the program
and the sequence is the order in which programs are delivered
across time. This step also includes the selection of theory-
based intervention methods and the translation of these methods
into practical applications, taking into account the parameters
for eﬀectiveness of the these methods. In Step 4, the methods
and practical applications are being translated into a coherent
intervention program In Step 5, adoption, implementation,
and sustainability of the intervention in real-life settings are
planned. Finally, Step 6 entails the outline of the process and
eﬀect evaluation. The steps and tasks of IM are visualized in
Figure 1.

RESULTS

Systematically walking through all of the steps of IM, resulted in a
detailed description of the intervention. This description, in turn,
provides insight into the theory- and research-based foundations
of the many decisions that were made during the process of
intervention development. Below, the study ﬁndings from each
step of IM are described.

2

FIGURE 1 | Intervention Mapping steps and tasks (adapted from Bartholomew Eldrigde and colleagues) (10).

IM Step 1: Needs Assessment
Worldwide, cervical cancer is the third most common cancer
among
women
(11).
Persistent
infection
by
the
human
papillomavirus (HPV) appears to be the major cause of cervical
cancer (12). In the Netherlands, yearly 600 new cases of cervical
cancer are detected, of which 200 with fatal consequences (13).
This is despite the presence of a national cervical cancer screening
program for women aged 30–60 years (14). HPV-vaccinations
of 12-year-old girls were expected to reduce the number of
cervical cancer cases by 50% (13). Therefore, in 2008, the Dutch
government decided to include the HPV-vaccination of 12-year-
old girls in the National Immunization Program (NIP). However,
HPV-vaccine uptake remains lower (53%) than expected (70%)
(15). There is a need to improve this uptake is order to reduce
the cervical cancer burden. Therefore, the primary goal of the
intervention was to improve HPV-vaccination uptake among
invited girls.
Most studies have conﬁrmed that parents play a large role
in decision-making about their daughters’ HPV-vaccination
[e.g., (16–18)]. A Dutch study showed mothers to play the
most important role in the immunization decision of girls.
There is a high percentage of consensus between mothers and
daughters (79%) about the outcome (19).Therefore, mothers
were selected as the target group for designing an educational
intervention for promoting the HPV-vaccination uptake by

their daughters In order to gain insight into determinants
of mothers’ HPV vaccination acceptability, we conducted a
longitudinal study (20). The results showed that intention was
the main and stable predictor of HPV vaccination uptake.
Intention, in turn, was best explained by attitude, behavioral
beliefs, subjective norms, habit, and perceptions about the relative
eﬀectiveness of the vaccine, they explained 83% of the variance
in HPV-vaccination intention. Also relevant for the mothers’
intention were anticipated regret, risk perception, self-eﬃcacy,
and knowledge. Additional determinants of HPV-vaccination
acceptability found by previous cross-sectional studies were
conﬁdence in authorities, ambivalence, and processing of HPV-
vaccination education (19, 21).
Furthermore, research showed that a substantial proportion
of the mothers had not actively processed information about
the HPV-vaccination (50%) and still felt ambivalent after they
made their decision (25%) (19). This indicates that the mothers’
decision is based on rather unstable grounds, which makes
them vulnerable for arguments challenging their initial attitudes
and/or intention. Informed decision-making is expected to
make mothers less vulnerable for counter arguments (22, 23).
Furthermore, decisional conﬂict is strongly related to informed
decision-making, as one of the factors contributing to decisional
conﬂict is feeling uninformed (24). A more informed decision
is thus theoretically related to reduced decisional conﬂict (25).

3

Hence, the secondary goal of the intervention is to improve
informed decision-making, reduce decisional conﬂict, and
positively inﬂuence determinants of HPV-vaccination uptake.
In the Netherlands, the existing education about the HPV-
vaccination consists of an introduction folder and a link
to a website providing generic information. All girls at the
age of 12 receive an invitation for the HPV-vaccination
with the accompanying brochure and link to the website.
But, this education needs to be improved because HPV-
vaccination uptake remains lower than expected (15). Besides,
Van Keulen et al. (19) showed that mothers indicated a need
for more interactive, personal information about the HPV-
vaccination over and above the general information. Mothers also
expressed diﬀerential needs concerning the amount and scope of
information. Topics of interest for future communication about
the HPV-vaccination as indicated by mothers were for example,
the pros and cons, potential long-term side eﬀects, and the
safety and eﬀectiveness of the HPV-vaccination (19). Regarding
the delivery mode of the information, mothers indicated a
preference for internet (19). These preferences guided our
decision to develop a web-based intervention, enabling us to
provide mothers with interactive, tailored information about the
HPV-vaccination (see Step 3).

IM Step 2: Program Outcomes and
Objectives
Program Outcomes
Based on the identiﬁed problem and needs we determined that
the primary outcome was to improve HPV-vaccination uptake
among invited girls and the secondary outcome was to strengthen
mothers’ informed decision-making, reduce decisional conﬂict,
and positively inﬂuence determinants of the HPV-vaccination
decision. Below, we introduce POs, determinants of these POs,
and accompanying COs for each outcome.

Performance Objectives
The expected intervention outcomes were subdivided into POs.
The HPV-vaccination consists of two subsequent injections. In
other words, the behavior has to be repeated only once (with
an interval of 6 months). The POs are: (1) the mother makes
a (informed) decision to have her daughter vaccinated against
HPV; (2) the mother discusses her decision with her daughter
and partner; (3) the mother guides her daughter toward receiving
the ﬁrst HPV-injection; (4) the mother guides her daughter
toward receiving the second HPV-injection.

Behavioral Determinants
For each PO, we identiﬁed the reasons why mothers would
take that action. These so called behavioral determinants were
based on theory (e.g., the theory of reasoned action and socio-
cognitive theory) (25, 26) and on empirical research (19, 20, 27).
We selected determinants that met the criteria of importance
and changeability (10). Importance of the determinants of PO
1 (i.e., deciding to get the HPV-vaccination) was based on the
association (i.e., R2 eﬀect size) (28) of the determinants with
HPV-vaccination intention (21). For the POs 2–4 (i.e., discussing
the HPV-vaccination and actually getting the ﬁrst and second

injection), importance was based on consensus among co-
authors (RR, TP, MP, and HvK). Changeability (i.e., the strength
of the evidence that the proposed change can be realized by the
intervention), was also based on consensus among co-authors
(RR, TP, MP, and HvK).
For the ﬁrst PO, we returned to the needs assessment and
selected the following determinants: attitude, beliefs, positive,
and negative outcome expectancies, anticipated regret about
both receiving and rejecting the HPV-vaccination, conﬁdence
in authorities, habit strength, risk perception having received
(no) HPV-vaccination, subjective, and descriptive norms, relative
eﬀectiveness of the HPV-vaccination, ambivalence, and HPV-
vaccination information processing (19, 21). Furthermore,
according to Marteau et al. (27), an informed decision is based
on suﬃcient and relevant knowledge, and a match between the
person’s values (i.e., their attitude toward the HPV-vaccination)
and outcome behavior (i.e., whether mothers had their daughter
vaccinated against HPV or not). Consequently, knowledge was
selected as a determinant. Determinants that were selected
for PO2 were attitude (29), and self-eﬃcacy (26). Selected
determinants for PO3 and PO4 were knowledge and beliefs
(26). Determinants that were not selected were considered
either unimportant (e.g., for PO1: self-eﬃcacy) (19, 21) or
unchangeable (e.g., for PO2: parenting style).

Change Objectives
For each determinant, we identiﬁed COs. COs are the active
ingredients of the intervention and function as a blueprint of
the theoretical design rationale. Table 1 provides an overview of
examples of the matrix of COs, the complete version can be found
in Additional File 1.

IM Step 3: Program Design
Theme, Components, Scope and Sequence
The ﬁrst task of Step 3 is to generate ideas for intervention
theme, components, scope, and sequence. The product of this
step is an initial plan that describes the program (10). We
decided the intervention to be Web-based (see Step 1). The
main theme of the intervention was “making an informed
decision about the HPV-vaccination of your daughter.” The
various components were logically clustered for improving
usability. This resulted in four menu options: (1) two-sided
information about the HPV-vaccination, (2) a decisional balance,
(3) practical information, and (4) frequently asked questions
(See Additional File 3 for screenshots of the four menus). The
ﬁrst menu enabled mothers to collect tailored information
about the HPV-vaccination (e.g., such as information about the
eﬀectiveness of the HPV-vaccination). The various components
were in line with mothers’ preferences as indicated by earlier
research (See “needs assessment”) (10). In the second menu,
mothers could weigh their personal values regarding the HPV-
vaccination in the form of a decisional balance and values
clariﬁcation tool. In the third menu, mothers could gather
practical information such as how and where to receive the HPV-
vaccination. The fourth menu listed frequently asked questions
about the HPV-vaccination. Here we also added a “problems with
the website” component, providing mothers with help.

4

TABLE 1 | Examples of change objectives (COs).

Performance objective
Determinant

Knowledge
Attitude
Beliefs
Risk perception having
received no
HPV-vaccination

1. Mother makes the
(informed) decision to have
her daughter vaccinated
against HPV.

Mother explains that HPV is a
virus.
Mother explains that HPV is
transmitted sexually.
Mother explains that men can
also be infected with HPV.

Mother evaluates the
HPV-vaccination positively.
Mother recognizes the health
beneﬁts of the
HPV-vaccination.

Mother recognizes the
importance of her daughter
receiving the HPV-vaccination
before they become sexually
active (i.e., age 12).
Mother recognizes that the
vaccine has proven to be safe
and effective.

Mother acknowledges the risk
of her daughter becoming
infected with HPV and
developing cervical cancer later
in life without the vaccination.

2. Mother discusses her
decision to have her daughter
vaccinated against HPV with
her daughter and partner.

Mother evaluates
communication with her
daughter and partner positively.

3. Mother guides her
daughter toward receiving the
ﬁrst HPV-injection.

Mother knows where to get the
ﬁrst HPV-injection.

4. Mother guides her
daughter toward receiving the
second HPV-injection.

Mother knows where to get the
second HPV-injection.
Mother recognizes that the
HPV-vaccination is most
effective when her daughter
gets fully vaccinated.

Furthermore, mothers were able to visit the intervention
multiple times. The ﬁrst time they visited the website, they were
provided with an explanation of how the website worked. Then,
they were introduced to the ﬁrst menu. We used a combination
of a freedom of choice and a tunneled design (i.e., a “hybrid
design”) to guide mothers through the website (30). This means
that mothers could choose themselves which component in
which menu they wanted to visit (i.e., freedom of choice design).
However, once they entered a component, they were guided
through it in “tunnel fashion,” with navigation being limited
to “next” and “prior” buttons. The reason for choosing such a
hybrid design is that we wanted to proﬁt from the strengths
of both approaches (30). Speciﬁcally, the tunnel design was
expected to increase intervention adherence and engagement and
acquisition of knowledge (31). The freedom of choice design was
expected to promote mothers’ autonomy, which is important
when motivating behavior change (32, 33). Furthermore, the
hybrid design matched the diﬀerential needs concerning the
amount and scope of information expressed by the mothers (19).
Table 2 provides an overview of the scope and sequence of the
intervention.

Theoretical Methods and Practical Applications
To identify theoretical change methods that help achieve the
COs, we used an overview of methods provided by Bartholomew
et al. (chapter 6) (10). The eHealth setting gave us the chance to
apply eﬀective strategies in an innovative way, namely by using
computer-tailoring and interactions with virtual assistants (see
sections below) (34). Computer-tailoring was selected as the main
theoretical framework for development. Tailoring is a health
communication strategy by which messages are individualized
to personal preferences and needs (35). Meta-analyses have

shown that tailored interventions are more eﬀective than generic
interventions in achieving behavioral outcomes [e.g., (36, 37)].
Beneﬁcial eﬀects of tailoring are attributed to improved exposure,
information processing, appreciation, reading, and perceived
personal relevance [e.g., (38, 39)]. Because computer-tailored
interventions can reach large groups of people at relatively
low costs, especially when delivered via the Internet, (40),
they can have substantial impact at the population level (41).
Also, tailoring matches the mothers’ need for more interactive,
personal information about the HPV-vaccination (Step 1) (19).
Computer-tailored feedback was used in three diﬀerent ways
throughout the intervention. First, it was used to tailor the
feedback on participants’ answers to statements and questions
about speciﬁc aspects of the HPV-vaccination. For instance,
mothers were ﬁrst asked to estimate their daughters’ chance
to get an HPV-infection. Those who perceived this chance as
low, received feedback which stated that this chance is rather
high instead of low, whereas those who perceived the chance as
high, received feedback that conﬁrmed that the chance is indeed
high. Second, computer tailoring was used to provide mothers
the opportunity to weigh their personal values regarding the
HPV-vaccination in a decisional balance. Another mean was the
“value clariﬁcation” tool [a motivational interviewing strategy;
cf. (32)]. Mothers were invited to list their central values for
life, and were stimulated to relate these to the decision about
vaccinating her daughter. Finally, computer-tailoring was used
for guiding mothers through the website. The intervention kept
track of the components that the mother had already visited
by using logs. This enabled us, for instance, to highlight parts
of the intervention which the mother had not seen yet. Also,
if mothers were exposed to information that had already been
discussed in another component, the intervention mentioned

5

TABLE 2 | Scope (components and main targeted determinants) and sequence of
the intervention.

Menua
Componentb: main targeted determinants

Information about the
HPV-vaccination
General information: knowledge

Facts and stories: beliefs, positive and negative outcome
expectancies

From HPV to cervical cancer: knowledge

Ways to protect against cervical cancer: relative
effectiveness

Side effects of the HPV-vaccination: negative outcome
expectancies

Importance vaccinating at young age: positive outcome
expectancies

Other mothers: descriptive norm

Working mechanisms vaccination: knowledge

Chance of getting HPV/cervical cancer: risk perception
having received (no) HPV-vaccination

Effectiveness and safety of the HPV-vaccination: beliefs,
positive outcome expectancies

Weighing up the pros
and cons
Decisional Balance: attitude, ambivalence

Values clariﬁcation: attitude, ambivalence

Practical information
Talking about the HPV-vaccination: attitude, self-efﬁcacy,
subjective norms

Where do I get the HPV-vaccination: knowledge,
planning, self-efﬁcacy

2 instead of 3 HPV-injections: knowledge

Frequently asked
questions
Frequently asked questions about the HPV-vaccination:
n/a

Frequently asked questions about getting the
HPV-vaccination: n/a

Problems with the website: n/a

n/a, not applicable.
aWithin and across the different menus, a freedom of choice design was used.
bWithin the various components, a tunnel design was used.

this in order to assure that the connection between the diﬀerent
types of information provided was clear.
We selected virtual assistants for delivering tailored feedback.
A virtual assistant is an embodied conversational agent deﬁned
as a computer program with a human-like visual make-up and
appearance on a computer screen (42). Virtual assistants were
chosen to match the mothers’ preferences for more interactive
personalized feedback (19). They provide opportunities for two-
way interactions, and can create a highly personal experience.
Also, research has indicated that a social relationship between
user and program is important (43, 44), as it supports the
basic psychological need for relatedness (33, 45). This can be
established by using virtual assistants (46–48). Also, several
studies conﬁrmed that the presence of a virtual assistant can
further improve the eﬀectiveness of the intervention (49–51).
Speciﬁcally, the added value of using a virtual assistant over a text
and picture-based website is that it improves recall of information
(52), transfer of learning (53), amount of learning (54), self-
eﬃcacy expectations, literacy, and behavior change (49, 50, 55). In
addition, the mere presence of such an animated interface agent

has a positive eﬀect on experiencing fun and engagement [e.g.,
(47, 50, 56)]. Two virtual assistants were visualized: a mother-like
and a female doctor-like assistant as the combination of using an
expert and a peer virtual assistant has been shown to be eﬀective
(57, 58). The main purpose of the virtual assistants was to
provide mothers with social support, which is an important factor
associated with positive health outcomes in general (59). The
mother-like assistant was used to guide mothers throughout the
website and helped weigh their personal values in the decisional
balance. The doctor-like assistant was used to deliver feedback
about the HPV-vaccination.
Table 3 provides examples of theoretical methods (column
2) for determinants identiﬁed in IM step 2 (column 1) for
PO1 (i.e., mother makes the informed decision to have her
daughter vaccinated against HPV). For each method, parameters
for eﬀectiveness were speciﬁed (column 3). We then translated
theoretical methods into practical applications (column 4) that
were appropriate for the population and the (Internet) setting.
In Additional ﬁle 2, we also specify which POs and COs were
targeted using which methods and applications in the various
components. This can be seen as the most straightforward
blueprint of the intervention. All COs were covered by the
intervention.
The most important method aiming to reduce decisional
conﬂict was the decisional balance (see Figure 2), which has
proved a quick and eﬃcient intervention by itself (63). Mothers
were presented with a list of pros and cons of the HPV-
vaccination by the mother-like assistant (left column). This list
was based on pros (e.g., “the HPV-vaccination decreases the
chance of my daughter getting cervical cancer”) and cons (e.g.,
“my daughter is too young to receive the HPV-vaccination”) that
were considered most important to the mothers as indicated
by the needs assessment (Step 1). For each pro or con,
they indicated (1) whether they agreed (disagree/neutral/agree;
middle column) and (2) how important the pro or con was to
them (unimportant/neutral/important; third column). The latter
was indicated by stars: the more stars, the more important the pro
or con was to the mother. When mothers (dis)agreed, tailored
feedback “popped up.” This was done to ensure mothers based
their answer on correct information (see Figure 2). Furthermore,
mothers were given the option to add pros and cons that
were not in the list. Based on pros and cons mothers marked
as most salient, a decisional balance (top right of the screen)
revealed their current position on a scale ranging between not-
wanting (left side) and wanting (right sight) to get their daughter
vaccinated.

IM Step 4: Program Production
We developed the intervention using Tailorbuilder© software.
The virtual assistants were developed by a company called
“Webspeaking.” Individual responses and routing were linked to
written and spoken feedback messages by means of computer
software using if-then algorithms. The website was made
available on computers and tablets and was OS-platform
independent. Using an online questionnaire, mothers (N = 375)
were asked about the preferred graphical appearance of the
intervention (including the name of the intervention, the

6

TABLE 3 | Examples of selected methods, strategies, parameters and strategies for Performance Objective 1 “mother makes the (informed) decision to have her
daughter vaccinated against HPV.”

Determinants
Theoretical method
Parameter for use
Practical application

Beliefs, positive and
negative outcome
expectancies

Belief selection (TRAa)
Active learning (ELMb)
Requires investigation of the current attitudinal,
normative and efﬁcacy beliefs of the individual
before choosing the beliefs on which to
intervene
Requires time, information and skills

“Facts & Stories”: mother is asked by the mother-like
assistant to indicate for various statements, whether they
are either a “fact” (true) or a “story” (false).Then, the
doctor-like virtual assistant elaborates on correct
outcome expectancies, beliefs, misperceptions and
omissions.

Attitude, ambivalence
Decisional Balance
(MIc)
Requires consideration and evaluation of
behavior
“Weigh up the pros against the cons”: Mothers are
presented with a list of pros and cons of the
HPV-vaccination by the mother-like assistant. Based on
pros and cons mothers marked as most salient, a
decisional balance reveals their current position on a
scale ranging between wanting and not-wanting to get
my daughter vaccinated.

Attitude, ambivalence
Value Clariﬁcation (MIc)
Modeling (SCTd)
Requires consideration and evaluation
of values Attention, resemblance, self-efﬁcacy
and skills, reinforcement of the model,
identiﬁcation with the model, coping model
instead of mastery model.

“What are your values?”: Mothers are invited to list their
central values for life. Optional, they can ﬁnd examples of
values of other mothers (e.g., being a good parent). They
will then be stimulated to relate these to the
HPV-vaccination. Here, examples of how these values
were related to the HPV-vaccination according to other
mothers, were available.

Risk perception having
received (no)
HPV-vaccination

Statistical risk
information (HBMe)
Consciousness raising
(HBMe)
Framing (PMTf)

Can use feedback and confrontation; however,
raising awareness must be quickly followed by
increase in problem-solving ability and
self-efﬁcacy.
Requires high self-efﬁcacy expectations. Gain
frames are more readily accepted and prevent
defensive reactions

Mother-like assistant asks about mothers’ perceived risk
perception of her daughter getting infected with HPV and
of her daughter developing cervical cancer. Tailored
feedback on this perceived risk is then given by the
doctor-like assistant. Finally, mothers are provided with
statistical risk information (i.e., the probability rates of
attracting HPV and cervical cancer).

aTRA, theory of reasoned action (29).
bELM, elaboration likelihood model (60).
cMI, motivational interviewing (32).
dSCT, social cognitive theory (26).
eHBM, health belief model (61).
fPMT, protection motivation theory (62).

voices and appearances of the virtual assistants). A text-editor
rephrased the written and spoken texts in order to maximize
comprehensibility. A graphic designer made the website design
and provided us with appropriate pictures to illustrate feedback,
in order to make the website more appealing for this target group
(See Figure 3 for an example).

Experimental Pre-testing and Pilot-Testing of
Prototypes
In
order
to
anticipate
an
intervention
that
meets
the
requirements and preferences of the target group, we followed
user-centered design procedures. This entails the iterative
involvement of the end-users in the design process (64). We
gathered feedback on diﬀerent versions (static and interactive)
or (parts of the) intervention, by online experimental pretests
and
focus
groups,
respectively.
Experimental
pretesting
oﬀers empirical support for the impact of strategies on
determinants and serves as a guarantee for implementing
adequate intervention materials (65, 66). We conducted three
experimental online pretests. Since we did not ﬁnd a clear
consensus in the literature about the framing of risks, the
ﬁrst experiment (N = 375) was about testing the diﬀerential
eﬀect of providing statistical (i.e., probability rates) or/and

narrative risk information (i.e., a personal story). Mothers were
randomly assigned to one of four conditions in a 2 (statistical
information: yes or no) × 2 (narrative information: yes or no)
between-subjects factorial design. ANOVA revealed a signiﬁcant
main eﬀect of statistical information on daughters’ perceived
susceptibility toward HPV [F(1, 371) = 7.56, p < 0.01]. Mothers
who received statistical risk information had a higher perceived
daughters’ susceptibility toward HPV (M = 4.11 on a 7-point
scale, SD = 0.10) than mothers who did not receive statistical
risk information (M = 3.73 on a 7-point scale, SD = 0.09). Thus,
statistical risk information seemed most eﬀective. We therefore
decided to include statistical risk information to target risk
perception with this intervention (Step 3).
In a second online experimental pretest (N = 561), we
explored the best way to communicate about social norms; by
providing negatively (i.e., discourage undesired behavior) vs.
positively (i.e., encourage desired behavior) framed descriptive
and/or subjective norms (67). It was suggested that the
descriptive norm should be avoided in situations where the
unhealthy behavior is prevalent (68). As for the HPV-vaccination,
39% of invited girls have not received the HPV-vaccination (15).
Therefore, we also wanted to examine whether communicating
a descriptive norm could have a potential adverse eﬀect on

7

FIGURE 2 | Screenshot of the decisional balance with a tailored pop-up and the mother-like virtual assistant on the website. *The plan for the decisional balance was
developed in step 3; actual development of the balance was realized in step 4.

HPV-vaccination acceptability. Mothers were randomized into
one of four conditions in a 2 (norm: injunctive vs. descriptive) ×
2 (frame: positive vs. negative) between subjects factorial design
with an additional control condition. We found no indication for
using one type of framing norms over the other (p’s > 0.05; mean
HPV-vaccination intention scores ranging from 5.51 to 5.77, on
a 7-point scale). We also did not ﬁnd any adverse eﬀects of
descriptive norms on HPV-vaccination acceptability (p > 0.05).
As negatively framed norms were expected to be more diﬃcult
to process (69), we decided to just include positively framed
descriptive norm by communicating about the national HPV-
vaccination uptake rate. Within the component “talking about
the HPV-vaccination,” mothers were taught how to deal with a
potential contrasting subjective norm of important others (e.g.,
their daughter and partner).
Finally, being a relatively new vaccine, there remains
uncertainty about potential long-term eﬀects of the HPV-
vaccination. This was also found to be a topic of interest among
mothers for future communication (19). Therefore, in a third

experimental pretest (N = 695), we investigated the eﬀects of
acknowledging vs. ignoring uncertainty about potential long-
term eﬀects of the HPV-vaccination. Mothers were randomly
assigned to one of two conditions in which uncertainty about
the HPV-vaccination was either (a) acknowledged or (b) ignored.
Results showed that, compared to mothers who were exposed
to information ignoring uncertainty, mothers who were exposed
to information acknowledging uncertainty experienced more
decisional conﬂict (acknowledged: M = 3.42, SD = 1.84, p < 0.01
vs. ignored: M = 3.05, SD = 1.74), were more ambivalent about
their decision (acknowledged: M = 4.04, SD = 1.86 vs. ignored:
M = 3.42, SD = 1.89, p < 0.001), and had a less positive attitude
(acknowledged: M = 5.07, SD = 1.50 vs. ignored: M = 5.69,
SD = 1.38, p < 0.01) and intention (acknowledged: M = 5.26,
SD = 1.73 vs. ignored: M = 5.85, SD = 1.45, p < 0.01).
These ﬁndings implicate not to communicate about long-term
uncertainties. However, we chose to do so in the intervention,
for the following reasons: ﬁrst, the found eﬀect sizes were
small. Second, not communicating about long term uncertainties

8

FIGURE 3 | Screenshot of the doctor-like assistant providing feedback about the ineffectiveness of having a healthy life style (e.g., healthy eating, exercising) in
protecting against cervical cancer with illustrations provided by a graphic designer.

brings along the risk of mothers searching information about
this elsewhere. This can be quite dangerous as many rumors
about potential long-term eﬀects, for which no prove exists,
can be found (e.g., on the Internet) (70). Reading these (false)
rumors without any refutation being oﬀered aside (71), could
have more detrimental eﬀects on HPV-vaccination acceptability
than when we ourselves provide the (correct) information.
The latter enables us to inoculate mothers with arguments
that become accessible in case they are confronted with (new)
information that might challenge their initial positive intentions
(i.e., psychological inoculation) (22, 23). Finally, mothers
themselves expressed a need for full disclosure, especially when
uncertainties were ignored, which was also found in a previous
study (19).
At a later stage, we conducted several focus groups (N = 3)
among mothers to test interactive prototypes of the intervention
to ensure compatibility with the preferences of the target
group. A ﬁrst prototype of the intervention was tested in two
focus groups. After we revised the prototype according to the
feedback from these two focus groups, a second prototype of the
intervention was tested in a third focus group. The protocol was

similar for all focus groups: after a general introduction, mothers
were given a laptop and headset to individually navigate through
the website. They were given the opportunity to give feedback
on every page of the website about features they (dis)liked (e.g.,
the “look and feel” of the page(s), and the tailored feedback
of the virtual assistants). Then, they were asked to ﬁll out a
written questionnaire assessing their subjective evaluation of the
virtual assistants (e.g., the extent to which feedback matched their
responses) and the website (e.g., their evaluation of the diﬀerent
menus). Finally, in a group discussion mothers could elaborate
on their opinion about the intervention, and oﬀer suggestions for
improvement.
Feedback was ﬁrst gathered from the ﬁrst two focus groups.
For instance, in the ﬁrst prototype, there was a component
targeting anticipated regret by using imagery (72, 73). Mothers
were asked how much regret they would have if they did
not vaccinate their daughter against HPV and their daughter
developed cervical cancer later in life. However, we discovered
that asking this evoked much resistance. We therefore decided to
remove this component from the intervention. As an alternative,
we decided to target anticipated regret indirectly (e.g., by giving

9

information about the high prevalence of HPV). Furthermore, in
the ﬁrst prototype, the written and spoken tailored feedback were
provided at the same time. Mothers indicated that, therefore,
they experienced diﬃculties listening to the virtual assistant.
Hence, we created a new prototype, in which the written feedback
appeared once the virtual assistant was done providing the
tailored feedback.
In the third focus group, mothers indicated that they would
like to see which components they had already visited. We
therefore created an adapted version of the website in which
logs were used to register the pages mothers had already
visited and subsequently used these logs to visualize which
components were completed. This was done by turning them
into a diﬀerent color (i.e., orange, see Figure 4) In addition,
the mother-like virtual assistant was used to give advice about
components to visit next, in order to maximize exposure to the
intervention. If the virtual assistant advised on a component,
the component was highlighted by an orange circle (see
Figure 4).
After revising the intervention according to the feedback from
the third focus group, a ﬁnal prototype was pilot-tested online
using various devices to ensure it worked adequately. This was
done among a sample of mothers (N = 10) and among members
of the project group.

IM Step 5: Designing an Implementation
Plan
To
ensure
future
implementation
and
adoption
of
the
intervention (step 5), we formed an advisory board of
representatives
of
important
linking
agents
(e.g.,
Public
Health Services) and professionals involved in delivering the
HPV-vaccination. We organized two advisory board meetings;
they advised on the experimental pretesting, practicability,
and feasibility of the intervention, the planned eﬀect- and
process evaluation, and implementation of the intervention
within the NIP. The National Institute for Public Health
and the Environment (RIVM), responsible for the national
implementation of HPV-vaccination, was co-ﬁnancier of the
project and full member of the project team. RIVM would
get full control and management over the website if the ﬁnal
intervention turned out to be eﬀective.

IM Step 6: Creating an Evaluation Plan
In order to evaluate the eﬃcacy and eﬀectiveness of the
intervention, we planned a randomized controlled trial (RCT).
The RCT consisted of 2 arms: (1) a control and (2) intervention
group. Mothers were randomly recruited from Praeventis, the
Dutch National Immunization Register, and three Internet
panels. The latter was to guarantee a suitable subsample for the
planned eﬃcacy trial (21The Praeventis sample enabled us to
anticipate the naturalistic condition for future implementation of
the intervention, which provided the opportunity for testing the
intervention’s eﬀectiveness. The primary outcome measure was
HPV-vaccination uptake, as registered by Praeventis Secondary
measures were informed decision-making, decisional conﬂict,
and determinants of HPV-vaccination acceptability. These were
measured using a Web-based questionnaire.

Part of the RCT was a process evaluation assessed program
adherence and the users’ subjective program evaluation. At
follow up, participants evaluated the information provided by
the website (e.g., relevance, credibility), perceived user control
(e.g., experienced degree of autonomy) and the functioning of
the virtual assistants (e.g., fun, reliability). Mothers were also
asked to rate the website and the virtual assistants on a 10-
point scale, ranging from 0 (very bad) to 10 (excellent). Objective
program use was evaluated by the logs keeping track of the
pages the mothers’ has visited. Two indicators were computed:
“completeness” and “time.” Completeness represents the total
percentage of pages that a participant has visited while logged
into the website, ranging from 0% (no exposure) to 100%
(exposure to all pages). Time represents the total amount of time
participants have spent logged into the intervention.
Results from the RCT are described in detail elsewhere
(74). The main ﬁnding from the eﬀect evaluation was that the
intervention showed a signiﬁcant positive eﬀect on informed
decision-making, decisional conﬂict, and nearly all determinants
of HPV-vaccination uptake (P < 0.001). No diﬀerences in
intervention eﬀects were found between the two diﬀerential
samples. The main ﬁnding from the process evaluation was that
mothers evaluated the intervention as highly positive: mothers
evaluated the website with a 7.6 (SD = 1.36) and the virtual
assistants with a 7.4 (SD = 1.53). According to the computer logs,
2,509 (63%) of the 3,995 (100%) invited mothers logged on to the
website. On average, mothers spent 22 minutes on the website
(SD = 13 min).

DISCUSSION

In this article, we have provided a comprehensive and detailed
description of how we systematically developed an intervention
promoting HPV-vaccination acceptability using the IM protocol.
This led to a highly innovative, interactive, Web-based, tailored
intervention, in which tailored feedback was delivered by virtual
assistants. Tailoring has only recently been applied to HPV-
vaccination (57, 75–77). To our knowledge, only one of the
existing tailored interventions was computer-tailored and this
intervention turned out to be ineﬀective in promoting HPV-
vaccination acceptance (75). Moreover, not only did we tailor the
content of the intervention to the mothers’ personal interest, but
tailoring was also used to guide the mothers’ personal pathway
through the intervention. The latter is likely to have improved
the usability of the intervention. The intervention accounted for
tailoring on a variety of determinants. For example, not only
did we tailor on perceived barriers (e.g., beliefs about adverse
eﬀects), like Gerend et al. (76) did, but also on other beliefs (e.g.,
beliefs about the daughters’ sexual behavior and age in relation
to the need for the HPV-vaccination), attitude, subjective norms,
habit, relative eﬀectiveness, anticipated regret, risk perception,
self-eﬃcacy, and knowledge. The use of virtual assistants in
interventions promoting HPV-vaccination acceptance seems
promising since results from the focus groups (Step 4) and
the subjective program evaluation (74) showed that mothers
appreciated them very well. But, we still consider the use of virtual

10

FIGURE 4 | Screenshot of the ﬁrst menu with the mother-like assistant in which a suggested component is highlighted and visited components have turned into a
different color.

assistants to be complex, especially in Web-based interventions
in which both spoken and written feedback/information are
provided.
The intervention appeared eﬀective in promoting HPV-
vaccination acceptability and informed decision-making, and
appeared to have potential for broad scale dissemination and
implementation (74). This intervention blueprint will aid in
interpreting the results of our evaluation studies (74). In addition,
it provides insight into causal mechanisms, which contributes
to theory development (3, 4, 7–9). Moreover, it will ease the
comparison of design rationales across interventions (e.g., for
reviews and replication of studies) (5–7). Finally, it provides leads
for the development of other eHealth interventions (1, 4).

Advantages of IM
We believe that using IM greatly contributed to the intervention
being eﬀective in promoting HPV-vaccination acceptability and
informed decision-making among mothers of invited girls.
First, by developing the intervention in a systematic manner,

we ensured a solid theoretical and empirical foundation for
the intervention [cf. (10)]. For decisions to be made about
methods/applications that lack a solid ground of consensus in
the research literature, we were able to pre-test the impact
of alternative prototypes before ﬁnalizing and testing the full
operational intervention.
Furthermore, according to IM, it is imperative that members
of the target group are involved in the development of
the intervention (10). However, currently, in many eHealth
interventions, the design of the intervention is based on
assumptions that are not validated with input from end-users.
In fact, the importance of formative research and pretesting of
materials is often being overlooked. The resulting intervention
may therefore lack key features, and subsequent evaluations
of the eﬀectiveness of the interventions may be compromised
(78). Therefore, we applied a user-centered design by extensively
involving mothers in the intervention development from the
beginning to the end (64). This was done by conducting focus
groups and online experimental pretests, in which we gathered

11

feedback from representatives of the target group. This iterative
process of development and feedback guided our attempt to
gradually improve the solution we had to oﬀer for reaching the
intended objectives. In other words, erroneous or inconclusive
decisions can thoughtfully be changed or reversed in order
to prevent the ﬁnal intervention from being at odds with the
objectives set beforehand. An example illustrating this is our
decision to remove a component targeting anticipated regret
from the intervention as it clearly evoked resistance as shown by
the focus groups. Based on the feedback from the focus groups
(Step 4), we changed the method targeting anticipated regret
(Step 3), and pretested the intervention again (Step 4). Thus, we
moved back and forth between the steps. Furthermore, not only
did we ﬁne-tune the content of the intervention to the mothers’
preferences, but also the design of the website was chosen by
the mothers. Hence, we adapted the entire intervention to the
requirements and preferences of the mothers.
Next to maximizing the likelihood of success, using IM
has made the process of intervention development explicit
and transparent, providing a road map of the decision-making
process and its main outcomes. This will suit the interpretation of
strengths and weaknesses of the intervention when looking at the
results from the outcome evaluation (Step 6) (74). It also enables
the owner to improve the intervention where necessary and
others to replicate the steps described when developing a similar
intervention for diﬀerent populations and/or settings (79).

Design Rationales in eHealth
Recently, it has been argued that eHealth researchers should
publish descriptions of interventions and results from evaluation
studies separately in order to gain a better understanding of
what exactly is being evaluated, facilitate comparison between
interventions, and extend the evidence base for the development
of future interventions (80, 81). The current paper complies
to this call and adds to the plea for systematic and detailed
descriptions of design rationales in the eHealth ﬁeld. Systematic
descriptions may improve the quality of future systematic reviews
that assess the link between design features and outcomes of an
intervention (6, 82, 83). These reviews, in turn, can be used as a
guide for eHealth researchers in designing future interventions
with improved eﬃcacy, reach, and user acceptability (81).

Limitations
Although we believe that using IM has greatly contributed to
the intervention being eﬀective in promoting HPV-vaccination
acceptability, we agree with other authors that IM is a
complex and time-consuming process (84–86). However, we
are convinced that the development of the intervention was
brought to a higher level by IM. Moreover, we believe that the
experience we gained may improve eﬃcacy of the process and

make it less time-consuming in future intervention development.
We can proﬁt from this experience when developing similar
interventions for a diﬀerent population (e.g., an intervention
promoting HPV-vaccination among Dutch boys).

Conclusion
In this article, we provide a detailed, comprehensive description
of how we systematically developed an intervention promoting
HPV-vaccination acceptability. Using IM led to an innovative and
eﬀective intervention using interactive Web-based computer-
tailored education. This intervention blueprint will aid in
interpreting the results of our evaluation studies. Moreover, it
will ease comparisons of design rationales across interventions,
and may provide leads for the development of other eHealth
interventions. Overall, this paper adds to the plea for systematic
reporting of design rationales constituting the process of
developing interventions, and the development of a cumulative
science of interventions in the eHealth ﬁeld.

ETHICS STATEMENT

The study was approved by the Medical Ethical Committee
(METC), the ethical committee of the VU Medical Center in
Amsterdam. Informed consent was provided online for the
online studies (i.e., the three experimental pretests, the online
focus group and the RCT). For the focus groups, participants
provided written consent.

MP contributed to study conception and design, acquisition
of data, analysis, and interpretation of data, and drafting of
manuscript. HvK, TP, and RR contributed to study conception
and design, interpretation of data and revising the manuscript
critically. AH and HdM contributed to study conception and
design and revising the manuscript critically. HvV critically
revised the manuscript. All authors approved the ﬁnal version of
the manuscript to be published.