Case Report

Development of a computer-aided text message platform
for user engagement with a digital Diabetes Prevention
Program: a case study

Danissa V. Rodriguez
1, Katharine Lawrence
1, Son Luu1, Jonathan L. Yu1,
Dawn M. Feldthouse
2, Javier Gonzalez2, and Devin Mann1,2

1Department of Population Health, NYU Grossman School of Medicine, New York, New York, USA and 2Medical Center Informa-
tion Technology, NYU Langone Health, New York, New York, USA

Received 28 January 2021; Revised 3 September 2021; Editorial Decision 6 September 2021; Accepted 9 September 2021

ABSTRACT

Digital Diabetes Prevention Programs (dDPP) are novel mHealth applications that leverage digital features such
as tracking and messaging to support behavior change for diabetes prevention. Despite their clinical effective-
ness, long-term engagement to these programs remains a challenge, creating barriers to adherence and mean-
ingful health outcomes. We partnered with a dDPP vendor to develop a personalized automatic message sys-
tem (PAMS) to promote user engagement to the dDPP platform by sending messages on behalf of their primary
care provider. PAMS innovates by integrating into clinical workﬂows. User-centered design (UCD) methodolo-
gies in the form of iterative cycles of focus groups, user interviews, design workshops, and other core UCD ac-
tivities were utilized to deﬁned PAMS requirements. PAMS uses computational tools to deliver theory-based,
automated, tailored messages, and content to support patient use of dDPP. In this article, we discuss the design
and development of our system, including key requirements and features, the technical architecture and build,
and preliminary user testing.

Key words: mHealth, digital diabetes prevention, mobile health, software development, digital prescription engagement, digital
health

INTRODUCTION

Over 80 million US adults are considered to have prediabetes. With-
out treatment, an estimated 15–30% will develop type 2 diabetes
within 5 years.1 Diabetes Prevention Programs (DPP) have been
shown to be effective in preventing the progression to diabetes
through behavior change strategies such as weight loss, dietary
changes, and exercise.2,3 The DPP curriculum has been successfully
adapted to a variety of digital DPP (dDPP), which offer an alterna-
tive to delivering in-person diabetes prevention education,4 and
have been shown to be effective at promoting weight loss and reduc-
ing diabetes risks for users.5–7

Despite the potential of dDPP to improve health outcomes,8–10

sustained engagement and adherence with digital programs remains
a challenge, and low rates of retention and program completion rep-
resent a major barrier to effective implementation and success.11–13

Evidence supports the role of communications tools such as text
messages in improving engagement and outcomes with digital health
applications14–16; however, significant gaps remain between messag-
ing communications platforms and their integration into clinical
workflow and practices of clinicians, including the electronic health
record (EHR).17 This results in missed opportunities for comprehen-
sive care delivery in diabetes prevention, particularly in the primary

V
C The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the American Medical Informatics Association.

155

Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, 29(1), 2022, 155–162

doi: 10.1093/jamia/ocab206
Advance Access Publication Date: 19 October 2021

Case Report

care environment, where technology barriers to comprehensive dia-
betes prevention counseling and care are compounded by time con-
straints, knowledge gaps, and resource limitations.18

In this article, we present the development of a novel integrated
multicomponent communications platform to promote patient-
provider communication and patient engagement in digital diabetes
prevention programs. Components of this intervention include (1) a
theory-driven behavior change library, (2) a personalized automatic
message system (PAMS) delivery platform, and (3) EHR-integrated
data visualizations. We hypothesize that tools that integrate
evidence-based digital health applications with patient–provider
communication technologies and health records can improve patient
engagement and adherence to these platforms and have the potential
to improve health outcomes.

PAMS STUDY OVERVIEW AND RESEARCH
DESIGN STRATEGY

The PAMS intervention was designed and developed as part of a fed-
erally funded multiphase research project assessing the impact of
targeted engagement interventions on adherence to dDPP.19 In Phase
1 of the study, which resulted on the development of PAMS, we uti-
lized a user-centered design (UCD) approach to identify the core fea-
tures of the engagement system—including its technical build,
message content, message cadence, and delivery mode—design the
intervention, and test the early prototypes. Phase 2 deploys a single-
armed pilot among patients with prediabetes to assess the prelimi-
nary effectiveness of the intervention and refine the tool. In Phase 3,
a randomized controlled trial (RCT) evaluates the impact of the in-
tervention tool plus the dDPP platform versus the dDPP platform
alone on health outcomes (eg, weight, BMI, hemoglobin A1c) and
engagement in dDPP.19 Institutional Review Board (IRB) approval
was obtained for each phase of the research. This paper focuses on
Phase 1 of the study and its implication in the development of
PAMS.

INTEGRATED FRAMEWORK FOR THE
DEVELOPMENT OF DIGITAL BEHAVIOR CHANGE
INTERVENTIONS

The dDPP engagement intervention uses an integrated framework
that combines established theoretical models for behavior change
with effective digital health implementation strategies in order to
maximize both the evidence-based conditions for behavior change
and the user acceptance and use of a digital health product. This
framework was developed to address critical theory–praxis gaps be-
tween the design of an evidence-based digital health behavior change
intervention, its practical development, its clinical efficacy, and its
successful implementation and use in clinical practice. This unique
combination applies a theory-grounded approach (the Capability,
Opportunity, and Motivation model of behavior change, COM-B)
to the development of digital behavior change interventions while
also leveraging innovative, evidence-based strategies from the fields
of product design (UCD) and software development (agile) to de-
velop solutions that address the individualization and continuous
evolution of optimizations that is required to meet the needs of di-
verse patients over time (see Figure 1).
The underpinning theoretical framework that guides our ap-
proach to digitally mediated behavior change for diabetes preven-
tion is the well-established COM-B model (the “behavior change

wheel”). This model is widely used in behavior change health re-
search and has been proven effective for health interventions target-
ing disease management and prevention, including chronic diseases
such as diabetes and hypertension, as well as modifiable risk factors
such as smoking cessation, weight loss, and physical activity.20–26

We use this model to identify key elements of patient and provider
behavior (specifically, capability, opportunity, and motivation)
around diabetes risk and prevention that may be activated and/or
suppressed to elicit targeted actions and effect behavior change. To
execute the design and practical development of our engagement in-
tervention system around the behavior change domains identified by
COM-B, we employ complementary strategies of UCD for capturing
user feedback along the intervention process, and agile software de-
velopment for modeling the software development part of the study.
UCD uses repeating cycles of ideation, prototyping, testing, and re-
finement to develop targeted digital health products in collaboration
with end-users (eg, patients, providers, health administrators, tech-
nologists) that reflect their needs, preferences, and concerns for use.
Agile is a process derived from software development that involves
the identification and review of key requirements (eg, needs, prefer-
ences of users) and the continuous generation and refinement of par-
tial deliverables for stakeholders and end-users. Both UCD (and the
related Design Thinking process) and agile have been identified as
effective strategies for digital product development in health care27–

30; their application facilitates the development of targeted, accept-
able, and adaptable digital health interventions, thereby improving
the likelihood of both effectiveness and adoption and adherence by
users28,29 and refinement of partial deliverables for stakeholders and
end-users. Applying the strategies of UCD and agile facilitates the
development of targeted, acceptable, and adaptable digital health
interventions, thereby improving the likelihood of both effectiveness
and adoption and adherence by users.28,29

PAMS TECHNICAL DEVELOPMENT

The technical development of PAMS follows an agile software de-
velopment approach based on an incremental process where feature-
based builds are delivered in iterative cycles of 2 weeks (sprints).
Each iterative cycle consists of requirement planning, design, devel-
opment, and testing of a specific set of functional features, making
sure each subsequent iterations incorporates improvements based on
user feedback.
To develop and evaluate PAMS in clinical context, we partnered
with Noom, a prominent commercially available dDPP mobile ap-
plication (“app”) that provides the evidence-based CDC-based dia-
betes prevention curriculum through tailored lesson plans, tracking
features (eg, meals, exercise and physical activity, and weight), and
virtual group and individual coaching support. The Noom curricu-
lum is derived from the DPP, which itself represents an amalgam-
ation of behavior change strategies designed to promote behavior
modifications to improve self-management of diabetes risk factors.31

Studies of Noom have demonstrated high levels of effectiveness and
acceptability compared with in-person DPPs and have been shown
to help patients both lose weight and prevent the progression to dia-
betes.32–34

Rationale for “in-house” PAMS build
Prior to the decision to build PAMS, a Request for Information was
issued to 5 different vendors with experience in establishing commu-
nication with patients via mobile devices, including short message

156

service (SMS) and graphics intercharge format (Gif). Vendor
responses were evaluated based upon various criteria with 4 of criti-
cal importance; enterprise architecture integration; alignment with
IT infrastructure and strategy; scalability; and robust customer suc-
cess support. Based on the evaluation criteria, very few vendors met
requirements at a desired cost. Potential outcomes of PAMS devel-
opment may include unique components and innovative applica-
tions that could expand our research beyond supporting dDPP, to
explore potential solutions in other healthcare problem areas. As a
result, the decision was to build PAMS in-house to achieve the most
cost-effective solution with more control and flexibility for customi-
zation to support specific research objectives. At a minimum, for the
initial phase of the study with a limited number of patient partici-
pants, it was within our internal capability to build PAMS that will
meet all early-stage requirements. Yet, gaining a good understanding
of existing vendors’ capabilities at this time can help inform our de-
cision in the future as research priorities and technical requirements
for PAMS evolve over time.

PAMS content and features development
The core components of PAMS were identified, prototyped, and
evaluated among key stakeholders through a series of semistructured
group and individual interviews, design thinking workshops, and
user testing sessions during Phase 1 of the study. Stakeholders in-
cluded patients with prediabetes, primary care providers (PCPs),
health technologists, behavioral change theorists, and product devel-
opers and coaches. Table 1 outlines the various data collection
methodologies, insights, and core PAMS features and requirements.
To develop the language and content of the PAMS system as
well as initial PAMS features to be transformed in technical require-
ments, we applied the “double diamond” framework from Design
Thinking to drive the theory and empirically driven development of
our intervention35 (see Figure 2). Key features of the double dia-

mond method include both divergent (eg, discover, develop) and
convergent (eg, define, deliver) stages of intervention development
and iteration. In divergent stages, message content was creatively ex-
plored and developed among various stakeholders (eg, patients, pro-
viders, content experts), using strategies such as content workshops,
personas, and brainstorming sessions. In convergent stages, mes-
sages were reviewed by content and theory experts (eg, dDPP
coaches, behavior change theorists), refined, and compared to rele-
vant behavior change theories and techniques.
From this work, a complete library of theoretically and empiri-
cally derived messages was developed. Messages were periodically
reviewed by stakeholders and tested in near-live and live environ-
ments for feedback, which were used to refine and add messaging
content. Sample messages and their associated behavior change de-
terminant20 grouping, and technique20 are shown in Table 2.

PAMS technical requirements
Following the data collection period, a set of user requirements were
written to guide the development of PAMs and then refined to iden-
tify the “minimum viable product” (MVP) that was developed,
piloted, and further refined.30,36 The initial requirements document
was divided into small portions and deliverables of the system were
presented periodically for further revisions and to address possible
changes as agile development suggests.37 Main requirements involve
the capacity to query, store, and safely manipulate patients’ data;
calculate engagement levels; categorize patients’ according to en-
gagement level; read, store, and manipulate a behavioral science-
based message pool; send personalized messages based on patients’
engagement, and generate a reporting dashboard for providers. As
part of the requirements, high-security data manipulation standards
need to be applied. All data consumed and generated by PAMS need
to be strictly documented, organized, and stored for future evalua-
tion. PAMS would also be able to provide necessary data to

Figure 1. Theoretical model that supports the design and development of PAMS. PAMS: personalized automatic message system.

157

researchers on the effect of messages in achieving engagement for
further analysis. Message content was developed based upon
insights from user research activities and refined based upon clinical
content experts to achieve engagement.

PAMS architectural design
Internal PAMS functionality includes data collection, data analysis,
message selection, and message delivery processes. PAMS has a
modular design where each module is independent and governs a
specific activity or functionality within the system. Figure 3 illus-
trates PAMS architectural design. The blue-highlighted area in the
figure represents PAMS itself, to include the associated modules, we

use symbols. Components outside the blue-highlighted area are ex-
ternal systems and operations that interact with PAMS. These in-
clude external applications and research activities that produce data
to support PAMS’ functionalities or utilize data coming from
PAMS. Arrows in the figure show directions of data flows.
The patient registration module checks the Noom application
programming interface (API) to verify if our patients have registered
to the dDPP vendor and updates patients’ information in RedCap.
The Noom data processor module, which is triggered weekly,
queries raw data from the dDPP vendor (Noom), processes it, and
extracts meaningful information such as achieved values for exer-
cise, meals, group activities, messages, and weight. The engagement
calculator receives preprocessed data from the Noom data processor

Table 1. Data collection methodologies, insights, and core PAMS features and requirements

Method
Participants (N)
Key outputs

Stakeholder focus groups, interviews
Intervention content
Timing, cadence
EHR integration

Patients, nonpatient users (3)
Content experts (2)
Technologists (2)
Clinicians (4)

Messaging content library
Optimal modality (SMS)
Message personalization, targeting
Noom features for performance tracking
Design workshop
User experience
Design, layout

Multiple stakeholders (10)
Tone, frequency of messages
Other message elements (GIFs, links)

Content expert review
Behavior change strategies/technique
Content validation

Behavior change theorists (2)
Digital health experts (2)
Noom coaches (3)

Positive versus negative reinforcement
Social comparison, support
Need for internal data review Visualizations
User testing
Usability
User experience
Technical issues

Patients (9)
Research team (5)
Technical troubleshooting, support
Two-way message capability
Additional personalization
Noom integrations

EHR, electronic health record; PAMS: personalized automatic message system.

Figure 2. The dDPP “double diamond”—data collection methodologies, insights, and core PAMS content and features. PAMS: personalized automatic message
system.

158

module and it uses 3 different algorithms to generate an engagement
score. This engagement score or adherence value is consumed by the
message selector module which governs categorizing patients
according to different engagement level categories/trends such as
newly low, newly high, persistent high, and persistent low engager,
and selects the message to be sent based on the patient’s recent
trends and phase of the user journey. This module provides data to
the patient outreach which is in charge of preparing the text content
to be passed to Twilio (eg, the SMS gateway) API. Incoming mes-
sages are managed by the patient outreach module. PAMS has a cal-
endar
feature
called
PAMS
schedule
which
sends
messages
according to defined time rules such as birthdays, 1 week after the
start of the program, 3 months into the program, and so on, to com-
plement user engagement. PAMS has a number of databases for
storing data consumed and produced by the modules. Databases
store the message pools, patient engagement data, and a registry of

messages sent and received. PAMS has a researcher dashboard that
enables monitoring of the participants’ journey, retrieval, and analy-
sis of data, as well as idea generation for optimizations to PAMS.
As part of the PAMS and EHR integration, the Epic provider
dashboard allows PCPs to follow the diabetes prevention journey,
evaluate the impact of messages on engagement levels, and make de-
cision about new strategies to help patients meet their goals. This
dashboard is embedded into the Epic platform to facilitate accessi-
bility, and it supports provider–patient communication. Provider
dashboard design is the result of an interview process to better serve
provider’s needs.

PAMS technical build
Amazon web services (AWS) were utilized for the development of
PAMS.38 With our microservice approach design using an event-

Table 2. Sample PAMS messaging library

Behavior change grouping (technique)
Message content

Self-belief (Focus on past success)
Hello [name]. This is Dr. [drname] and the dDPP team. It looks like
you’ve been regularly active in logging your Noom activities. Keep it
up.
Feedback and monitoring (Feedback on behavior)
Hello [name]. In reviewing your Noom activity, it seems you’ve been
less engaged in Noom recently. Have your healthy behaviors changed?
(1/2) Keep tracking your work, so your healthcare team can help sup-
port you. If you need support, reach out to your coaches or Noom
community—they are here to help you stay committed. (2/2)
Comparison of behavior (Social comparison)
Did you know—Noom users who log at least one weight, record one
exercise activity, read one lesson, and talk to their coaches at least
once a week are meeting the CDC recommendations for success in
healthy lifestyle change? Take a look at what you’ve accomplished this
week.
Repetition and substitution (Habit formation)
Hi [name]. Keeping a record of your work during the week is a good
way to build healthy habits and keep track of what you are working
toward. Take some time to log your Noom activities this week.
Goals and planning (Goal setting)
Hi [name]. This is the dDPP Research Team. Please remember to log
your Noom activities next week—staying active in the dDPP program
will also help you stay healthy!

PAMS: personalized automatic message system.

Figure 3. PAMS architectural design. PAMS: personalized automatic message system.

159

driven model,39–40 the main components of PAMS are AWS Lambda
functions which are triggered by different events such as updates to
S3 buckets, modifications on DynamoDB tables, or CloudWatch
events. The versatility of Lambda functions allows for collaboration
among developers. Since all the microservices communicate using
events, they are fully functional as a module, and they abstract pro-
gramming languages intercommunication and data transferring.
Most of the Lambda functions were developed using Python or Scala
programming languages. Lambda functions produce and consume
events that allow the total integration of the system. Lambdas read
and write in our databases to manipulate and update data. External
interactions of PAMS use API calls, which secure effective data
transfer.

PAMS automation
The initial stage of the study involved highly manual processes illus-
trated in Figure 4. Given all the required tools, it takes approxi-
mately 50 min for a research staff to perform all data handling steps
and execute SMS triggering for each of the patients on a weekly ba-
sis. With 9 initial study subjects enrolled to support early-stage de-
velopment, manual processing of user data was manageable;
however, as the number of participants increases, manual processing
would quickly become unsustainable. Study documentation has also
shown instances of human errors. PAMS went through rigorous test-
ing to ensure zero errors and system bugs while automating all the
features in Figure 4.
Another important factor that makes the automation capability
of PAMS promising is the ability to access patient engagement infor-
mation, which typically is not readily available. PAMS abstracts the
implementation of features in Figure 4 and presents an integrated
dashboard in Epic with the relevant information for PCPs such as
engagement data including health outcomes, patient’s category, and
messages sent. Providers can then provide support tailored to each
patient’s behavior change journey, enabled by auto-triggered SMS
capability. PAMS has the potential to allow for providing additional
support outside of in-person visits, without significant time commit-
ment from PCPs. This potential has been uncovered from user re-
search insights that identified an opportunity to incorporate dDPP
workflows into existing provider workflows as a way to operation-
alize this protocol. This has been achieved through the development
and integration of dDPP tools within the EHR system. Such time-
consuming manual activities would incur significantly high cost
when considering tailored care for a large patient base developing

healthy self-care behaviors. Due to PCP time constraints, manual
manipulation of patient data is not feasible and PAMS provides a
time-friendly, promising, and effective solution.

DISCUSSION

Current status and future directions
Currently, the first version of PAMS has been deployed into produc-
tion status; PAMS 1.0 includes the MVP. A second phase of develop-
ment is planned for refining PAMS features and expanding its
functionality, which will be deployed in the single-arm pilot (Phase
2) of the study. Further iterations based on learning from Phase 2
will be incorporated into the final product, to be deployed in the
RCT (Phase 3). Additional features and functionality of PAMS iden-
tified to be potentially deployed in future phases include flexible
rules for triggering messages, a smart chatbot, an improved provider
dashboard, and increasing capacity for individual message content
and delivery personalization.
Further future development includes a more intelligent approach
utilizing machine learning (ML) for providing the smart-driven se-
lection criterion for messages to dynamically address patients’ needs
and find better engagement results is also planned for development
during Phase 3.41–43 The goal for PAMS 2.0 is to incorporate ML to
select the messages that positively impacted some patients and iden-
tify the common characteristic to extend findings to new patients.
The ML classifier is planned to be trained with features such as mes-
sages score given by patients from 1 to 5 where 5 represent the high-
est positive feedback, message impact in the patient engagement
represented by the engagement trend followed by the text, and data
patient demographics data (legal sex, race, employment status, age).
Data related to message scores will be used for the ML classifier and
are currently being collected as part of PAMS 1.0. Finally, Phase 2
and 3 will focus on the implementation of the PAMS intervention,
with a focus on implementation outcomes (eg, acceptability, sustain-
ability, cost),44 as well as access, equity, and inclusion.

Technical challenges and limitations
During the development of PAMS, some technical difficulties and
limitations were encountered. High data security standards were
enforced, which introduced challenges with some AWS features and
interoperability across platforms. Some inbound requests and data
transfers were blocked by the firewall as an attempt to secure data,
challenging the Twilio-AWS connection for the reception of the in-

Figure 4. Manual versus automatic PAMS data manipulation. PAMS: personalized automatic message system.

160

coming messages and the AWS-Epic integration for the secure de-
ployment of the provider dashboard; protected health information
(PHI) data were also carefully handle to overcome enforced AWS se-
curity standards such as the restriction of storing sensitive data on
dynamo databases or s3 buckets; and times delays in updating builds
that are dependent on third parties such as with Epic. Our develop-
ment team worked diligently to overcome these challenges and pre-
sent alternative solutions to achieve the desired results while
maintaining data integrity such as allowing AWS to securely check
external API instead of allowing inbound call, securing PHI data in
RedCap, and actively working with third party teams. PAMS is the
result of an ongoing study aiming to design a platform that
addresses user feedback and learnings, frequent changes challenged
the efficiency of our small development team, but PAMS modular
design facilitated the delivery of the system on time.

CONCLUSION

PAMS is an innovative message platform developed using UCD and
agile methodologies to provide a user-friendly and effective mecha-
nism to address challenges with engaging patients with a digital dia-
betes prevention platform and healthy behavior change. Integrating
evidence-based behavior change theories for the prevention of dis-
ease with UCD strategies and novel digital technology development
systems can facilitate the development of dynamic, usable, and effec-
tive digital health tools. PAMS is built to be applicable to a variety
of dDPP platforms and EHR partners, and meets with strict data se-
curity and PHI standards, and has potential applications to a
broader spectrum of healthcare conditions and technology interven-
tions. The design of PAMS encourages scalability of the system and
the easy integration of further modules and iterations as part of on-
going research, which allows for continued iteration and innovation
with an eye toward maximizing effectiveness and use while minimiz-
ing disruptions to patient experience or care. Future versions of
PAMS will involve the inclusion of ML and refined features of
PAMS 1.0, as well as more general research to explore continuous
personalization of the patient experience, its integration with other
digital health tools, and its impact on patient outcomes.