Original Paper

Refinement of a Parent–Child Shared Asthma Management Mobile
Health App: Human-Centered Design Study

Jennifer Sonney1,2, PhD, APRN; Emily E Cho2, MS; Qiming Zheng2, MS; Julie A Kientz2, PhD

1Department of Child, Family, and Population Health Nursing, School of Nursing, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States
2Department of Human Centered Design and Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States

Jennifer Sonney, PhD, APRN
Department of Child, Family, and Population Health Nursing
School of Nursing
University of Washington
1959 NE Pacific Street
Box 357262
Seattle, WA, 98195
United States
Phone: 1 206 685 2161

Abstract

Background: 
The school-age years, approximately ages 7 through 11, represent a natural transition when children begin
assuming some responsibility for their asthma management. Previously, we designed a theoretically derived, tailored parent–child
shared asthma management mobile health app prototype, Improving Asthma Care Together (IMPACT).
Objective: The purpose of this study was to use human-centered design (HCD) to iteratively refine IMPACT to optimize user
experience and incorporate evidence-based longitudinal engagement strategies.
Methods: This study used a mixed methods design from December 2019 to April 2021. Our app refinement used the HCD
process of research, ideation, design, evaluation, and implementation, including 6 cycles of design and evaluation. The design
and evaluation cycles focused on core app functionality, child engagement, and overall refinement. Evaluation with parent–child
dyads entailed in-person and remote concept testing and usability testing sessions, after which rapid cycle thematic analyses
identified key insights that informed future design refinement.
Results: Twelve parent–child dyads enrolled in at least one round of this study. Eight of the 12 child participants were male
with a mean age of 9.9 (SD 1.6) years and all parent participants were female. Throughout evaluation cycles, dyads selected
preferred app layouts, gamification concepts, and overall features with a final design prototype emerging for full-scale development
and implementation.
Conclusions: A theoretically derived, evidence-based shared asthma management app was co-designed with end users to address
real-world pain points and priorities. An 8-week pilot study testing app feasibility, acceptability, and preliminary efficacy is
forthcoming.

(JMIR Pediatr Parent 2022;5(1):e34117) doi: 10.2196/34117

KEYWORDS
parent–child shared management; school-age children; asthma; participatory design; mHealth; prototype; usability; family health
informatics

Introduction

Over 5 million children in the United States have asthma,
making it the most common chronic condition of childhood [1].
Asthma management is largely dependent upon symptom
recognition, monitoring, and response as well as timely and

appropriate medication use [2,3]. Despite national asthma
management guidelines, it is estimated that over 50% of US
children with asthma are uncontrolled, placing them at higher
risk of exacerbation and poorer outcomes [4]. Childhood asthma
exacerbations account for 767,000 emergency department visits,
74,000 hospitalizations, and 13.8 million missed school days

JMIR Pediatr Parent 2022 | vol. 5 | iss. 1 | e34117 | p. 1

annually [1]. As a consequence, children with poor asthma
control and their parents experience lower quality of life and
negative academic and work performance [5-7].

The school-age years, approximately ages 7 through 11,
represent a natural transition in asthma management
responsibility. School-age children must start assuming some
responsibility for asthma-related care as they spend increasing
time away from parents at school and other extracurricular
activities [8]. Unfortunately, there is frequent disagreement
between parents and children with respect to asthma symptom
frequency and severity, asthma management practices, and
overall level of control, with parents often reporting fewer
symptoms, higher medication adherence, and better control than
their children [9-12]. This disagreement may be contributing
to an overestimation of childhood asthma control and subsequent
undertreatment. Careful and deliberate parent–child shared
asthma responsibility improves asthma symptom assessment,
medication adherence, and overall asthma control [13-15]. A
critical gap among existing asthma management interventions
is the failure to account for and facilitate shared management
responsibility. A parent–child shared asthma management
solution is needed to facilitate optimal comanagement of asthma
and to prepare the child to assume increasing asthma
management responsibility.

With an estimated 85% of US adults owning a smartphone [16]
and 69% tracking their health online [17], the ubiquity of
smartphones has led to an explosion of mobile health (mHealth)
self-management apps. Among adults with asthma, effective
mHealth interventions combine medical guidelines, personalized
self-monitoring, and behavior change techniques [18-20].
Presently, there are far fewer mHealth asthma apps for youth,
with the majority specifically designed for adolescents [21-23].
While many of these apps have demonstrated preliminary
efficacy [23], they are designed to support self-management
versus parent–child shared asthma management, which limits
their utility in school-age children. Among the apps specifically
developed for children, they are almost entirely focused on
education rather than engaging the child in assuming some
responsibility for monitoring their own health [21]. While
school-age children are often familiar with using a smartphone,
only an estimated 17% of US children have their own
smartphone [24], therefore an app designed for a parent and
child to use together to support asthma management represents
an important area of opportunity. To that end, there is now a
need for mHealth interventions that leverage lessons learned
from the adult literature and are specifically designed to facilitate
parent–child shared management of asthma.

Human-centered design (HCD) is an approach to participatory
design wherein end users are engaged throughout the iterative
design process [25,26]. Previously, we reported on our use of
HCD to develop a preliminary prototype of a parent–child shared
asthma management mHealth intervention and companion
wearable device [27]. The prototype features and functions were
developed to address asthma management needs and priorities
identified by parent–child dyads. These app features and
functions were also evaluated and approved by an asthma
clinician to ensure they aligned with the national asthma
management guidelines [2,3]. Likewise, the prototype was

theoretically derived from Social Cognitive Theory and the
Common Sense Model of Parent–Child Shared Regulation
[28,29]. Social Cognitive Theory stresses that goal setting,
action planning, and self-monitoring are important behavior
change processes. The Common Sense Model of Parent–Child
Shared Regulation emphasizes the contributions that both parent
and child make toward shared management of health. Therefore,
the app was specifically designed for parent–child dyads to use
together to facilitate shared management; each week, parents
and children select a small, achievable shared management goal,
review goal-specific guidance, anticipate barriers, and monitor
their goal progress on the subsequent week. Notably, this
original prototype prioritized the integration of behavior change,
personalized self-monitoring, and medical guidelines [27,30].

The true viability of any mHealth behavior change intervention
app is dependent upon ongoing use. While our study team
iteratively developed the features and functions of the original
app prototype, in-depth usability testing of user experience (UX)
and subsequent design iteration were beyond the scope of the
original project. Refinement was necessary to ensure that the
UX was optimized. Similarly, the literature has clearly shown
that overall mHealth app engagement wanes over time, thus
limiting the potential efficacy of any app [31]. Given that this
mHealth app was designed to function as a behavioral health
intervention, integration of engagement strategies was also
necessary to promote longitudinal engagement with app.
Therefore, before proceeding to full-scale app development and
pilot testing, the purpose of this study was to use HCD to refine
the original parent–child shared asthma management mHealth
prototype, Improving Asthma Care Together (IMPACT), to
optimize UX and engagement. The specific aims were to (1)
assess and iteratively refine the mHealth app based upon
usability findings, (2) incorporate longitudinal engagement
strategies within the app, and (3) innovate a home-based
multimodal solution to overcome barriers imposed by the
COVID-19 pandemic.

Methods

Design and Sample

This study used a mixed methods design and included a series
of design-evaluation cycles from December 2019 to April 2021.
Study recruitment occurred from December 2019 to December
2020. A convenience sample of fourteen 7- to 11-year-old
children with asthma and one of their parents was recruited from
the principal investigator’s (JS) research database, which
includes parent–child dyads who have participated in previous
studies for school-age children with asthma. Recruitment for
these prior studies included flyer distribution by school nurses
as well as study flyer posting in pediatric provider offices,
community locations (eg, libraries, Boys and Girls clubs), and
social media. Child eligibility included (1) age 7-11 years, (2)
parent-reported 
asthma 
diagnosis, 
(3) 
parent-reported
prescription for daily asthma medication, and (4) able to speak
and understand English. The prescription for daily asthma
medication was used as a proxy to indicate persistent asthma,
considered more severe than intermittent or exercise-induced
asthma [3]. Parent/caregiver inclusion criteria included (1) 18

JMIR Pediatr Parent 2022 | vol. 5 | iss. 1 | e34117 | p. 2

years or older, (2) child’s primary caregiver, (3) able to
understand and read English, (4) reside with the child for at
least 50% of the time, and (5) a legal guardian who may consent
for the child to participate. Exclusion criteria included prior
participation in the original prototype development as well as
current asthma exacerbation, such as wheezing or respiratory
distress, as this is a serious health event that requires careful
monitoring and would distract dyads from participation.
However, dyads were eligible to participate once the
exacerbation resolved.

Ethics

The University of Washington Human Subjects Division
reviewed this study and deemed it as exempt (#00003144).
Written informed consent was obtained from all parent
participants, on behalf of themselves and their child, and assent
from all child participants.

Original IMPACT Prototype

IMPACT was designed to serve as an asthma monitoring system
as well as behavioral intervention to promote parent–child
shared asthma management. The original IMPACT prototype
comprised 3 key features: asthma symptom tracking, asthma
control (measured by the Childhood Asthma Control Test or
C-ACT [32]), and asthma shared management goal setting and
progress reporting. Child-reported asthma symptom events are
tracked with the app dashboard in graphical format. Likewise,
the app was designed to prompt parent–child dyads to complete

the C-ACT weekly, with scores visualized over time in the app
dashboard. Finally, each week, parent–child dyads would select
1 or 2 asthma shared management goals that were provided by
the app. The following week, dyads would report on their goal
progress. Overall, shared management was supported by
gradually transferring asthma management responsibility to the
child while supported and supervised by the parent. Within the
app, the parent–child dyad selects a weekly asthma management
task or activity for which the child will begin assuming
responsibility. Goal-specific guidance and support (when
available) are provided, such as scheduling medication
reminders, to assist the dyad with achieving the goal. Such
intentional shifting of asthma management responsibility
through mutual goal setting ensures the child learns critical
management tasks and skills while supported by the parent
[9,10,29].

App Refinement Process

Overview

A hallmark of HCD is design iteration that follows a cyclic as
opposed to linear process (Figure 1). The core study team
included a designer (QZ), a pediatric asthma clinician-scientist
(JS), a UX researcher (EEC), and a senior HCD expert (JAK).
This study followed the HCD process steps: research, ideate,
design, evaluate, and implement to refine the IMPACT prototype
and incorporate longitudinal engagement strategies [25,33]. The
app refinement process required numerous cycles of design and
evaluation, which is expected in HCD.

Figure 1. Human Centered Design Process.

Research

During this phase, our team conducted a scoping literature
review of mHealth app engagement strategies. Next, our team
conducted a market research review to understand existing apps
designed for use by school-age children, including health- and

non-health–related apps. We then assessed the extent to which
existing 
asthma 
apps 
facilitated 
parent–child 
shared
management.

JMIR Pediatr Parent 2022 | vol. 5 | iss. 1 | e34117 | p. 3

Ideation

The ideation phase of HCD entails generating ideas and
solutions to address user needs and priorities [33]. To guide our
work in designing for engagement, our team conducted a
literature review of common approaches to promoting app
engagement [18,24,30,34,35]. Based upon this review, our team
decided to incorporate gamification to promote app engagement
and subsequently adopted the Octalysis Framework for
Gamification and Behavioral Design [36]. Guided by the concept
of motivation from social psychology, the Octalysis Framework
intentionally accounts for intrinsic, extrinsic, positive, and
negative motivations. Intrinsic motivation refers to activities
performed out of pure enjoyment with no tangible rewards,
whereas extrinsic motivation refers to behaviors performed in
pursuit of tangible external rewards [37,38]. Positive motivators
stimulate positive emotions such as joy, satisfaction, and a sense
of meaning, whereas negative motivators may elicit feelings
such as surprise, fear, or concern for a loss of progress or reward.
The Octalysis Framework is depicted as an octagon with each

side representing 1 of 8 core drives (CDs) of motivation (Figure
2) [36]. CDs associated with extrinsic motivation (CD 2, 4, 6)
are located to the left of the model, whereas those associated
with intrinsic motivation are represented on the right (CD 3, 5,
7). Positive motivators are located at the top of the model (CD
1, 2, 3), whereas the bottom portion of the model represents
negative motivators (CD 6, 7, 8; Figure 2).

Guided by the Octalysis Framework, the study team conducted
brainstorming sessions for new features and enhancements of
the IMPACT app, using rough sketches and short descriptions
to communicate and align ideas across the team. Next, we
employed affinity mapping, where ideas were grouped into
themes, and team members ultimately voted on their top
engagement ideas. Finally, we used effort versus impact matrices
to prioritize design ideas and refinements. Although parent–child
dyads were not engaged in the initial ideation phase, their
feedback from subsequent stages, including new app features
or concepts, were prioritized in future design iterations (see the
“Results” section for details).

Figure 2. Octalysis framework and core drive motivations. Adapted, with permission, from [38].

Design

The original mHealth IMPACT app prototype was developed
using Figma, a digital design and prototyping platform that
supports the prototyping spectrum from wireframes through
high-fidelity interactive prototypes (Figma, Inc). Given that the
original prototype was housed within Figma, the designer (QZ)
continued to use Figma for subsequent design ideas to facilitate
a cohesive UX. During the design phase, the designer digitally
drafted the prioritized design ideas, usually providing 2 or 3
variations. The study team reviewed the designs together and
typically selected 2 versions to move forward to user testing in
the evaluation phase. The inclusion of the asthma
clinician-scientist study team member during such early design
stages ensured that prospective designs represented asthma
management best practices. As is depicted in Figure 1, numerous
rounds of design and evaluation occurred as the app was
progressively refined. Initial design rounds used low-fidelity

wireframes to depict the basic app structure (information
architecture) and functionality (eg, screens showing paths users
take, or “user flows”). Later design rounds focused on visual
design and microinteractions of the app features, which
necessitated high-fidelity prototyping within Figma.

Evaluate

The study team used numerous techniques within the evaluation
stage, including concept testing, usability testing, and
semistructured interviews [33,39,40]. Concept testing entails
seeking feedback and preferences from users about specific
concepts and designs. For example, presenting different layouts
of a dashboard to determine which was more effective for users,
a technique known as parallel prototyping [41]. We also used
card sorting, which entailed presenting numerous feature options
generated from the ideation phase to users and asking them to
categorize their preferences in order of importance.

JMIR Pediatr Parent 2022 | vol. 5 | iss. 1 | e34117 | p. 4

Usability testing, by contrast, was used to test specific tasks
within the app to determine whether users were able to use the
app as intended [33,39,40]. These tasks are referred to as
“flows,” representing the series of screens users encounter as
they perform a task. Usability sessions were moderated by the
UX researcher (EC) and observed by the designer, which
facilitated understanding user feedback. Through the use of the
“think-aloud” technique, a cognitive interviewing method,
participants were asked to perform a task within the app while
the researcher observed [42]. Users were asked to describe their
use of the app as they performed the tasks, including what they
liked or disliked, what was confusing, and whether they would
change anything. All evaluation sessions also incorporated
semistructured interviews to elicit any user feedback,
suggestions, or other comments.

Following each evaluation session, the UX researcher and
designer debriefed the session and discussed their takeaways
from the session (eg, user preferences for specific designs, or
challenges using a specific flow). As is typical in HCD, each
usability testing cycle was followed by rapid thematic analyses
to identify key insights [25]. Key insights were then translated
into recommended refinements by the UX researcher. These
refinements were prioritized using a common usability scoring
system (1=highest priority, 4=lowest priority) [43]. Level 1
(high priority) items prevent users from completing a task, Level
2 items create a significant delay in task completion, Level 3
have minor effects on usability, and Level 4 (lowest priority)
are subtle with minimal effects. For this project, high-priority
items reflected essential functions, new features, or other
substantive app changes. Substantive design changes always
were tested in a future evaluation cycle. Conversely,
lower-priority items—often minor functionality issues such as
type of clock face or button—were revised without further
testing. Depending on the evaluation findings, the study team
decided to either iterate the design further (re-enter the design
phase) or move the prototype to implementation. We originally
planned 3 cycles of design and evaluation, but as a result of
delayed study timelines due to the COVID-19 pandemic, we
extended our threshold for concluding iterations to Spring 2021.

Implement

Implementation entails handoff of the final designs to the
developer team for full-scale development of the app.
Implementation usually follows numerous rounds of design and
evaluations until a final design emerges.

Procedures for Evaluation and Refinement

As depicted in Figure 1, this study consisted of research,
ideation, numerous design, and evaluation cycles, followed by
implementation. Study participants were directly involved in
evaluation sessions. Procedures for engagement with study
participants during evaluation sessions are herein described.
For each session, the UX researcher generated an evaluation
session plan including introductory script, task planning (concept
testing or usability testing), and open-ended questions for the
semistructured interview. Sessions were planned such that child
activities were prioritized first to retain their attention.

Once the session plan was complete, the UX researcher
contacted the parent of prospective parent–child study
participants in the principal investigator’s research database via
email. Those who were interested scheduled a study session
with the UX researcher. Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, study
sessions were conducted at participant homes or a community
library. Participant use of the Figma prototype app was recorded
using Mr. Tappy (Mr. Tappy), a kit comprising a magnetic base
that attaches to a mobile device with a digital camera on an
adjustable metal arm. The UX researcher was able to view the
user’s actions via the Mr. Tappy browser-based viewer.

During the COVID-19 pandemic, the stay-at-home orders
necessitated to transition to a remote study protocol. All remote
study sessions were conducted via Zoom videoconference
(Zoom Video Communications, Inc.). As an alternative to Mr.
Tappy, which would require mailing to and from participant
homes, the UX researcher would access the Figma app
prototype, share their screen, and enable “remote control” of
their mouse and keyboard. These settings allowed users to freely
control their engagement with the app while Zoom recorded
the session.

Following informed consent and child assent (electronic consent
and assent for remote sessions), the UX researcher moderated
the study session following the session plan while the designer
observed and took notes. Sessions were approximately 60
minutes in duration. Rapid cycle thematic analyses were
completed after each session, as discussed earlier, which
informed the subsequent design refinements. Parent–child dyads
received US $50 digital gift card following each evaluation
session.

Results

Participants

Twelve parent–child dyads enrolled in at least one round of this
study. Eight of the 12 child participants were male with a mean
age of 9.9 (SD 1.6) years. Nine of the child participants
identified as White, 2 as Black, and 1 as mixed race. All of the
parent participants identified as female, which is consistent with
our prior study samples. Nine parent participants identified as
White, 2 as Black, and 1 as mixed race. None of the study
participants identified as Hispanic or Latinx.

Sample sizes for the 6 evaluation cycles ranged from 3 to 6
dyads. Usability best practices call for 4 or 5 participants per
session, which typically will identify 80% of usability problems
[44,45]. Larger samples are generally considered overly
burdensome, redundant, and time-consuming. Parent–child
dyads participated in at least one evaluation session, with 1 dyad
participating in 5 sessions (Table 1). The inclusion of some
dyads in multiple cycles was beneficial as it ensured they were
familiar with the app objectives and core functionality, allowing
them to swiftly focus on new design enhancements and changes.
By contrast, inclusion of novel dyad users within study cycles,
particularly later cycles, ensured we had diverse perspectives
and feedback.

JMIR Pediatr Parent 2022 | vol. 5 | iss. 1 | e34117 | p. 5

Table 1. Dyad participation by evaluation cycle (N=12 parent–child dyads).

Evaluation cycle
Dyad number

1, 3, 4, 5, 6
1

1, 2, 4, 6
2

1, 3, 4, 5, 6
3

4, 5, 6
4

1
5

4
6

5, 6
7

5
8

2
9

1
10

1, 3
11

2, 4
12

Research

Engagement Strategies

We found that gamification, or the incorporation of gaming
elements in nongaming uses, is increasingly employed in the
mHealth market [35,46]. Originating from the videogaming
industry, gamification integrates fun elements and human
motivation to maintain user engagement. Gamification strategies
appear highly variable and dependent upon the user, context,
and activity or goal. Some examples include badges, leader
boards, social engagement, and challenges or quests [35].
Despite this variability, gamification shares the ultimate goal
of motivating users to continue using the app [47].

Existing Apps for Children

Among existing apps for children, we found several common
strategies, including the use of avatars, badges, and streaks.
Similarly, child-facing app designs were streamlined, colorful,
and intuitive with emphasis on visuals. Notably, mHealth apps
designed for childhood asthma were predominantly educational,
affirming our unique perspective targeting parent–child shared
management responsibility.

Ideation

Using the detailed Octalysis Framework (Figure 3), which
provides feature examples mapped to each CD, the study team
brainstormed and then prioritized various concepts that could
be incorporated into our app (Table 2).

Figure 3. Octalysis Framework for gamification and behavioral design. Reproduced, with permission, from [38]. UI: user interface.

JMIR Pediatr Parent 2022 | vol. 5 | iss. 1 | e34117 | p. 6

Table 2. Ideation phase: gamification brainstorming results.

Prioritya
Core drive and concept brainstorm

CD 1b: Epic meaning (positive motivation)

N/A
N/Ac

CD 2: Development (extrinsic, positive motivation)

1
Setting and achieving measurable goals (promotes accomplishment)d

1
Positive reinforcement (congratulations when goal met)d

2
Leveling up or other reward systemd

2
Progress bar for rewardsd

2
Badges for achievements

3
To-do list for app activitiesd

4
Step-by-step onboardingd

4
Hotspots during onboardingd

CD 3: Empowerment (intrinsic, positive motivation)

1
Choice of a list of recommended goals and option to write own goals (blank fill)d

1
Real-time feedback during goal progress reportsd

4
Customize app backgrounds or decor with accumulated rewards

CD 4: Ownership (extrinsic)

1
Customize profile with avatard

2
Virtual pet or mascotd

2
Accumulated rewards as currency for a virtual “good”

CD 5: Social influence (intrinsic)

1
Shared app engagement with parent and childd

3
Option to share results with health care providerd

4
Asthma tips from health care professionals (mentorship)

4
Chat forum (collaboration)

4
Leaderboard to inspire competition

CD 6: Scarcity (extrinsic, negative motivation)

2
Progressively more difficult to earn rewardsd

2
Reward options progressively expand with ongoing used

CD 7: Unpredictability (intrinsic, negative motivation)

2
Unlocking new rewardsd

3
Streaks

CD 8: Avoidance (negative motivation)

3
Surprise rewards

a1=highest priority and 4=lowest priority.
bCD: core drive.
cN/A: not applicable.
dDepicts concepts that emerged in the final prototype.

JMIR Pediatr Parent 2022 | vol. 5 | iss. 1 | e34117 | p. 7

Design

Overview

As depicted in Figure 1, this project entailed 6 cycles of design
and evaluation such that insights from evaluation informed
future design refinements. The design foci, evaluation methods,
and key insights of each cycle are discussed below and in Table
3. Several concepts were never prototyped, including chat
forums and leaderboards, due to patient privacy concerns. Expert

asthma tips were not prototyped as these are redundant with
existing asthma apps. We primarily used medium-fidelity Figma
prototyping during design (and evaluation), which entails certain
clickable elements within the design. For the last design and
evaluation cycle, a high-fidelity Figma prototype was used,
which had fully integrated clickable elements such that users
could simulate real-world use and navigate as if it were a real
app.

JMIR Pediatr Parent 2022 | vol. 5 | iss. 1 | e34117 | p. 8

Table 3. Design foci, evaluation, and key insights by cycle (N=12 dyads).

Key insights
Evaluation
Design foci
Participants
and visit type
Cycle

Concept test:
Concept test:
Baseline mid-fidelity prototype functionality
and layout:
n=6 dyads

In-person

1

•
Separate symptom and C-ACT
graphical displays.
•
Dashboard display for asthma

symptoms and C-ACT (PPb)
•
Dashboard: Asthma Symptoms and C-

ACTa
•
Simplify layout.
Usability test:
•
Modify color scheme.
•
Goal-setting flow

Usability test:
•
Goal-setting flow (TAc, SSd)
•
Progress reporting flow

•
Progress report flow (TA, SS)
•
Retain goal choices, improve flow.
•
Response or celebration for
achieved goal.
•
Need more child engagement.
•
Good parent–child interaction dur-
ing use.

Concept test:
Concept test:
Mid-fidelity prototype functionality and
layout:
n=3 dyads

In-person

2

•
Preferred animal avatars.
•
Various avatar options (PP)
•
Add avatar for user profiles
Usability test:
•
Liked ability to customize.
•
Simplified dashboard
Usability test:
•
Goal-setting flow (TA, SS)
•
Revised goal-setting flow
•
Flows improved and clear.
•
Progress report flow (TA, SS)
•
Enhanced progress reporting flow
•
Love celebration response when
goal achieved.
•
ACT completion and interpre-
tation (TA, SS)
•
C-ACT flow

•
Color schemes much improved.
•
Add legend for C-ACT interpreta-
tion.

Concept test:
Concept test:
Mid-fidelity prototype and child engagement
strategies:
n=3 dyads

Remote

3

•
Love the animal mascot and re-
wards, preferred dog theme.
•
Animal mascots (PP)
•
Introduce animal mascot and reward
system concepts
•
Color themes (PP)
•
Integrate animal mascot with re-
ward system.
•
Reward systems (TA)
•
Revise C-ACT flow with legend
Usability test:
Usability test:
•
Legend for C-ACT (TA, SS)
•
C-ACT legend is clear.
•
Show symptoms first on dashboard.
•
New feature suggestions—medica-
tion tracking, data export.

Concept test:
Concept test:
Mid-fidelity prototype and animal mascot:
n=6 dyads

Remote

4

•
All participants desire home
spirometer integration.
•
Spirometer integration with
app (SS)
•
Introduce home spirometer concept
•
Refined dog mascot and reward theme

Usability test:
Usability test:

•
Children love dog mascot that
grows with rewards.
•
Dog mascot with bone reward
system (TA, SS)
•
Easily understood reward system,
progress bars.

Concept test:
Mid-fidelity prototype and introduce con-
cepts:
n=5 dyads

Remote

5
•
Dyads preferred sequential onboard-
ing flow with prompts.
•
Onboarding (PP)
•
Scrollable to-do list with “done”
checkmarks. Add prompt on dash-
•
Onboarding
•
To-do list (PP)
•
To-do list
•
Background and accessories
(TA, SS)
board if there are items to do.
•
New background or accessories
•
Children did not care for new
backgrounds or accessories. Prefer
•
Streak (PP, SS)
•
Streak
•
Medication tracking (PP, SS)
•
Medication tracking
additional pets/mascots.
•
Spirometer in dashboard (TA,
SS)
•
Spirometer in dashboard and perfor-
mance incentive
•
Children did care for streaks.
•
Dyads prefer calendar plus re-
minders for medication tracking.
•
Spirometer tracking needs to be
simplified with export function.
•
Different spirometer performance
incentive (windmill) ok, but could
be improved.

JMIR Pediatr Parent 2022 | vol. 5 | iss. 1 | e34117 | p. 9

Key insights
Evaluation
Design foci
Participants
and visit type
Cycle

Concept test:

•
Love animal mascot unlocks.
•
Love maintenance phase concept,
suggest “mute” for goals, retain
everything else.

Usability test:

•
Refinements were all clear.
•
Keep calendar for medication use
and add option for medication re-
minders.
•
Consider minor edits for consistent
language, color scheme.

Concept test (TA, SS):

•
New animal mascot unlocks
(TA, SS)
•
Maintenance phase concept
(TA, SS)

Usability test:

•
Onboarding (TA, SS)
•
To-do list (TA, SS)
•
Medication tracking (TA, SS)
•
Spirometer incentive and
tracking (TA, SS)

High-fidelity prototype:

Introduce:

•
Animal mascot unlocks
•
“Maintenance phase”

Refine:

•
Onboarding
•
To-do list
•
Medication tracking
•
Spirometer incentive and tracking

n=5 dyads

Remote

6

aC-ACT: Childhood Asthma Control Test.
bPP: parallel prototyping.
cTA: think aloud.
dSS: semistructured interview.

Cycles 1 and 2

The highest priority items from the ideation phase related to
core functions within the app, specifically evaluating goal
setting, the interaction between parent and child, and a new
priority, an avatar for child users to excite them about ongoing
use of the app. These items cross numerous CDs. Based upon
these priorities, the designer expanded the original prototype
to include positive reinforcement when a dyad reported
successful achievement of a goal. An avatar concept was also
prototyped to customize user profiles, with various options
including animals, robots, dinosaurs, and monsters. These
priority items were tested with users in cycles 1 and 2, with

refinements made after each cycle based upon user feedback
(described in the “Evaluation” section).

Cycles 3 and 4

The next batch of priority concepts related to developing a
virtual pet or mascot and reward system for app usage, with the
intent to promote and maintain child user engagement.
Numerous prototypes were developed with animal or creature
mascots, including a monkey, underwater theme, animated
lungs, monster, and a dog (Figure 4). Several rewards systems
were similarly developed such that users earned rewards for
various goal achievements. A variety of progress bars, displays
options, and rewards were prototyped around the mascot
concept.

Figure 4. App mascot prototypes.

Cycles 5 and 6

The final design cycles focused on several of the items from
Table 2, including 2 versions of a to-do list, onboarding

guidance, and several longitudinal app engagement concepts.
Onboarding guidance prototypes included carousels of app
features, spotlights on app functionality, and options for video
tutorials. Longitudinal engagement strategies included

JMIR Pediatr Parent 2022 | vol. 5 | iss. 1 | e34117 | p. 10

expanding the animal mascot concept to provide options for
unlocking additional mascots, using accumulated rewards to
purchase new app backgrounds or accessories for the animal,
and the concept of streaks. We also designed for integration of
a home-based spirometer within the app, which emerged from
parent participant feedback during prior remote evaluation
sessions amidst the COVID-19 pandemic. The study team
developed a spirometry tracking graph within the IMPACT app
dashboard as well as visual incentives for optimal spirometry
performance. Finally, we designed an export feature, which
would provide users the option to export app data (C-ACT,
spirometry results, etc.) to their health care provider.

Evaluation

Overview

Most evaluation cycles used concept testing, to determine
specific concepts to integrate within the app, as well as usability
testing, to determine whether users were able to use the
implemented concepts as intended. Overall, evaluation cycles
initially prioritized core app functionality, then child
engagement, and finally integration of all concepts and
refinement (Figure 5). Key insights by cycle are presented in
Table 3.

Figure 5. Design and evaluation foci by cycle.

Cycles 1 and 2

To test the core app functionality, cycles 1 and 2 prioritized
evaluating the original prototype dashboard and goal-setting
flows. The dashboard, or home screen, depicts graphical
representations of the child’s asthma symptoms and a weekly
C-ACT. Concept testing was used to determine parent and child
preferences for dashboard layout and color schemes.

I would totally have nothing on here except the
symptom box and move everything down to the
navigation bar...so you are only focusing on which
is important, which is symptoms. [P3]
We also concept tested avatar options with child participants,
with animal avatars emerging as preferred.

Usability testing was used to test the goal setting, progress
report, and ACT flows. The goal-setting flow was very clear,
with one parent commenting,

Oh boy, I love these goals! [P2]
During the semistructured interview, another parent asked what
would happen after dyads completed the intervention. This
parent suggested that the team consider an additional app phase
that did not focus on changing shared management behaviors,
but rather on maintaining them along with ongoing asthma
symptom and control tracking (later addressed in design cycle
6). The remaining flows tested well with minor refinements
recommended.

Cycles 3 and 4

Cycles 3 and 4 focused on evaluating the animal mascot and
reward system child engagement strategies. A series of parallel
prototyping concept tests revealed that dyads strongly preferred
a dog mascot and that the reward system be cohesive with the
mascot. Ultimately, a dog bone reward scheme was selected.
During the interview, one child suggested we build on the dog
mascot concept:

You can feed the animals to make them bigger and
better...and they can get different colors. [C3, 11
years, during cycle 3]
This suggestion was integrated into cycle 4, with the dog mascot
initially displayed as a puppy that progressively grows through
reward achievements. Usability testing revealed the growing
puppy mascot was unanimously favored.

Amidst the COVID-19 pandemic, many parents with children
with asthma expressed concern about decreased access to their
health care provider. A specific concern was restrictions placed
on spirometry, which is an aerosolizing procedure. In light of
these parent-identified concerns, we introduced an additional
concept for testing, home spirometry. One parent commented,

Yes, that would be extremely useful. That would give
us the information to decide whether to go to the
doctors or emergency. [P1]
Another shared,

I think this would be great! It also generates more
data to give to the doctor...He [the child] might be

JMIR Pediatr Parent 2022 | vol. 5 | iss. 1 | e34117 | p. 11

fine when he goes to see the doctor once a year, but
the rest of the year he wheezes, and I worry. [P2]
Finally, interviews revealed that dyads would also like to see
the app incorporate medication tracking and reminders.

Medication reminders. We need a reminder...that’s
what we need more than anything. [P1]

Cycles 5 and 6

Cycle 5 was entirely focused on concept testing various options
for onboarding, app tasks, streaks, medication tracking, and
spirometry integration. Dyads were very decisive on preferred
formats. Child participants clearly did not care for the streak
concept,

Streaks just feel more like work. [C4, 10 years]
Children also preferred that we expand the mascots to allow for
additional dog “unlocks” within the reward system as opposed
to earning accessories or app background changes. The
introduction of medication reminders and tracking as well as
spirometry were both unanimously favored.

Cycle 6 concept testing evaluated the maintenance phase concept
to follow intervention completion, which originated from a
parent participant, whereby the goal setting was muted, and
dyads may continue to use the other app features long term.
Dyads loved this addition as it would enable ongoing app use
even after the intervention was complete. High-fidelity usability
testing revealed only minor refinements, indicating readiness
to move to implementation.

Implementation

Once the high-fidelity prototype was finalized, the study team
worked alongside the engineering team to construct user stories
that specify feature requirements within the app. User stories
are written from the perspective of the user, such as “as a user,
I want to be able to track my asthma control within the app”
[48]. Screenshots, Figma prototype links, and descriptions of
the related prototype features often accompanied the user stories.
Globally, user stories help provide the “why” for software
developers alongside the prototype [49]. Practically, they
constitute a step-by-step guide for development of a product
and subsequent internal testing to ensure the developed app
functions as intended [48-50]. Developer effort and timelines
are also estimated based upon user stories. Given that the
development and study teams co-constructed the user stories,
any questions or clarifications related to the proposed design
were addressed collaboratively. In total, these user stories
constitute the design specifications for the engineering team.

Discussion

Principal Findings

The purpose of this study was to use HCD to refine the original
parent–child shared asthma management IMPACT app and to
incorporate longitudinal app engagement strategies. The study
team successfully refined the app, incorporated longitudinal
engagement strategies, and added dyad-prioritized new features.
Final testing indicated that parent–child dyads found the refined

IMPACT prototype addressed their prevailing asthma needs
and priorities in an engaging, easy-to-use app.

Partnering with our end users ensured that our final design met
the needs and priorities of children with asthma and their
parents. Evidence has shown that such participatory design
practices increase the likelihood of intervention uptake and
efficacy [51,52]. Our participants were very clear that they did
not desire another educational intervention, but rather a system
to address challenges in monitoring symptoms and transitioning
asthma responsibility to the child in a safe manner. Parent
participants were especially enthusiastic about the shared
management goals, which break down key asthma management
tasks while facilitating parent–child shared monitoring and
management. The incorporation of spirometry was also in direct
response to a serious parental concern about barriers to health
care access amidst the COVID-19 pandemic. Our study also
serves as an example for integrating other mHealth best
practices, including theoretically informed intervention
techniques, clinical guidelines, and validated assessment tools
[53-55].

Drawing upon the Octalysis Framework, our final design
successfully integrated concepts from 6 of the 8 gamification
CDs, excluding CD 1 (epic meaning) and CD 8 (loss and
avoidance). Epic meaning, or being part of something bigger
than oneself, does not align well with an mHealth app, which
is specifically designed to support an individual’s health. We
concept tested a CD 8 concept, streaks, though none of our
participants recommended retaining the concept. The final
IMPACT design included more extrinsic than intrinsic
motivations, though both are accounted for in the design. This
is not unexpected as extrinsic motivations, such as tangible
rewards, are more straightforward for children and frequently
used in child-facing gamified systems [34,56-58]. Similarly,
some intrinsic motivations, such as social sharing, are
inappropriate for mHealth apps due to patient confidentiality
concerns. However, an ideal gamified system does not need to
integrate all CDs, but rather ensure each of the 4 motivation
dimensions are accounted for in the design [36].

Despite the surge in mHealth interventions, to our knowledge,
none have been designed to promote parent–child shared asthma
management. Just as children need to learn self-care practices
in a stepwise fashion (ie, feeding, dressing), so too do they need
to 
learn 
self-management 
in 
a 
similar 
progression.
Unfortunately, evidence shows that youth often abruptly assume
complete management of their asthma during adolescence, often
resulting in worsened health status and poor health outcomes
[11]. Despite this evidence, guidance facilitating parent–child
shared asthma management is lacking in the literature and
existing mHealth apps [11]. Interventions specifically designed
to facilitate safe and intentional parent–child shared management
through concrete, task-based goal setting represent a novel
approach to teaching children essential asthma management
skills while still under the supervision of their parent. Such
innovations hold the promise of improving a child’s health in
the present as well as building lifelong self-management skills.

To our knowledge, there are few, if any, studies describing the
iterative design of a dyadic health management app [59]. Our

JMIR Pediatr Parent 2022 | vol. 5 | iss. 1 | e34117 | p. 12

study represents an exemplar for integrating mHealth best
practices, 
particularly 
behavior 
change, 
personalized
self-monitoring, and medical guidelines [27,30], while
concurrently accounting for a dyad’s unique circumstances,
family needs and priorities, and social environment [45,59]. As
equal participants, parent and child feedback was carefully
considered and incorporated into the app to ensure that the needs
of both types of users are accounted for. While we anticipated
parental hesitation to allow their child to assume asthma
responsibility, we actually found that most were relieved and
excited to be developing an app that would meet their needs.
Multiple rounds of design and evaluation were necessary to
successfully incorporate these preferences within the app; dyads
often would resolve disagreements about app designs without
study team facilitation. The result was an mHealth solution that
represents not only a solution to dyad-identified needs and
priorities, but also one that models a paradigm shift from
personal to family informatics [59]. Such solutions hold
tremendous promise in supporting families in navigating
parent–child shared management of health.

Limitations

While this study has many strengths, there are important
limitations that warrant consideration. The convenience sample
of parent–child dyads was small and somewhat homogenous
(primarily male children and female parents), which limits
generalizability of study findings. The sample was recruited
from the principal investigator’s research database, which is
not representative of all school-age children and their parents
and did not screen for other comorbidities. It is also possible
that study dyads experienced social desirability bias. Finally,
our recruitment was confined to one geographic area, again
limiting potential generalizability of our findings.

Conclusions

The final IMPACT app is a theoretically derived, tailored
parent–child shared asthma management intervention and
monitoring system. IMPACT was iteratively co-designed by
our interdisciplinary study team as well as end users to ensure
that the app meets the needs and priorities of children with
asthma and their parents. The final IMPACT prototype is
presently being fully developed for an anticipated 8-week pilot
RCT in which we will test the feasibility, acceptability, and
preliminary efficacy of the app.