Original Paper

Creating a Digital Toolkit to Reduce Fatigue and Promote Quality
of Life in Multiple Sclerosis: Participatory Design and Usability
Study

Sarah Thomas1*, BSc (Hons), PhD; Andy Pulman1*, MA, PhD; Huseyin Dogan2, BSc (Hons), MSc, EngD; Nan Jiang2,
BEng, MSc, PhD; David Passmore2, BSc (Hons); Keith Pretty2, BSc (Hons), MBA; Beth Fairbanks2, BSc (Hons);
Angela Davies Smith3, MSCP, MSc; Peter W Thomas1, BSc (Hons), CStat, PhD

1Bournemouth University Clinical Research Unit, Department of Medical Science & Public Health, Faculty of Health & Social Sciences, Bournemouth
University, Bournemouth, United Kingdom
2Department of Computing & Informatics, Faculty of Science & Technology, Bournemouth University, Bournemouth, United Kingdom
3Bristol & Avon Multiple Sclerosis Centre, Southmead Hospital, North Bristol National Health Service Trust, Bristol, United Kingdom
*these authors contributed equally

Sarah Thomas, BSc (Hons), PhD
Bournemouth University Clinical Research Unit
Department of Medical Science & Public Health, Faculty of Health & Social Sciences
Bournemouth University
Bournemouth Gateway Building
St. Pauls Lane
Bournemouth, BH8 8GP
United Kingdom
Phone: 44 1202 961953

Abstract

Background: Fatigue is one of the most common and debilitating symptoms of multiple sclerosis (MS), experienced by more
than 80% of people with MS. FACETS (Fatigue: Applying Cognitive Behavioral and Energy Effectiveness Techniques to Lifestyle)
is an evidence-based, face-to-face, 6-session group fatigue management program for people with MS. Homework tasks are an
integral part of FACETS and are currently undertaken in a paper-based form. Feedback from a consultation undertaken with
FACETS attendees and health care professionals with experience in delivering the FACETS program suggested that being able
to complete the homework tasks digitally would be desirable, potentially enhancing engagement and adherence and enabling
on-the-go access to fit into busy lifestyles. Relative to other long-term conditions, there are few apps specifically for MS and, of
those available, many have been developed with little or no input from people with MS.
Objective: The purpose of this mixed methods study was to create a digital toolkit comprising the homework tasks (eg, activity
diary, goal planner, thought diary) of the FACETS program for people with MS, considering end users’ unique requirements
throughout the design, build, prototyping, and testing stages.
Methods: Phase 1 involved the elicitation of detailed user requirements for the toolkit via 2 focus groups with previous attendees
of FACETS (n=3 and n=6) and wireframing. Phase 2 involved supervised usability testing with people with MS (n=11) with
iterative prototyping. The usability sessions involved going through test scenarios using the FACETS toolkit on an Android test
phone with video capture and concurrent think-aloud followed by completion of the System Usability Scale (SUS) and a
semistructured interview collecting feedback about design, content, and functionality.
Results: The mean SUS score for the digital toolkit was 74.3 (SD 16.8, 95% CI 63.2-85.6; range 37.5-95), which equates to an
adjective rating of good and a B grade (70th-79th percentile range) on the Sauro-Lewis curved grading scale. A number of usability
and design issues (such as simplifying overall screen flow to better meet users’ needs) and suggestions for improvements (such
as using location-based services and displaying personalized information and progress via a central dashboard) were addressed
and implemented during the usability testing cycle.

JMIR Form Res 2021 | vol. 5 | iss. 12 | e19230 | p. 1

Conclusions: This work highlights the importance of the participation of people with MS across the entire development cycle,
working to a human-centered design methodology to enable a considered and MS-centered solution to be developed. Continued
horizon scanning for emergent technological enhancements will enable us to identify opportunities for further improvements to
the FACETS toolkit prior to launch. The toolkit supports self-monitoring and management of fatigue and has potential applicability
to other long-term conditions where fatigue is a significant issue.

(JMIR Form Res 2021;5(12):e19230) doi: 10.2196/19230

KEYWORDS
multiple sclerosis; fatigue; self-management; cognitive behavioral; digital health; mHealth; eHealth; development; participatory
design; usability testing

Introduction

Background

Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a neurological condition affecting
the central nervous system. More than 2.5 million people
worldwide have MS with over 130,000 in the United Kingdom
[1,2] at an estimated cost to the UK economy of £3.3 to £4.2
billion (US $4.5 to $5.7 billion) per annum [3]. Fatigue is one
of the most common and debilitating symptoms of MS [4],
experienced by over 80% of people with MS [5], and the main
reason for stopping work early [6]. FACETS (Fatigue: Applying
Cognitive Behavioral and Energy Effectiveness Techniques to

Lifestyle) is a group-based, face-to-face fatigue management
program for people with MS developed by members of our team
that has been shown to be effective in a national multicenter
randomized controlled trial (RCT) funded by the UK MS Society
[7-11]. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, some health
care professionals have been delivering the FACETS program
virtually (via video conferencing) with initial participant
feedback promising.

The program is delivered in 6 weekly sessions [8]. A key
component of the FACETS program is the homework tasks that
provide an opportunity for participants to try out what they have
learned and put it into practice in their daily lives (Table 1).

Table 1. Overview of the FACETSa program.

Homework elements
Session title
Session no.

Activity and fatigue diary; energy measure
What is MSb-related fatigue?
1

Rest, activity, and sleep planner
Opening an energy account
2

Goal-setting exercise
Budgeting energy and smartening up goals
3

Fatigue thought diary
Stress response; cognitive behavioral model
4

Thought challenge sheet
Putting unhelpful thoughts on trial
5

Keeping-on-track planner
Recapping and taking the program forward
6

aFACETS: Fatigue: Applying Cognitive Behavioral and Energy Effectiveness Techniques to Lifestyle.
bMS: multiple sclerosis.

Given the favorable results from the national multicenter RCT
of FACETS [9-11] and subsequent rollout of the program, team
members conducted a consultation on behalf of the MS Society
to gather views from stakeholders (people with MS and health
care professionals) about potential digital delivery models to
enhance reach [12]. Self-guided web-based delivery models for
fatigue management have shown promise in MS, although
dropout rates have tended to be relatively high [13,14], a
common issue encountered in eHealth trials [15]. Findings from
the consultation indicated that stakeholders considered an online
delivery model of FACETS to be of value [12], although not a
direct replacement for the face-to-face version. An online
e-learning package was deemed the best way to deliver a
minimum viable solution—a product requiring only a limited
amount of development time that is implemented with a minimal
number of features to provide a basic working model with scope
for future expansion and improvement. This has now been
launched by the MS Society [16].

During the consultation, it also became apparent there were no
high-quality free apps that could support digital completion of
the FACETS homework tasks. A separate key recommendation,
therefore, was to initiate a project to create a free stand-alone
digital toolkit consolidating the structured homework elements
of the FACETS program [12]. This project forms the focus of
our paper.

Smartphone ownership and use is high in people with MS
[17-19]. An app format would have the advantage of permitting
on-the-go access and real-time symptom logging and use of
reminders, potentially enhancing adherence to the homework
tasks [12,20].

Everywhere I go, I’ve got my phone. If I’ve got a few
minutes, I sit and fill it in and if it’s fresh and current,
I wouldn’t fill in paperwork. Even on the course, I’d
fill in the paperwork the night before, or the morning
I was coming to the class. But if I had it on my phone,

JMIR Form Res 2021 | vol. 5 | iss. 12 | e19230 | p. 2

I’d be more inclined to fill it in. [Previous attendee
of the face-to-face FACETS program] [12]
The 2018 MS Society/Nuffield Trust data and technology report
presents a vision of “personalized, coordinated, and empowering
care for people with MS, enabled by effective technology,”
noting that “Digital transformation and the possibilities it
provides have not yet been realised within the care and support
people with MS access” [21,22]. A complementary mobile
solution enabling the FACETS homework elements to be made
interactive and portable aligns closely with recommendations
from the MS Society data and technology report and action
plan, particularly in the areas of having more control over care
and accessible and coordinated care [21-23]. It would help to
meet the aims of the UK MS Society research strategy in relation
to self-management and implementation [24] and would address
the third (fatigue) and fourth (self-management) James Lind
Alliance research priorities for MS [25].

In their 2017 systematic review of MS apps available from US
app stores, Giunti et al [26] noted there were few apps available
for MS relative to other long-term conditions such as cancer
and diabetes [27-29]. While there are mobile apps available for
fatigue management in MS [30-33], they did not meet our
requirements of being free to use. To date, only a fatigue
management app for cancer, which draws upon cognitive
behavioral principles, has been evaluated in a full-scale RCT
[34-36]. While there are separate apps available to support
self-management of MS symptoms (including diaries and
symptom loggers), these did not align sufficiently with the
FACETS homework elements, and most were not free.

Preliminary Work

Findings from a 2018 systematic search and scoping review by
Giunti et al [37] suggested that most MS-specific apps lack
features desired by people with MS. They and others have called
for greater involvement of people with MS and health care
professionals before digital solutions are implemented [37-40],
noting the importance of understanding condition-specific
factors when designing mobile health (mHealth) apps [37-39].
Developers need to consider the requirements of people with
MS and possible MS symptoms (blurry vision, reduced fine
motor control, cognitive impairment, and fatigue) throughout
the development, prototyping, testing, and implementation of
any digital solution [21-23,38,41,42].

Initial requirements for the FACETS toolkit were categorized
using the MoSCoW framework [43], a simple method used
across business disciplines to enable project teams and
stakeholders to define requirements: must have (a necessity for
meeting the specified goal), should have (beneficial but not
essential for a successful product), could have (desirable but
not important), and won’t have this time (future possibilities
but not feasible for immediate implementation). Findings from
the consultation [12] informed the initial set of draft
requirements, and a stakeholder workshop and interviews with
service users were conducted to explore client expectations
regarding digitization and begin gathering baseline requirements
[44]. An affinity diagram and personas (fictional characters that
incorporate composite attributes of target users) were created
and used in the early design phases [44]. A card-sorting task

(involves ordering, grouping, and naming of objects or concepts)
was undertaken with the research team to guide the design of
the navigational structure [44]. Paper designs were sketched
leading to the creation of low-fidelity wireframes and,
subsequently, to the first interactive high-fidelity design
prototype.

The toolkit was primarily aimed at complementing the existing
FACETS face-to-face program and the MS Society online
course. This meant that it needed to remain tethered to the
existing materials and the way they are structured to ensure
consistency. A secondary consideration was that there might
be users downloading the toolkit who had not attended FACETS
but who might wish to use elements of the toolkit for recording
data relating to their MS and fatigue. A further consideration
was that in the future the toolkit might be used to share
information with health care providers [45] or expanded to
include more content from the FACETS program; the toolkit
might also be considered relevant for other long-term conditions
[46].

Choosing the type of technology to use for the toolkit was
challenging as this is a constantly evolving area. One
recommendation from Beatty et al [47] in the context of an
evaluation of an intervention for cancer-related distress was that
future online programs should be multiplatform to facilitate
access across a full range of devices. The FACETS toolkit was
initially developed for Android—chosen due to its larger market
share and lower anticipated cost of development compared to
Apple iOS [48]. Given that a key requirement was access to the
toolkit without Wi-Fi and that it would potentially need to align
with the MS Society’s e-learning course [16] (in addition to the
face-to-face program) [7], mobile web solutions were not
considered suitable. The toolkit was developed using an agile
approach following Google’s Material Design guidelines [49]
and industrial best practices, with reference to the adapted
technology acceptance model [50-52]. Google user interface
guidelines [53] were followed when creating and using icons
and widgets, and core app quality guidelines [54] were followed
to ensure a baseline satisfactory user experience. Coding started
in October 2018. Several prototypes were developed that
incorporated all MoSCoW requirements identified as must have
and should have [43]. Initial versions concentrated on
implementing basic operational functionality that could then be
expanded upon or altered as required.

Methods

Study Design

This was a mixed methods study [55] involving quantitative
approaches (MS-specific and demographic questions and the
System Usability Scale [SUS] [56]) and qualitative approaches
(focus groups, think-aloud protocol, and semistructured
interviews). Ethical approval for this research was obtained
from Bournemouth University (ref. 17430).

Participants and Recruitment

Participants were recruited via a local MS center (individuals
who had participated in a previous study and had given
permission to be contacted about future research), a local MS

JMIR Form Res 2021 | vol. 5 | iss. 12 | e19230 | p. 3

support group mailing list, and via an advertisement on the MS
Research, Treatment, and Education website. For both the phase
1 focus groups and phase 2 supervised usability testing studies,
participants who contacted the research team were emailed
participant information sheets with information about the study.

Inclusion criteria included being age 18 years or older, having
a self-reported diagnosis of MS, experiencing fatigue impacting
daily life, and being an active smartphone user (phase 1 only).
See Figure 1 for schematic of phases of study.

Figure 1. Schematic of study phases. FACETS: Fatigue: Applying Cognitive Behavioral and Energy Effectiveness Techniques to Lifestyle; pwMS:
people with multiple sclerosis; SUS: System Usability Scale.

Procedures

The focus groups (phase 1) were held at a conference center in
Bristol. Supervised usability sessions (phase 2) were held at a
conference center in Bristol and on the Bournemouth University
campus. Both venues were accessible, and taxi-booking and
reimbursement of travel expenses were offered to all
participants. To minimize participant burden, we obtained
written informed consent via a participant agreement form on
the day of the focus groups or usability sessions. In phase 2, we
audiorecorded and filmed some parts of the supervised usability
testing sessions. If participants did not wish to be audiorecorded
or filmed, we offered a one-to-one session with notes taken as
an alternative. Two copies of the agreement form were
countersigned by the researcher. One copy was given to
participants for their records, and one copy was retained by the
researcher. The main ethical consideration related to fatigue,
which is a major issue for people with MS. Focus groups and
usability sessions included regular rest breaks and provision of
refreshments, and we emphasized that participants could take
a break or stop participating at any time. Duration of sessions
was no longer than 90 minutes.

Phase 1. Focus Groups to Elicit User Requirements

This phase involved the elicitation of detailed user requirements
and wireframing. Two focus groups (n=3 and n=6) with previous
attendees of the FACETS face-to-face program were held to
gather feedback about requirements and preferences for the
toolkit (Multimedia Appendix 1). These were facilitated by AP

(in Bristol, an MS assistant practitioner also attended) and
audiorecorded and transcribed verbatim. A second set of design
prototypes was then created using an interactive prototyping
tool, and feedback was obtained from focus group attendees in
person and via paper-based semistructured questionnaires
completed after attendance. Based on this feedback, a third set
of design prototypes was created prior to development
commencing.

Phase 2. Supervised Usability Testing Sessions

Participants (n=11) were asked to use elements of the toolkit
and complete up to 2 specific test scenarios (lasting 30 minutes
in total) on a supplied Android mobile phone (Table 2).
Videocapture of their hands (via a usability rig) and face/top
half of their body was undertaken as they interacted with the
toolkit while concurrently thinking aloud (give a running
commentary). They also completed demographic and
MS-specific questions and the SUS [56]. Participants were asked
about initial impressions of the version of the toolkit they had
tested and for feedback on its design, content, and functionality
during a subsequent 30-minute (audiorecorded) semistructured
interview based on a topic guide (Multimedia Appendix 2). The
digital health postdoctoral researcher (AP) led the usability
sessions (n=11). The developer (DP) attended all sessions, and
ST (research psychologist) attended 9 sessions. Testing
commenced with a stable prototype release; later release
versions were created based on user feedback and tested with
users iteratively (see Figure 2 for example screenshots of a
prototype release).

JMIR Form Res 2021 | vol. 5 | iss. 12 | e19230 | p. 4

Table 2. Mapping of FACETSa sessions to the toolkit elements and usability test scenarios.

Participants (1-11) who
tested element
Test scenarios
Toolkit element
Homework task in face-
to-face program

1-5
Add one or more activities (eg, vacuuming, swimming, making breakfast,
gardening) performed recently. Make a change to the activity just added,
and view it to check that the information was amended correctly.

Activity diary
Week 1: activity and fa-
tigue diary; energy mea-
sure

1-3
Thinking about your wake-sleep routine, add a wind-down alarm (for
when typically planning to start getting ready for bed) and a wind-up alarm
(for when typically planning to start to wake up in the morning). Then
create one or more rest periods during the day, setting the duration
(scheduling for times when you might wish to take a rest during a typical
day). Test out a few alarm options and see if they work correctly.

Rest and sleep
routine
Week 2: rest, activity,
and sleep planner

4-9
Create one or more SMART (specific, measurable, achievable, realistic,
time for review) goals (a lifestyle change you would like to make). Some
possible ideas for areas for change could be exercise routines, relaxation
practice, incorporating rest periods, and establishing sleep-wake routines.

Goal planner
Week 3: goal-setting ex-
ercise

10-11
Think about a situation that triggered strong emotions and unhelpful
thoughts related to fatigue. Describe the situation in the thought diary
along with up to 3 unhelpful thoughts, and select the emotions experienced
at the time. Then rate strength of belief for each unhelpful thought and for
the accompanying emotions.

Thought diary
Week 4: fatigue thought
diary

10-11
Select a thought to challenge. Start off by identifying any unhelpful
thinking styles, think of one or more alternative thoughts, and rate strength
of belief. Then rerate strength of belief in the original thought, and rerate
the strength of the associated emotions.

Thought diary
Week 5: thought chal-
lenge sheet

—b (element not yet devel-
oped)

Help the user maintain momentum: complete a plan that focuses on the
next 3 months (this element is still under development).
Keeping-on-track
planner
Week 6: keeping-on-
track planner

aFACETS: Fatigue: Applying Cognitive Behavioral and Energy Effectiveness Techniques to Lifestyle.
bNot applicable.

Figure 2. Dashboard and homework element screenshots from working prototype v0.0.3.

JMIR Form Res 2021 | vol. 5 | iss. 12 | e19230 | p. 5

Analysis

The SUS [56] is a standardized questionnaire for collecting
usability evaluations of a system being tested and has been
shown to have good validity and reliability [57], including in
the evaluation of mobile health apps [58]. Standard scoring is
between 0 and 100 [57], which the Sauro-Lewis curved grading
scale [59] converts to a normative percentile score and
associated grade. These grades can range from A (best
imaginable on the adjective rating scale by Bangor et al [60])
to F (worst imaginable). Participant ratings on the SUS were
collected during 2019. Quantitative ratings from the
questionnaire were summarized using descriptive statistics.

Focus group and interview recordings were transcribed and
thematically analyzed using a deductive approach that focused
on the domains covered in the topic guide (focusing on design,
functionality, and content). A generic qualitative approach to
thematic analysis was used [61] with interresearcher
interpretation. Following familiarization with the transcripts, a

member of the team charted themes in a matrix. Possible
enhancements and amendments to the toolkit (logged by the
developer on GitHub) and field notes taken during the
think-aloud sessions were also considered in the analysis
process. Subsequently, another team member familiarized
themselves with the transcripts and the matrix of initial themes.
They developed an agreed coding scheme using an analytical
framework that combined a priori issues from the original topic
guide and emerging themes [62].

Results

Participant Characteristics

Focus groups comprised 8 females and 1 male; all participants
had previously attended the face-to-face FACETS program.
Self-reported descriptives for the usability testing participants
(n=11) are presented in Table 3. All study participants consented
to being recorded.

JMIR Form Res 2021 | vol. 5 | iss. 12 | e19230 | p. 6

Table 3. Self-reported descriptives for usability testing participants (phase 2; n=11).

Value
Characteristic

Gender, n (%)

4 (36)
Male

7 (64)
Female

49 (8.41) 34-62
Age (years), mean (SD), range

Type of MSa, n (%)

8 (73)
Relapsing remitting

1 (9)
Secondary progressive

2 (18)
Primary progressive

6.8 (2.5) 2-9c
APDDSb, mean (SD), range

—d
1: mild symptoms that don’t limit activity

2 (18)
2: noticeable symptoms with mild, small impact

—
3: limitations on activities of daily living

—
4: interferes with walking, can walk 300-500 m

—
5: can walk 100-200 m but often uses a stick

—
6: needs a stick or single crutch

3 (27)
7: needs 2 canes or walker to walk 20 m

2 (18)
8: wheelchair is main form of mobility; can move from wheelchair without help

2 (18)
9: wheelchair is main form of mobility; help needed to move with wheelchair

Time since diagnosis (years), n (%)

3 (27)
1-5

2 (18)
6-10

3 (27)
11-15

2 (18)
16-20

1 (9)
>20

Employment status, n (%)

4 (36)
Working full time (>30 hours per week)

3 (27)
Unable to work

4 (36)
Retired

Use of mobile apps, n (%)

1 (9)
Never use

4 (36)
Use a few

6 (55)
Use a lot

Has attended face-to-face FACETSe program, n (%)

7 (64)
Yes

4 (36)
No

SUSf

75 (37.5-95)
Median (range)

74.3 (16.81) [63.2, 85.6]
Mean (SD) [95% CI]

Sauro-Lewis adjective rating, n (%)

5 (45)
A/A+

1 (9)
B

JMIR Form Res 2021 | vol. 5 | iss. 12 | e19230 | p. 7

Value
Characteristic

2 (18)
C

2 (18)
D

1 (9)
E

aMS: multiple sclerosis.
bAPDDS: Adapted Patient-Determined Disease Steps.
cPossible scores on the APDDS scale range from 0-10 corresponding to 11 ordinal levels of functioning. However, 2 participants gave ratings indicating
they perceived their functioning to fall between ordinals (1 participant between 7-8 and another participant between 8-9) and for the summary statistics
these were scored as 7.5 and 8.5, respectively.
dNot applicable.
eFACETS: Fatigue: Applying Cognitive Behavioral and Energy Effectiveness Techniques to Lifestyle.
fSUS: System Usability Scale.

Focus Groups

Below we summarize the key toolkit requirements suggested
by focus group participants:

•
Should be a “tool to help rather than a time-consuming
task”
•
Suitable for those unfamiliar with FACETS
•
Important to include positive aspects
•
Include self-monitoring feedback (eg, dashboard and
graphs)

Below we summarize preferences for the toolkit expressed by
focus group participants:

•
App should be freely available at app stores
•
Reminder (eg, reminders to take rests) and note functions
would be useful

•
Would like relaxation module to be included
•
Linking with Alexa is a good idea

System Usability Scale

Summary statistics for the SUS scores are presented in Table
3, and frequencies of ratings for each of the 10 SUS items are
presented in Figure 3. Overall, the median SUS score for the
toolkit was 75 and the mean was 74.3 (SD 16.81; 95% CI 63.2
to 85.6; range 37.5-95.0). This equates to an adjective rating of
good [60] and a B (70th to 79th percentile range) on the
Sauro-Lewis curved grading scale [59]. The majority of
participants (8/11) thought they “would like to use this toolkit
frequently” (the version of the prototype they tested; SUS-Q1).
Most considered the toolkit easy to use (9/11; SUS-Q3) with
55% (6/11) believing most people would learn to use it quickly
(SUS-Q7). The majority (7/11, 64%) considered the toolkit’s
functions to be well integrated (SUS-Q5).

Figure 3. System Usability Scale—item response frequencies.

Usability Feedback

Below we organized the feedback from the usability sessions
encompassing general comments and those related to design,

functionality, and content, mapped to the toolkit elements. We
considered suggestions made for additional functionality. We
also included relevant feedback elicited during the focus groups.

JMIR Form Res 2021 | vol. 5 | iss. 12 | e19230 | p. 8

General Comments

Overall, users found the app relatively easy to navigate, liked
its look and feel, and felt that they would quickly get used to
the system.

I did like it and I liked the colors because they are
bright but they’re not too bright, it was quite, it looked
quite vivid I think it is fair to say, which is good. I
think it was quite easy to navigate round, I mean once
you have got the basic, you know, the three dots and
the three lines, from there you can pretty much go
anywhere and yes I think it was quite good [P203,
Usability sessions]
I found my way around easy. I think initially I just
had to get to grips with it. Just to look where things
were but...I like the menu structure, it was easy to
follow. [P204, Usability sessions]
However, sometimes users noted difficulty in keeping track of
where they were in the app, and early versions of the recap
section were found to be confusing.

I’m quite visual and I couldn’t picture the structure
of where I was in the...you know...hierarchy of areas,
kind of thing, so that was kind of confusing because
I then couldn’t then think “Oh I need to skip that bit.”
[P202, Usability sessions]
Users wanted content and information to be kept brief and easy
to understand, without unnecessary repetition and with options
to skip content. As one user noted in a focus group in phase 1,
it should be “a tool to help rather than a time-consuming task.”
Users were in favor of the inclusion of video in addition to audio
and text.

You have to be careful not to over...put so much
information that it becomes overwhelming, that you
can analyze down to so much and you think I can’t
think about this anymore and you put too much into
it. [P211, Usability sessions]
I don’t want to be spending too much time doing it
so I’m missing out on doing things... [P205, Usability
sessions]
Yes you know I am ok reading text but I don’t want
to read too much, so you know it is balancing it
between video and text. [P207, Usability sessions]
Users liked the concept of section-based onboarding and said
that prompts and examples were useful, particularly for those
with fatigue and cognitive issues. They noted the importance
of ensuring reminders are neutral and nonjudgmental in tone.

Yes and you know people with MS we do sometimes
get flustered and forget how to do things, so a
reminder every now and again, the option to be able
to go back and actually see how I do this. [P204,
Usability sessions]
Yes I think...if somebody is struggling a bit and it
keeps saying, “You should be doing this.” But if it
said, “Would you like to go?” that, that seems a bit
more neutral. [P208, Usability sessions]

One user said they would like the app to “look more like a
game” (P2011, Usability sessions). The app was seen to be a
helpful self-monitoring tool that would be useful for describing
fatigue levels, activity patterns, and symptoms to an individual’s
clinical team. It was noted that it could also include content that
would help family and friends understand more about MS
fatigue and its impact.

As well as having the ability to be able to explain to
someone who doesn’t have MS, “Do you know what?
Watch this video on this app that I’ve got.” [P203,
Usability sessions]
Users felt that the app could be a useful tool not only alongside
the FACETS program but also before or after the program and
could be used to gather information prior to a referral by a
clinical team for fatigue.

But anyway, it would have been really, really good
to have had an app with videos or animations [when
newly diagnosed] to talk through the premise of
FACETS, almost maybe as a precursor to attending
the course. [P203, Usability sessions]
Yeah, because my stuff at the moment goes into
spreadsheets and when I have to phone up to say,
“Oh, I think I am having a relapse,” they ask you a
whole bunch of questions: “Have you done this?”
“Have you done that?” “When was the last episode
you had?” “What is your fatigue like?” All these
questions it’s all on a little Excel sheet on my phone
at the moment but this will be a bit more of a proper
user interface to get that kind of stuff.... [P204,
Usability sessions]
I think for me this is a really hugely useful parallel
tool alongside the course or, kind of, after the course
[P202, Usability sessions]
I mean it would be brilliant for me, I went on the
FACETS course a really long time ago, or it feels like
a really long time ago now, so to have all of that
information would be really good to refresh my
memory. [P203, Usability sessions]
Users noted that the app could be useful for those with other
conditions where fatigue is a symptom.

I think it could be useful...I think it could be infinitely
useful for all people with MS, but not just MS, all
people who have fatigue, who have a condition that
is...causes fatigue. [P208, Usability sessions]

Activity Diary

Feedback
The activity diary was seen to be a helpful way of enabling users
to consider activity and fatigue patterns.

Okay, so yes there, that’s quite good for monitoring
because actually then you could start to build up a
pattern of what makes you feel really fatigued,
couldn’t you? [P201, Usability sessions]
So it’s as if you can put something in so you don’t
overbook yourself you know...and my thing is that I

JMIR Form Res 2021 | vol. 5 | iss. 12 | e19230 | p. 9

am supposed to have two rest days a week you know,
it’s like reminding people it’s fine, rest is part of
management really. [P209, Usability sessions]
Enabling the user to choose from a prepopulated activity list
(and eventually using predictive text suggestions) rather than
manual entry was viewed as a useful time-saving feature. It
would also make a breakdown of activity type possible.

I think... I think more is probably, I know it’s difficult
to put in more, but in terms of fatigue, it’s often the
quite nuanced type of activity that is worse or better...
it wouldn’t be particularly helpful to have the broad
categories because actually work means doing so
many different types of things that um... [P202,
Usability sessions]
The use of location-based services to pull and record relevant
information, such as the outside temperature (heat often
adversely affects MS fatigue), was suggested by a focus group
participant.

P101: ...if it can be linked into the weather, like today
it is humid so we have got to think take the shade,
keep cool. [Focus Group 1]

Prototype Changes Made to This Section
Design changes implemented based on usability feedback
included implementing swipe to refresh layouts, updating the
calendar view originally used to reduce background thread load,
fixing a problem whereby activities entered between 12:00 AM
and 1:00 AM were not displaying, and revising the layout to
improve flow. Location-based suggestions and the addition of
predictive text functionality were implemented.

Rest and Sleep Planner

Feedback
Functionality issues reported included the variable quality of
some of the alarm tone sounds included as default on the test
phone.

Participant: ...and I wake up to the sound of birds,
which is nice, it’s not...
Interviewer 1: Yeah, I was looking at those and they
are....they are much more...
Participant: It is nicer than a belting alarm... [P202,
Usability sessions]
Concern was also expressed by users over the initial layout and
legibility of the clock display and rest, wind-up, and wind-down
periods chosen (Table 2).

Yeah so if I’m looking at that, right ok, especially
with my eyesight problems, I’ve got to read through
this whole list to find the thing I want. You’ve got
icons next to it, so sleep and wake has got a little cog
and half-moon icon next to it but if that...what I mean
is if that was bigger and maybe colorful then I could
go to it quicker and say right that’s what I want to go
back and have a look at my sleep patterns. [P210,
Usability sessions]

Prototype Changes Made to This Section
We amended the visuals to include the duration of wind-up and
wind-down periods (Table 2). We also ensured it was easy to
read by making the layout tabular in order to separate new rest
and sleep/wake routines. Particular attention was paid to
customizing how the alarm options could be set and configured.
Technical problems that required resolution included issues
with the ringtone preview and selection on certain devices, and
the alarms not resetting upon phone restart.

Goal Planner

Feedback
Participants considered the opportunity to set goals a very useful
part of the face-to-face program. Suggestions were made to
improve user understanding within a screen-based format by
offering the ability to view hypothetical worked examples to
help convey the concept of SMART (specific, measurable,
achievable, and realistic with time for review) goals.

...if you click, 'yes I understand that', then yes it goes
on to the next bit or if 'no' then the health care
professional would tell you what SMART means
because you don’t need another MS person telling
you that. [P207, Usability sessions]
Users noted that having the ability to select personalized,
customizable reminders for entered goals and review and update
them could increase engagement with the toolkit.

Prototype Changes Made to This Section
The option to note a goal quickly and come back to it later to
apply SMART criteria was implemented following user
feedback. Case study examples were added to enhance
understanding of the concept of SMART goals as this can be
difficult for some to understand. Other changes made to improve
functionality included adding in pop-up logic to provide
guidance to the user when 'no' was selected in the 'realistic' field
of the SMART criteria and revising the layout to make it more
consistent with the activity diary.

Thought Diary and Thought Challenge

Feedback
As can be seen in Table 2, elements 4 and 5 of the FACETS
homework had been integrated into one section (Thought Diary)
to reduce the complexity of screen flow for the user. Feedback
from users suggested that although this section was useful,
further simplification was required.

Yes I think this thought summary that’s useful
because, you had to think about how you were
thinking in reflection to the impact it’s had on you,
and I found that quite useful to think, because you do
exhaust yourself worrying about everything. [P211,
Usability sessions]
Well, because I’d already rated it once, that was the
original frustration of what that incident or whatever
was causing me. I don’t think, by the time I’d got to
reflecting on the thing and gone back and reviewed
what was going on and how I could approach it
differently or this, that and the other, I didn’t think it

JMIR Form Res 2021 | vol. 5 | iss. 12 | e19230 | p. 10

made me any less frustrated or angry from the point
that I’d already rated it. [P210, Usability sessions]

Prototype Changes Made to This Section
The screen flow and structure was simplified further (eg, by
removing the requirement to provide ratings for strength of
belief in alternative thoughts).

Additional Features and Other Issues

Adding a notes function (to enable the quick addition of general
pieces of information or thoughts for later expansion or
reflection) was suggested as a way of reminding users about
historical health-related information (eg, about new symptoms
that had emerged, ongoing concerns, other scheduled
appointments) that could be useful at MS review consultations
(sometimes held a year apart).

When you are newly diagnosed you just, there is this
barrage of questions and they don’t come to you when
you are sat in front of the consultant or even the nurse
and you go home and you think, “Oh god I wish I had
asked that.” Oh do you know what I’ve just had a
thought, maybe having a notes app, a notes section
to write down, you know, notes about your [... ]
fatigue or notes about anything else MS-related that
you need to talk to your nurse or doctor about, that
might be nice. [P203, Usability sessions]
I use the notes in my phone a lot, so, er, information
that I am told...almost everything, if it doesn’t go into
my phone at the time, it gets lost. For instance, I have
got the swimming timetable, which I would then put
into my fatigue management diary... [P208, Usability
sessions]
Displaying progress on the dashboard and allowing the user to
apply custom queries to data entered (such as their most
fatiguing or enjoyable activities) were suggested as ways to
enhance engagement. A customizable dashboard could allow
the user to create a display containing summary information
most relevant and useful to them.

Yes because I would refer back to this and kind of
look at what I have done and gauge my fatigue levels.
[P204, Usability sessions]
It would be good to have one that was a weekly... so
you could see what days you were particularly, you
know, it’s like actually I need...I have got a lot that I
am trying to achieve on that day, so I need to know
that I need to have a rest on that day or before....
[P207, Usability sessions]
Although most participants liked the idea of being able to
visualize their fatigue levels over time, one participant felt that
this could be disheartening. A customizable dashboard would
mean that this feedback could be turned off if a user did not
find it helpful.

Yeah if you could turn it on and off or something so
you wouldn’t have to see it if you didn’t want to see
it or something, yeah it could, if you had that over
several weeks and you’re just looking at red, it could

be sort of like a bit demoralizing yes. [P205, Usability
sessions]
Users liked the text-to-speech feature that we included in the
recap content.

The fact that you watch or even [with] text you can
have somebody saying it at the same time, I find that
really helpful for myself, because just reading stuff
sometimes it doesn’t, it doesn’t go in properly. [P204,
Usability sessions]
It helps there was a voice saying the words as well
because it breaks it up. [P204, Usability sessions]
The text was really easy to read, but having it read
to me was really useful. [P208, Usability sessions]
Feedback from users in the initial usability sessions suggested
they found the synthesized text-to-speech voice overly robotic.

Then as you went on she turned more robotic and
more... yes, less human and I think it would be better
to be told by somebody sounding a bit more personal.
Whether it’s a man or a woman it doesn’t really
matter I suppose, it’s just yeah the right person, but
yeah. [P205, Usability sessions]
As the voice was device-dependent, we only had a certain degree
of control over it, but we did find slowing it down a little made
it sound more natural.

Usability testers considered the possible integration of
voice-activated speakers as a positive method of engagement
potentially saving time and energy and requiring less dexterity.
In some of the sessions, we gave a demo of inputting a diary
entry using Google Assistant, and this was well received.

Yeah. That’s exactly what I would like. Something
like that I would use. [P210, Usability sessions]
Ensuring that help and support functions on the toolkit
accommodated the needs of those unfamiliar with the FACETS
program was seen as important. Different types and levels of
information would be required for those using the toolkit in
conjunction with the FACETS face-to-face program or the
e-learning course versus those using it independently. The need
for this information to be structured more logically to improve
the user journey was highlighted in early usability sessions
where users experienced difficulties navigating the recap menu.

So yeah, if I clicked on the activity diary and it says
recap, I think I don’t know what that is. [P202,
Usability sessions]

Additional Material Incorporated Into Toolkit

We implemented a notes section as suggested, text-to-speech
functionality (available in recap sections) was added, and
expanded help sections were developed. The concept of the
personalized, customizable dashboard was developed gradually
as more toolkit elements were introduced and tested over time.

JMIR Form Res 2021 | vol. 5 | iss. 12 | e19230 | p. 11

Discussion

Principal Findings

In its current form the FACETS toolkit was evaluated as good
on the SUS, and qualitative feedback from usability sessions
indicated that users felt the toolkit would be useful. Users
provided numerous suggestions for improving the toolkit in
terms of design, functionality, and content. Some suggestions
were implemented immediately following feedback from
usability testers. Although the digital format necessitated the
simplification of some aspects of the toolkit elements (to reduce
cognitive demands and fatigue), it also presented opportunities
to create synergies and interactivity between toolkit elements
and the dashboard along with visualization and customization
possibilities [63].

Findings from previous research suggest that most MS-specific
apps lack features desired by people with MS [37,64], resulting
in poor uptake [63]. Giunti et al [37] and others have noted the
importance of taking into consideration condition-specific
factors when designing mHealth apps [39]. The involvement
of people with MS throughout the design, prototyping, and
usability phases of the toolkit means that such considerations
have played a pivotal role. Examples include providing a
customizable color scheme (for those with visual difficulties),
using icons where possible (to aid memory), providing
signposting, and incorporating guidance (eg, buttons to indicate
additional scrolled content or the availability of additional
information or definitions).

There was some degree of tension between maintaining
consistency with the original paper-based FACETS homework
tasks and capitalizing on the possibilities afforded by the digital
format. The toolkit was developed based on the homework
elements of FACETS but did not provide an exact one-to-one
mapping. For example, after review of the initial prototype by
the team, the thought diary and thought challenge homework
elements were combined into one tool as it was felt that the
original screen flow was complex to navigate and could lead to
frustration or disengagement by users (Table 2) [65].

Comparison With Prior Work

As noted in the introduction, there are currently few mobile
apps for fatigue management in MS. A review of mHealth in
MS by Gromisch et al [66] identified 3 mHealth-based apps
and 1 web-based platform that promote fatigue self-management
through a variety of approaches [66]. These include cognitive
behavior therapy principles (MS Energise, which draws upon
the FACETS program [30-32]), gamification of energy
management via stamina credits (More Stamina [67,68]), and
use of validated self-assessments and medication and activity
diaries (MSMonitor; web-based platform) [69]. One app (MS
Telecoach) focuses on increasing physical activity levels via
telemonitoring (accelerometers and self-reported fatigue) and
telecoaching (advice, motivational messages, and goal setting)
[70].

Similar to findings from the MS Energise [32] and More
Stamina [67] usability studies, user feedback for the digital
toolkit suggested a need to simplify some aspects. A

cross-national qualitative study on facilitators and barriers to
using mHealth tools for managing MS highlighted the
importance of clear, simple design and features to enhance user
accessibility and engagement [40].

Users in the MS Energise usability study suggested
text-to-speech functionality would be helpful [32]. We obtained
similar feedback in our early usability sessions and incorporated
text-to-speech functionality into the recap sections. Users
reported finding this useful, describing how it broke up content
and aided concentration.

The More Stamina app incorporates gamified elements in the
form of stamina credits [67]. In this study, one user said that
they would like the digital toolkit to be more game-like. In
previous work, we obtained mixed feedback in relation to
gamification from both people with MS and health care
professionals in the context of fatigue management [12]. Giunti
et al [67] found that in their formative work for More Stamina,
people with MS reported a preference for collaborative gamified
tasks rather than competitive tasks. Untire, a fatigue
management app for cancer-related fatigue, incorporates
gamified elements (such as progression bars, rewards, and
badges) [34]. Gamified elements could be incorporated as
optional features in a future version of the digital toolkit. This
will be an important area to explore further with users.

The Untire app for cancer-related fatigue allows users to invite
a buddy so that they can manage their fatigue with a family
member or friend [34]. Feedback from users in this study
suggested that the digital toolkit could be a useful tool to help
family members and friends understand more about MS fatigue.

In the MS Energise usability study, users felt the app could be
particularly helpful for people with MS soon after diagnosis
[32]. Similar comments were made in relation to the digital
toolkit, and it was seen to offer potential as a tool that could
support communication with the clinical team about fatigue and
ongoing monitoring, assessment, and treatment. Most testers in
this study had been diagnosed for more than 5 years, so further
testing of the toolkit is needed with participants who are
relatively newly diagnosed.

During field testing of MS Energise, the authors reported that
a task involving the identification of unhelpful thoughts in a
fictional character gave rise to unhelpful thoughts in some users
about their own fatigue [30]. In our study, one user reported
that seeing a visual display or heatmap of their own fatigue
ratings could be demoralizing. Findings such as these underscore
the importance of working closely with users throughout the
development lifecycle.

Prototyping

Due to the power and graphical capabilities of smartphones,
mobile apps can be overdesigned [42,71] leading to the paradox
of choice [65], where users struggle to process an overwhelming
amount of content or too many interface options. The use of
online interactive prototyping tools for initial design iterations
helped the project team envision their ideas more effectively
than with paper alone. They also helped address some of the
challenges of working in different locations and across digital
and health fields. We recommend the use of an interactive

JMIR Form Res 2021 | vol. 5 | iss. 12 | e19230 | p. 12

prototyping tool to maximize the advantages of participatory
design [72,73] in early design stages. Like Giunti et al [38], we
found the use of personas (fictional characters that incorporate
composite attributes of target users) a helpful way to capture
and convey the varied nature of MS during preliminary stages
of development [44].

Mobile Platforms

A mobile platform offers scope for greater personalization than
the paper-based FACETS program materials. As noted, while
most participants liked the idea of being able to visualize their
fatigue levels over time, one participant noted that this could
be disheartening. While self-monitoring can help people with
long-term conditions to feel more in control [74], it can also
evoke negative emotional reactions [75,76]. In the longer term,
we intend to offer customization of the dashboard enabling users
to specify the information they wish to visualize or focus on so
that it is relevant and meaningful to them. We also explored the
best ways to support users to make sense of their self-monitoring
data [76].

Suggested methods of highlighting progress included using
tracking to document accessed sections and displaying progress
on a central dashboard, also highlighted in our previous
consultation [12]. Over a longer period of time, this might
provide the user (and potentially their health care team) with
the ability to track data relating to fatigue and could help to
reinforce the FACETS program principles and support users in
making lifestyle changes. In the longer term, the toolkit offers
possibilities for longitudinal symptom and self-monitoring, data
sharing, and greater integration of self-management strategies
into daily life, with potential applicability to other long-term
conditions. For example, fatigue is a significant and debilitating
symptom in a number of neuromuscular disorders [77] and
post-COVID-19 [78]. The FACETS program has recently been
piloted with a group of long COVID-19 patients using a
videoconference delivery format [79].

Digital Tools

Digital tools like wearables and apps are now starting to help
users manage the logistics of their long-term conditions,
reminding them to take their medication [80] or helping them
manage injection sites [81]. In some conditions like diabetes,
significant progress has been made in developing and embedding
specific technologies to support self-management [82] and
empower patients [22], such as flash glucose monitoring [83].
These have yet to make much impact in MS to date [21-23,64],
and concerns over the quality, sustainability, and effectiveness
of some solutions remain [84]. Global app stores currently have
no direct links with official medical organizations like the NHS
or obligations to regulate apps on their behalf. This presents
potential risks in terms of inaccurate information being made
available and subsequently used within a health context [85,86].
Providing hypothetical worked-through examples within the
toolkit elements provided a way of conveying key concepts and
illustrating potential benefits from their use. In terms of
sustainability, due to the number of devices supporting Android,
fragmentation within the current market is huge. Most Android
devices are currently using versions of the operating system
that are more than 2 years old. Considered targeting of a

significant portion of the user base is recommended (rather than
trying to target every possible Android legacy device). This is
especially important given that new versions of Android and
Apple operating systems are released yearly to encourage
consumers to upgrade their phones regularly.

The process of developing the digital toolkit was highly iterative
and agile; where possible we implemented user suggestions for
improvements as we went along. For example, in response to
user suggestions, we incorporated the capability for real-time
weather data in the activity diary (that could be time stamped
at time of input or called back retrospectively) and text-to-speech
functionality (available in recap sections).

Emergent Technologies and Future Enhancements

Emergent technological enhancements (such as Google Voice
and Google Assistant) offer further opportunities for improved
personalized eHealth solutions [87] and increased engagement
[88] and adherence [89]. We are currently exploring the use of
voice-activated speakers and assistants such as Google Assistant
or Amazon Alexa to enable the input of information via voice
rather than keyboard, an innovative way to reduce screen fatigue.
We have successfully prototyped this in a closed test with further
development planned.

Enhancements could also encompass how a digital toolkit could
be used intelligently for smart home-based monitoring and
assessment via mobile devices [90]. Emerging technologies
such as artificial intelligence, machine learning, and remote
monitoring of condition markers could provide opportunities
for more tailored and personalized care, from services to
treatments [21]. For example, personalized advice and support
could be offered based on user responses (in the longer term
learned by artificial intelligence) to improve engagement.

Areas for further exploration might focus on the use of the
toolkit for self-management and monitoring [64] and facilitating
communication with health care or other service providers (such
as long-term disability benefits assessors [91]) [39,75]. User
suggested enhancements made to the prototype included the
ability to add notes, which could be used for meetings with
health care providers. Other enhancements might include
integration of the toolkit with existing data streams. This could
include the ability to collect biometric real-time data by using
plug-in oximeters and wearable monitoring devices [92]
(although improvements in accuracy are required). There is also
the possibility of linking recorded data from the toolkit (such
as FACETS attendance, activities logged, and goals set) to
secure online sources such as the UK MS Register [93]. The
toolkit’s database design and security structures allow for this
possibility.

Strengths and Limitations

A limitation of this research is that the prototype toolkit has
only been tested to date in a closed, controlled environment
with a limited number of potential users (n=11). It has been
argued, however, that 10 or more testers is adequate to identify
the majority of usability issues [94]. A further limitation is that
currently the toolkit is only available on Android.

JMIR Form Res 2021 | vol. 5 | iss. 12 | e19230 | p. 13

Strengths of this study include the multidisciplinary project
team, involvement of people with a range of MS types and
mobility throughout, the use of mixed methods, and our agile
approach to development. Our testing protocols were designed
to take fatigue-related issues into account including ensuring
testing locations were fully accessible, providing taxis (if
required) to the usability testing location, providing
refreshments, and incorporating rest breaks.

Future Research

The keeping-on-track planner (section 5 of the toolkit) is
currently still under development. The next phase of the study
will involve people with MS remotely testing the prototype
using their own Android smartphones and providing feedback
via an online semistructured questionnaire (telephone interviews
with a subsample). This will enable additional comments, ideas,
and development glitches to be identified by a wider range of
users across a broader range of mobile devices and actioned
prior to release. We will next pilot the toolkit in conjunction
with the FACETS program (either face-to-face or virtual) and
the e-learning course (similar to the real-world usability testing
of MindClimb, an app developed to support skills practice
alongside group cognitive behavioral therapy for anxiety in
adolescents [20]).

To date, involvement of health care professionals as stakeholders
in the development process has been limited. We plan to gather
feedback about the toolkit from health care professionals in our
next phase of testing. Development of an iOS version has begun,
with the toolkit currently in a pre-alpha stage, and this
development will continue. Future plans include expanding the
app to include more content from the face-to-face program to
provide further scaffolding for the tools in the toolkit and
self-management support. As the 2018 MS Society/Nuffield
Trust data and technology report suggests [21], rather than
immediately reaching for data and technology solutions, the
future should be constructed within an environment that enables
the potential of data and technology to give people with MS the
best care possible.

Conclusions

We have described a mixed methods approach to the design,
prototyping, and usability testing of a digital toolkit comprising
the homework tasks of FACETS. This work highlights the
importance of the participation of people with MS in the
development cycle, working to a human-centered design
methodology. Continued horizon scanning for emergent
technological enhancements will enable us to identify
opportunities for further improvements prior to launch.