Original Paper

Informing Patients With Esophagogastric Cancer About Treatment
Outcomes by Using a Web-Based Tool and Training: Development
and Evaluation Study

Loïs F van de Water1,2*, MSc; Héctor G van den Boorn1*, MSc; Florian Hoxha1, BSc; Inge Henselmans2, PhD; Mart
M Calff2, PhD; Mirjam A G Sprangers2, PhD; Ameen Abu-Hanna3, PhD; Ellen M A Smets2, PhD; Hanneke W M
van Laarhoven1, MD, PhD

1Department of Medical Oncology, Amsterdam University Medical Centers, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands
2Department of Medical Psychology, Amsterdam University Medical Centers, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands
3Department of Medical Informatics, Amsterdam University Medical Centers, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands
*these authors contributed equally

Hanneke W M van Laarhoven, MD, PhD
Department of Medical Oncology
Amsterdam University Medical Centers
University of Amsterdam
Meibergdreef 9
Amsterdam,
Netherlands
Phone: 31 205665955
Fax: 31 206919743

Abstract

Background: Due to the increasing use of shared decision-making, patients with esophagogastric cancer play an increasingly
important role in the decision-making process. To be able to make well-informed decisions, patients need to be adequately
informed about treatment options and their outcomes, namely survival, side effects or complications, and health-related quality
of life. Web-based tools and training programs can aid physicians in this complex task. However, to date, none of these instruments
are available for use in informing patients with esophagogastric cancer about treatment outcomes.
Objective: 
This study aims to develop and evaluate the feasibility of using a web-based prediction tool and supporting
communication skills training to improve how physicians inform patients with esophagogastric cancer about treatment outcomes.
By improving the provision of treatment outcome information, we aim to stimulate the use of information that is evidence-based,
precise, and personalized to patient and tumor characteristics and is communicated in a way that is tailored to individual information
needs.
Methods: We designed a web-based, physician-assisted prediction tool—Source—to be used during consultations by using an
iterative, user-centered approach. The accompanying communication skills training was developed based on specific learning
objectives, literature, and expert opinions. The Source tool was tested in several rounds—a face-to-face focus group with 6 patients
and survivors, semistructured interviews with 5 patients, think-aloud sessions with 3 medical oncologists, and interviews with 6
field experts. In a final pilot study, the Source tool and training were tested as a combined intervention by 5 medical oncology
fellows and 3 esophagogastric outpatients.
Results: The Source tool contains personalized prediction models and data from meta-analyses regarding survival, treatment
side effects and complications, and health-related quality of life. The treatment outcomes were visualized in a patient-friendly
manner by using pictographs and bar and line graphs. The communication skills training consisted of blended learning for clinicians
comprising e-learning and 2 face-to-face sessions. Adjustments to improve both training and the Source tool were made according
to feedback from all testing rounds.
Conclusions: The Source tool and training could play an important role in informing patients with esophagogastric cancer about
treatment outcomes in an evidence-based, precise, personalized, and tailored manner. The preliminary evaluation results are

J Med Internet Res 2021 | vol. 23 | iss. 8 | e27824 | p. 1

promising and provide valuable input for the further development and testing of both elements. However, the remaining uncertainty
about treatment outcomes in patients and established habits in doctors, in addition to the varying trust in the prediction models,
might influence the effectiveness of the tool and training in daily practice. We are currently conducting a multicenter clinical trial
to investigate the impact that the combined tool and training have on the provision of information in the context of treatment
decision-making.

(J Med Internet Res 2021;23(8):e27824) doi: 10.2196/27824

KEYWORDS
prediction tool; communication skills training; shared decision-making; risk communication; treatment outcomes; esophageal
cancer; gastric cancer; patient-physician communication

Introduction

Background

Esophageal and gastric cancers rank eighth and fifth,
respectively, in incidence worldwide [1]. The mortality rate is
high and, even in the curative setting, the 5-year survival rates
do not exceed 50% [2,3]. Over the years, several treatment
regimens have come into use, resulting in an array of treatments
varying in their effectiveness regarding survival, health-related
quality of life (HRQoL), and side effects and complications.
For example, localized esophageal cancer can be treated with
resection, with or without neoadjuvant chemotherapy or
chemoradiotherapy, or with definitive chemoradiation, and
localized gastric cancer can be treated with resection with or
without adjuvant or neoadjuvant chemotherapy [4-6]. Various
options exist for metastasized cancers, with chemotherapy
yielding the best survival rates. However, palliative radiotherapy
and best supportive care may also be valuable options for
specific groups of patients [4,5,7-10].

Oftentimes, the choice between treatment options is based on
preferences; the personal weighing of the pros and cons of the
options plays a decisive role in the final decision made, and
therefore, shared decision-making is needed [11,12]. For shared
decision-making to be effective, patients need to be
well-informed and thus be offered evidence-based and precise
information on treatment outcomes. Evidence-based information
refers to the best available, most accurate, and up-to-date
evidence. Precise information is concrete, clear, and
substantially detailed, such as “In 5 years, 45 out of 100 patients
like you that are given this treatment will still be alive.”
However, treatment outcomes can differ according to specific
patient characteristics (such as age and performance status) and
tumor characteristics (such as tumor–node–metastasis [TNM]
staging and the number of metastases) [13,14]. Thus, physicians
face the challenge of having to inform patients on
treatment-related outcomes in a manner that is not only
evidence-based and precise but also personalized to the
individual patient.

Physicians may face many other challenges when informing
patients with cancer on treatment and related outcomes. A vast
amount of information on the possible treatment options,
including their procedures and associated risks and benefits,
must be communicated within the time restrictions of a
consultation [15]. Moreover, this information, including
schedules, numbers, and probabilities, is often complex and
therefore difficult for patients to process [16,17]. Patients’

emotions can complicate information processing even further,
especially as esophagogastric cancer is a life-threatening disease
[18,19]. Physicians consider dealing with these emotions as a
difficult-to-acquire skill [20]. They often worry that their
information might even increase a patient’s anxiety or take away
a patient’s hope [21-25]. Therefore, physicians may have
conflicting opinions and doubts about how to provide precise
and numerical information regarding treatment risks and
benefits.

Furthermore, tailoring the type and amount of information to
the individual patient’s information needs, interests, and
concerns (eg, one patient wants to be informed using exact
percentages, whereas another would rather get a general
description) has also been shown to be a difficult skill for
physicians [26]. These challenges impede the ability to meet
the information needs of patients with cancer [27-29]. Physicians
rarely use clinical outcome data to systematically inform
patients, given a certain treatment, on their chances of survival,
the most likely side effects, and the consequences on their
quality of life [30,31]. However, it has been established that
many patients want to receive more information on their
treatment-related outcomes and want this information to be
more precise [32-36].

Several tools have been developed to aid physicians in this task
by using prediction models to generate clarifying visualizations
of personalized outcome data, such as the Predict and Adjuvant
Online tools for breast cancer [37,38]. To achieve personalized
prediction, these models use multiple characteristics of the
patient and the disease to create bar plots and Kaplan-Meier
curves displaying survival data. However, to date, no web-based
prediction tool exists for use in clinical consultations targeted
at patients with esophageal and gastric cancer [39]. Moreover,
the probabilities of side effects and HRQoL related to the
treatment options are not addressed in the current tools, although
patients express information needs related to these outcomes
[32,40]. Furthermore, several training programs are available
to improve the communication skills of cancer care providers
[41,42]. However, these often do not specifically address how
to inform patients about treatment options and their particular
outcomes, for instance, by using a prediction tool. Combining
a prediction tool with communication skills training to address
knowledge, attitudes, and skills might increase the usage and
adoption of the new tool in clinical practice, improve the overall
communication of outcome information by physicians, and
stimulate shared decision-making.

J Med Internet Res 2021 | vol. 23 | iss. 8 | e27824 | p. 2

Objectives

Therefore, we aim to develop a web-based prediction tool and
supporting communication skills training to improve how
physicians inform patients with esophagogastric cancer on
treatment outcomes, namely, survival, side effects or
complications, and HRQoL. To improve the provision of
treatment outcome information, we aim for information that is
evidence-based, precise, and personalized to the patient and
tumor characteristics, and that is communicated in a way tailored
to the individual information needs.

Introducing a change in physician-patient communication by
adding a new instrument might initially result in resistance from
users, as suggested by behavior change theories [43]. For
example, physicians might be reluctant to use the tool because
it does not fit into their consultation routine or because they
might lack trust in the prediction models. Therefore, our
secondary aim is to evaluate the feasibility of the tool and
training in practice by consulting physicians, patients, survivors,
and experts and to iteratively improve the tool and training.

Methods

Overview

Both the tool and training were targeted at physicians in
oncology who regularly conduct treatment decision-making
consultations. In the development of the tool and training, we
focused on patients with metastatic esophageal and gastric
cancer. With regard to shared decision-making, this group is
confronted with the most complex decision-making process,
where personal values and preferences play a large role in
deciding among multiple relevant treatment options.

The iterative development and testing of this two-part
intervention occurred in several phases following the 2008
Medical Research Council framework [44]. This framework
provides guidance for developing complex interventions and
presents several steps and elements necessary for the successful
implementation of the intervention. The framework is divided
into the following four phases: (1) development, (2) piloting,
(3) evaluation, and (4) implementation. This study describes
the first two phases: development and piloting. The development
phase is described separately for the tool and training. Both
elements of the intervention are joined in the piloting phase as
a combined pilot study (see Figure 1 for an overview).

Figure 1. Schematic representation of the development process of the tool and training. HRQoL: health-related quality of life.

The Web-Based Prediction Tool: Source

The web-based, physician-assisted prediction tool named
Source, which contains visualizations of evidence-based, precise,
and personalized outcome information, was developed using
an iterative, user-centered approach. The tool was designed to
be used by oncology health care providers for decision-making
consultations. The Source tool, unlike other prediction tools
such as Predict and Adjuvant Online, was not designed for
unsupervised use by patients at home to prevent incorrect use,
misunderstanding, and lack of emotional support.

First, prediction models were developed to ensure that the
Source tool’s treatment outcome information (survival, side
effects and complications, and HRQoL) was evidence-based,
precise, and personalized to the individual patient and tumor
characteristics. Personalized predictions for survival using this
tool are based on the SOURCE prediction models [45,46], which
predict survival based on the individual patient and tumor
characteristics and are regularly updated when new data become
available. Depending on the tumor location, either nine variables
(for gastric cancer) or 13 variables (for esophageal cancer) are
required for predictions. These variables include age, tumor

staging, and metastasis characteristics. The model output is the
probability of survival up to 2 years following diagnosis and
allows for the comparison of multiple treatments.

The side effects (toxicity) of chemotherapy treatment are based
on TOXView meta-analyses [7]. These models establish the
probability of adverse events such as nausea, alopecia, and
neuropathy, stratified by mild or severe grade toxicity (according
to the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events [47]),
for various chemotherapy regimens. These probabilities are not
personalized to the individual characteristics and do not vary
over time, as this was not possible with the available data.

Finally, predictions of HRQoL are available from a
meta-analysis and describe the change in the EORTC QLQ-C30
(European Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer
quality of life questionnaire C30) on the global health scale for
best supportive care and chemotherapy in metastatic patients
up to 6 months after diagnosis [10].

Next, these models and meta-analyses were used to visualize
treatment outcomes. For the visualizations to be easy to
understand for patients, a previous systematic literature review
on visual risk communication was consulted [48]. Furthermore,

J Med Internet Res 2021 | vol. 23 | iss. 8 | e27824 | p. 3

the literature about usability and usability guidelines for
web-based applications [49-52] and existing prediction tools,
such as Predict and Adjuvant Online, were consulted [37,38].
On the basis of the literature, the first set of requirements for

the tool was created according to the MoSCoW (Must Have,
Should Have, Could Have, Won’t Have) system [53]. This
process resulted in the requirements listed in Textbox 1.

Textbox 1. Overview of the requirements of the web interface according to the MoSCoW (Must Have, Should Have, Could Have, Won’t Have) system.

Must Have

1.
After opening the tool, a data entry form is shown to enter the variables needed for the prediction models.

2.
The data entry form is dynamic and shows only relevant variables.

3.
Survival, adverse events, and health-related quality of life outcomes are displayed in their own tabs, and only one outcome is displayed at a time.

4.
The outcomes are displayed graphically in a screen-filling image.

Should Have

1.
The data entry form contains input validation to avoid mistakes during entry.

2.
The data entry contains explanations of the variables.

3.
The plots can be tailored to the patients’ and physicians’ preferences (eg, time frame and treatments to be compared).

Could Have

1.
The tool’s display language can be set to Dutch or English.

2.
A textual summary accompanying the plots can be generated and printed so the patient can review the information at a later time.

3.
A help function for physicians is incorporated.

A prototype of the web interface was created based on the
literature guidelines and first requirements. The web-based tool
was developed using the RShiny software (version 1.2.0;
RStudio) supplemented with ggplot2 (version 3.2.1) to create
graphs [54,55]. The creation, evaluation, and improvement of
the tool followed an iterative user-centered design framework,
where feedback was gathered from end users (patients and
physicians) and experts. By iteratively updating the tool, we
aim to provide improvements for the tool after each feedback
session and avoid receiving the same feedback after each
feedback round. A total of 4 feedback sessions were conducted
from January 2018 to July 2018.

First, a face-to-face focus group was conducted with 6 patients
with esophageal and gastric cancer and survivors from the
Foundation for Patients with Cancer in the Digestive system
after verbal informed consent was provided. The aim of this
focus group was to obtain feedback on the tool in a group setting
and promote discussions among the group members. One of the
researchers acted as a moderator and presented the participants
with each of the tool’s graphs. Each displayed graph was
accompanied by a short oral explanation, after which the
participants were asked for their opinions. Feedback on the web
interface and suggestions for improvement supported by multiple
participants were used to create an improved version of the tool.
The focus group session was audio-recorded and analyzed
according to microinterlocutor analysis to systematically
evaluate the participants’ remarks [56].

In a second feedback round, 30-minute, semistructured,
face-to-face interviews were conducted with individual patients
with esophageal and gastric cancer. The main focus of these
audio-recorded interviews was to determine whether the patient
interpretation of the revised graphs was adequate. By conducting

interviews with individual patients rather than in a group, the
aim was to review patient interpretations without the influence
of other patients. The interviews were conducted using a piloted
script. A total of 5 outpatient participants were recruited by an
oncologist at the Amsterdam University Medical Centers.
Following the participants’ informed consent, 2 researchers
presented the tool to patients by using fictitious predictions of
treatment outcomes. Patients were asked to interpret the
presented graphs and describe their meaning to assess their
understanding. Thereafter, the researcher provided the correct
description of the graph, and the patients’ subsequent feedback
was gathered. Feedback was registered in a response matrix,
including the frequency of different remarks, to establish which
possible improvements could be implemented.

The third feedback round aimed to evaluate the usability of the
tool when used by medical oncologists, and 3 medical
oncologists at the Amsterdam University Medical Centers
participated in individual face-to-face think-aloud sessions.
After providing informed consent, they were asked to use the
tool for two paper patient cases while stating out loud whatever
came to mind. The cases described fictitious patients with
esophageal or gastric cancer, including some of their clinical
characteristics. Several tasks and questions about specific
outcomes (eg, “What is the 1-year survival probability with best
supportive care?” and “Which treatment has the best quality of
life after 6 months?”) were posed to guide the use of the tool
by medical oncologists. At the beginning of the think-aloud
session, a video explaining the think-aloud method [57] was
presented and the participants were asked to complete a short
practice exercise to ensure that they understood the think-aloud
method before starting the task. After the think-aloud session,
participants completed the System Usability Scale (SUS) to
measure the ease of use and overall likeability of the web-based

J Med Internet Res 2021 | vol. 23 | iss. 8 | e27824 | p. 4

tool [52]. Both screen captures and audio recordings were
registered during the think-aloud session. One of the researchers
(FH) used both recordings to register whether the oncologists
successfully completed the tasks, how many mouse clicks they
used to complete a task, and which buttons they clicked on the
web interface. The median SUS scores were calculated to
provide a quantitative indication of usability.

In the fourth and last round, feedback from experts was gathered
by conducting semistructured interviews with 6 researchers
with expertise in patient-physician interaction, shared
decision-making, risk communication, medical informatics, and
clinical decision support software. The experts were presented
with a walkthrough of the tool and its options. Interviews were
recorded and summarized to determine which possible
improvements were brought forward.

The Source Supportive Communication Skills Training

Overview

Communication skills training was developed to educate
physicians on informing patients with cancer in a treatment
decision-making consultation using the Source tool. Due to the
complexity of the skills needed, it was important to specify clear
learning goals. As stated in complex learning theory, when
training complex skills, the desired learning outcomes must
address the following domains: knowledge, attitudes, and skills
[58-60]. The training aimed for physicians to be able to name
the most important tips and tricks for adequately informing
patients on treatment outcomes and communicating treatment
risks and benefits (knowledge). Furthermore, the training aimed
for physicians to have a positive outlook on using numbers to
inform patients about treatment outcomes and their ability to
inform patients in an evidence-based, precise, personalized, and
tailored manner (attitude). Moreover, the training aimed for
physicians to be able to use the Source tool and to incorporate
the tool to inform patients during consultations (skills). Finally,
the training aimed to increase physicians’ ability to provide
information tailored to patients’ informational needs and level
of understanding (skills). A team (n=5) of experts in medical
communication and psycho-oncology and experienced trainers
in medical communication discussed the context and content
of the training and set learning objectives. In addition, the
literature on training and shared decision-making frameworks
was reviewed.

As physicians value time-efficient and flexible training [16],
the training was designed as blended learning, encompassing
preparatory e-learning and a face-to-face component. The 4-step
shared decision-making model proposed by Stiggelbout et al
[12] was used as a framework. This model distinguishes the
following four essential steps for shared decision-making: (1)
setting the agenda, (2) informing about treatment options, (3)
exploring patients’ values, and (4) making a decision in
agreement [61]. The outline of the training was based on
previous communication skills training for skills in shared
decision-making, as designed for and proven to be effective in
the CHOICE (Choosing Treatment Together in Cancer at the
End of Life) trial [61] and the literature on the guidelines for
effective communication skills training [42,62]. The focus of
the Source training is the second step of this model, that is,

informing patients about treatment options and the pros and
cons thereof.

e-Learning

First, e-learning was targeted at summarizing the evidence base
for effective information provision and providing physicians
with tips and tricks for clinical practice. to this end, we consulted
the literature related to theories, evidence, and guidelines on
the provision of information in medical practice [12,63-67].
The assembled literature and theories were summarized into
short chapters, each covering a different subtopic. The expert
team discussed the scripts in these chapters to obtain a consensus
on the frameworks and models used. Interactive elements, such
as exercises, were added to the e-learning to enable the learner
to actively process the information. Second, the e-learning aimed
to introduce the Source tool, thereby addressing the use and
functionalities of the tool and the underlying prediction models.

An earlier study concluded that physicians value both visual
attractiveness and variation between learning activities in
e-learning [16]; therefore, the layout, animations, and videos
were developed in cooperation with a small visual design
company, Public Cinema.

Face-to-Face Sessions

Face-to-face sessions were developed based on previous
experience in developing and evaluating communication skills
training in oncology [42,61,68]. The most important
recommendations from these earlier studies were to role-play
with an actor to practice the lessons learned during the training
and provide the trainee with personal feedback [42].
Development took place in multiple sessions with the expert
team. The basic assumptions for effective information provision,
as incorporated in the e-learning, served as a starting point for
the training content. Derived ideas were written down and
discussed to create a training script and a supportive PowerPoint
presentation. The casuistry for the training actors was developed
together with a clinical expert (HWMVL). These multiple
development sessions led to a conceptual version of the training.

Pilot Study Tool and Training

A pilot study was conducted from December 2018 to March
2019 to test both the tool and training in a real-life setting. As
this pilot study targeted patients with advanced disease only,
we included medical oncologists and metastatic cancer patients
as study participants. The pilot study was evaluated by the
Medical Ethics Review Committee of the Academic Medical
Center Amsterdam (reference number: W18_278). In total, 5
medical oncology fellows (2 men and 3 women) from two
university medical centers were invited to use the tool and
trained according to the concept training format. After
completion of the training, participating fellows were
individually interviewed via telephone in a semistructured
manner to gather feedback to improve both the Source tool and
training. For the tool, the focus of the feedback was on opinions
and experiences regarding usability and willingness to use the
tool. Regarding training, feedbacks on the different components,
training as a whole, and perceived utility were collected.

J Med Internet Res 2021 | vol. 23 | iss. 8 | e27824 | p. 5

In addition, an experienced medical oncologist (HWMVL)
conducted three treatment decision-making consultations with
outpatients using the Source tool for information provision and
in line with the training principles. These consultations were
recorded on video after obtaining written informed consent from
the patients and oncologists. To comply with ethical standards
and according to the training, only information that the patient
wanted to receive was disclosed to the patient. One-on-one
semistructured interviews were conducted with the 3 patients
by one of the researchers (LFVDW) to gather their experiences
with the physician’s outcome information and the use of the
Source tool.

Results

The Web-Based Prediction Tool: Source

A prototype web interface was created based on the findings of
a systematic review of the effects of different types of risk

communication on patients with cancer [48]. Following this
review, we decided to use clear and precise risk information
(eg, percentages or frequencies) and simple graphs with a limited
amount of information displayed. As the review did not yield
consistent guidelines on which types of graphs to use, it was
decided to visualize the outcomes in multiple ways. In this way,
graphs can be used according to the preferences of individual
patients, and the amount and presentation format of the
information displayed can be tailored to their needs and
preferences. The resulting RShiny web interface runs on an x64
Linux server (version 3.10.0).

Source Tool Components

The final tool, Source 1.103, contains five main components.
The first component, the patient information entry component,
allows the oncologist to enter the patient characteristics
necessary for the prediction models and meta-analyses, using
supporting information, such as the definitions of TNM variables
(Figure 2).

Figure 2. A screenshot of patient data entry. The data entry screen displays the fields that are necessary for the prediction models and meta-analyses.
Additional information on variables such as the World Health Organization performance status is provided with a mouse-over.

J Med Internet Res 2021 | vol. 23 | iss. 8 | e27824 | p. 6

The survival component outcome was visualized in two ways:
an icon array displaying the survival probability at a given point
in time by coloring a subset of 100 figures and a Kaplan-Meier
curve (line graph) displaying the survival probability over time
(Figure 3). The survival component incorporates the possibility
of switching between the two presentation formats. From the
options menu, it is possible to select specific treatments for

comparison (eg, best supportive care and chemotherapy) and
change the time frame of the prediction (from 6 to 24 months)
to show a per treatment CI and three survival scenarios
(indicating the best-case scenario comprising the top 25%, the
worst-case scenario comprising the bottom 25%, and the typical
outcome comprising the middle 50% [63,64]).

Figure 3. A screenshot of survival graphs. On the left, a pictograph displaying the predicted survival for best supportive care and chemotherapy after
1 year is shown. On the right, the Kaplan-Meier curve for the best supportive care is shown. The optional shaded area displays the so-called typical
outcome scenario (with survival ranging from 25% to 75%).

The side effects component displays bar charts for various
toxicities (Figure 4), as the meta-analysis provided static
probabilities for each of the adverse events [7]. Each side effect
was visualized by two stacked bars, one for mild side effects
and one for severe side effects on the Common Terminology
Criteria for Adverse Events scale [69]. The side effects of
multiple chemotherapy regimens can also be compared. To
avoid information overload, only the three most frequently
occurring side effects are shown initially, although it is possible
to select all side effects.

HRQoL is displayed in a line graph and shows the EORTC
QLQ-C30 global health score over time (Figure 5). There are
options to compare HRQoL in best supportive care with
chemotherapy and display a CI and reference value (obtained
from the European Organisation for Research and Treatment
of Cancer reference values manual [70]). The final component
is a summary that can be printed as a handout for the patient or
saved as a PDF file. This feature enables physicians to show
the aforementioned graphs accompanied by an explanatory text.
This text is dynamically generated using the selected treatment
data and explains the content of the graphs.

Figure 4. A screenshot of the side effects bar chart. This displays the three most commonly occurring toxicities for both 5FU and CAPOX. The darker
bars indicate severe toxicities, and the lighter bars indicate mild toxicities. 5FU: 5-Fluorouracil; CAPOX: capecitabine combined with oxaliplatin.

J Med Internet Res 2021 | vol. 23 | iss. 8 | e27824 | p. 7

Figure 5. A screenshot of the HRQoL (health-related quality of life) line graph. The graph displays the HRQoL following definitive chemoradiation.
The shaded area optionally displays the CI of the HRQoL line.

Evaluation Round Feedback

The four evaluation rounds of the tool resulted in several minor
visual and functional adjustments to the web interface, as
described in Multimedia Appendix 1. Major adjustments to the
tool resulting from the gathered feedback were mostly
adjustments regarding usability, such as increasing the font size
and positioning of the legend. For the survival outcome, the
icon array was found to be the most comprehensible, whereas
the line graph provided the most insight for survival over time.
Therefore, it was decided to keep both formats for the survival
outcome, as the graphs supplemented each other. The line graph
also remained in the tool as it incorporated the scenario’s
functionality (indicating worst-case, typical, and best-case
survival), a feature that was found important by most patients.
For side effects, it was found that the patients did not correctly
interpret the meaning of the stacked bar charts. The bars were
changed into two nonstacked bars with 90% overlap to display
mild and severe adverse events for the same side effects to
increase clarity on the meaning of the graph (Figure 4).
Furthermore, it was decided to remove bar charts as a display
option for HRQoL data, as both patients and oncologists found
the graph unclear and wanted the data to be displayed over time,
as HRQoL may increase and decrease over time. Showing the
predictions at a single time point may therefore not provide
sufficient insight. In the final design, various options are
available to personalize the displayed graphs. Regarding the
usability of the tool, it received a median SUS score of 90.0 out
of 3 ratings (above the Excellent threshold of 80.3 points [52])
during the think-aloud sessions.

In the pilot study, 4 of the 5 oncology fellows participated in
an evaluative semistructured interview following the training.
The fifth fellow did not respond to repeated invitations. All 4
oncology fellows reported that the tool was highly usable
overall. Some minor suggestions were provided for improving
the display of certain options, graphs, and buttons. Of the 4
oncologists, 3 reported that they would use the tool in their
clinical practice. They especially valued the personalized nature

of the tool’s predictions and the clear and easy-to-understand
visualizations for patients. Furthermore, the inclusion of HRQoL
data and the option to print a summary for the patient were
found useful. The fourth fellow would like the prediction models
to be further developed before using the tool. For instance,
during the pilot training and interviews, several critical remarks
on the prediction models were expressed, such as the lack of
World Health Organization performance status as a predictor
of overall survival. These comments likely reflect a possible
lack of trust in the underlying models and analyses of the tool.
Another barrier to using the tool that one of the fellows
addressed was the fear of emotionally confronting the patient
with the exact numbers. This fellow did indicate that this fear
was overcome through the tailoring skills that he had acquired
during the training.

The Source Supportive Communication Skills Training

The e-Learning Module

A short and to-the-point e-learning module was developed to
provide an overview of the theoretical background on the
provision of information in a treatment decision context and
introduce a web-based prediction tool. The e-learning module
starts with a short peer endorsement video of the training of
physicians that discusses the Source tool. Subsequently,
physicians can navigate through 4 chapters. The first chapter
provides an overview of the principles of effective information
provision in the context of a shared decision. The second chapter
introduces the physicians to the Source tool by presenting them
with a tailor-made instructional video of its use and functions.
Furthermore, a summary of the tool’s models and their
underlying data is provided. The third chapter provides an
overview of tips and tricks for informing patients about the risks
and benefits of treatment (Multimedia Appendix 2). The final
chapter consists of a short and practical summary of key
take-home messages. In all chapters, textual information and
short assignments are alternated by instructional videos and
animated knowledge clips. A simple and appealing visual design
is applied.

J Med Internet Res 2021 | vol. 23 | iss. 8 | e27824 | p. 8

Face-to-Face Training Sessions

The face-to-face component of the training consisted of two
group sessions of 3.5 hours each, provided by an experienced
trainer, with approximately 2 to 3 weeks in between to facilitate
intermediate practice. The sessions were aimed at small groups
of 2 to 6 participants, as this approach enables every participant
to practice and receive personal feedback. Such a setting can
also promote interactivity [71]. Both sessions involved
individual role-play exercises with a professional actor in which
feedback was provided by the trainer, the actor, and peers to
learn additional skills [62]. Furthermore, group discussions were
stimulated and led by the trainers. This approach was used to
encourage physicians to discuss their attitudes toward using
numbers and the tool in the context of the provision of
information to patients [62,72].

The first session covered the skills of setting the agenda of the
decision-making consultation, introducing the tool and informing
patients on survival outcomes. Physicians were asked to practice
separate parts of the consultation while receiving feedback from
other physicians and the trainer. Physicians were instructed to
use the acquired knowledge and skills during their outpatient
consultations before the next training session. The second
session allowed for the repetition of issues addressed during
the first session and sharing experiences of applying the lessons
learned of the first session in clinical practice. Next, skills were
addressed, again with role-play and feedback, to inform patients
about treatment outcomes in terms of side effects and
complications and HRQoL. This session also addressed how to
conclude decision-making consultations.

In both sessions, tailoring of the amount and type of outcome
information to specific patients played a significant role in both
role-play practice and group discussions. Tips and tricks were
discussed regarding how to determine an individual’s
information needs and wants, how to fit these needs with the
informational needs of the physician, and whether and how the
tool could contribute to tailored information giving.

The total duration of the blended learning was 7.5 study hours,
which consisted of 0.5 hours of e-learning and 7 hours of
face-to-face training.

Feedback and Major Adjustments

Medical Oncology Fellows

Fellows reported that they enjoyed participating in the training
and specifically valued personal coaching and practical tips.
Furthermore, fellows appreciated the trainers and actors. In their
opinion, there was a good balance between the information
provided by trainers and practical exercises. Fellows especially
appreciated the feedback during the training from the actor and
trainer on their role-play with the actor. Overall, the training
was described as useful, and specific improvements were
suggested.

A point of improvement that was brought up was the substantial
time investment in the training. In particular, the pace of the
e-learning and instructional video was considered too slow.
Furthermore, the timing of the face-to-face sessions following
a day of work was considered inconvenient. The most important

adjustments to the training as a result of the fellows’ feedback
were related to accelerating the pace and adding an individual
booster session to the training in which the physician could
receive personal feedback from one of the trainers on a full,
recorded consultation.

Patients With Metastatic Cancer

Despite their emotions on the subject, 2 out of the 3 patients
were willing to participate in a short interview about their
experiences with the consultation. Both appreciated the use of
the Source tool and the physicians’ explanations of possible
treatment outcomes. Patients expressed differences in their
experiences regarding the amount of information about treatment
options and outcomes. Although one patient reported being
satisfied with the amount of information, the other indicated
that the amount of information was too extensive for him to
memorize it all. He needed a printed summary of the tool for
support. Both patients mentioned their struggle with the meaning
of risk or benefit for themselves, as great uncertainty remains
about their own future, despite the information provided.

Discussion

Findings

Our study shows the iterative development and pilot testing of
the Source tool and training. This combined intervention was
developed using scientific evidence and input from physicians,
patients, and experts. This process resulted in the first web-based
prediction tool to inform patients with esophagogastric cancer
during consultations on survival, side effects, and HRQoL of
different treatment options. Furthermore, we created a
supporting training to teach physicians the communication skills
needed to use the tool and to provide patients with information
in an evidence-based, precise, personalized, and tailored manner.
Preliminary evaluation results are promising and provide
valuable input for further development and testing of both
elements.

Both the tool and training were valued by participating
physicians and patients. Physicians especially appreciated the
practical approach of the training; the multiple practice
opportunities and personal feedback helped them use the tool.
Nevertheless, despite their positive attitudes toward the tool
and training, old habits could stand in the way of using the tool
and may impede the use of learned communication techniques
in clinical practice. Behavioral change theories show that many
factors can contribute to but also stand in the way of learning
new behaviors. Resistance could, for instance, arise as a result
of a different expected outcome of the tool or because of a low
tolerance for change [43]. The transfer of training describes the
possible behavioral change resulting of an educational
intervention such as training. From the literature, we know that
although certain trainee characteristics (such as the perceived
utility of the training) and training design factors (such as a
realistic training environment) can promote the transfer of
training, they are also strongly influenced by characteristics of
the work environment, such as situational cues (eg, social
support from peers or supervisors) or consequences (eg, negative
or strong emotional reactions from patients) [73]. These
characteristics can be difficult to control in the setting of

J Med Internet Res 2021 | vol. 23 | iss. 8 | e27824 | p. 9

everyday hospital care. However, concerning the training design
factors, the distribution of the training sessions might be an
important factor contributing to the transfer of this tool and
training for daily clinical practice. Indeed, the so-called spacing
between the two face-to-face sessions and the booster session
of the training might help increase task performance [74-79].

During the pilot training, it was noted that in some cases, the
fellows lacked trust in the prediction models used in the tool.
Further steps were taken to increase the physicians’ trust. For
instance, details about the underlying data and publications were
added to the tool to provide more information about the
methodology and sources. Model updates (such as the 2020
version of the survival model), which increases the model’s
performance and sample size and includes, for instance, World
Health Organization performance status as a predictor, may also
increase trust in the tool [39]. Finally, external validation of the
models can also generate trust in the validity and applicability
of the tool [80].

The use of the Source tool could also be influenced by the
application’s usability and how well the tool solves the
patient-informing problem as perceived by patients and
physicians. Therefore, iterative usability testing is necessary to
achieve an acceptable level of usability. As the number of testing
rounds in this study is limited compared with other studies
[37,38], the tool’s usability may be further improved. This issue
will be an ongoing point of attention that we will address during
future testing and development of the tool. From a patient’s
perspective, some uncertainties regarding treatment outcomes
may be reduced during the consultation, whereas other
uncertainties remain. For example, the tool might support
patients in participating in shared decision-making, but active
participation in this difficult choice might also overwhelm them
[81]. These issues can be addressed in medical education and
training by dealing with a broad spectrum of patient uncertainty.

On the basis of our experiences, we can provide several
recommendations to aid future research in creating and
evaluating web-based prediction tools with training. First, we
advise involving end users, such as patients and physicians, in
the 
early 
stages 
of 
development. 
Assumptions 
and
implementations are often made from the perspective of
developers, which may not coincide with the needs and wishes
of patients or physicians. By evaluating at an early stage, it is
possible to adjust the tool and training, and subsequent
improvements can be implemented more seamlessly. Although
not formally evaluated in this study, user research to investigate
patients’and physicians’ideas and expectations regarding such
a tool could also contribute to the usability and adoption of the
tool in clinical practice. Second, evaluation by physicians may
be complicated because of their busy schedules. We recommend
making the feedback rounds with physicians as short as possible,
planning them sufficiently in advance, and having them take
place on education days. Third, as insights on data visualization
and risk communication may change constantly, we recommend
facilitating ongoing updates of a designed prediction tool. We
also suggest that future research should use the current state of
the art when designing a new tool or training. Fourth, we advise
that communication on outcomes with subjective interpretations,
such as HRQoL, deserves a more prominent place in

communication skills training. We noticed in our training that
physicians often had trouble explaining outcomes such as
HRQoL. Finally, it was observed that end users sometimes had
conflicting opinions regarding improvements to the tool or
training. As it is not possible to cater to everyone’s wishes, we
recommend weighing the pros and cons of suggestions and
deciding whether a personalization option will be implemented
(such as displaying survival as a pictograph and a line graph)
or whether a single option will be implemented (such as the
background color of the web interface).

Most of the patients and physicians who participated in this
study agreed that the tool and training added value to clinical
practice. However, bias may have played a role in the evaluation
of the tool and training, as the evaluation only partly took place
in clinical practice. To investigate this potential bias and the
extent to which the combined tool and training aid in
information 
provision 
in 
the 
context 
of 
treatment
decision-making, we are currently performing the third phase
of the Medical Research Council framework: evaluation, a
multicenter effect study (registered under NCT04232735, the
SOURCE trial). In this stepped-wedge trial, physicians receive
training and use the Source tool both in simulated patient
assessments and with outpatients. The effect that the intervention
has on the outcome information provided by oncology
physicians was quantitatively investigated by recording these
consultations before and after the intervention and analyzing
physicians’ outcome-related remarks. The primary outcome of
this study is the provision of precise outcome information;
secondary outcomes include the amount of tailoring to the
information needs of patients, the patients’own knowledge and
opinions on the communicated outcome information, and the
influence that the consultation has on patients’ emotions. As
trust in the SOURCE models was found to be a potential barrier
to using the tool in the pilot study, physicians’ trust in the
models will be closely monitored and specifically addressed
during the trial. The models included in the Source tool are
being continuously improved and updated, in part, to address
these issues.

In this trial, both palliative and curative patients will participate,
and models aimed at potentially curable patients (cM0) will be
added to the Source tool. The survival models are based on the
2020 version of the models, which include updated palliative
prediction models and newly developed curative prediction
models for both esophageal and gastric cancer [39]. The HRQoL
model for curatively treated patients originates from a systematic
review and meta-analysis, and treatment side effects for
curatively treated patients were provided by the COMplot study
[82,83]. The addition of these models to the Source tool enables
evidence-based and precise information personalized to the
individual’s characteristics in the full spectrum of patients with
esophagogastric cancer. As the tool is currently being tested in
a trial, access is currently restricted to trial participants.
However, after the conclusion of the trial, the tool will be freely
available in both Dutch and English, enabling the use of the
Source tool in clinical practice [84].

J Med Internet Res 2021 | vol. 23 | iss. 8 | e27824 | p. 10

Conclusions

We developed and evaluated a web-based tool and training to
inform patients with esophageal or gastric cancer regarding
treatment outcomes. Through evaluation and a pilot study,

patients and physicians indicated the added value of the tool
and training, and both were improved based on their feedback.
The tool and training are currently being evaluated in a
multicenter trial to determine their added value in clinical
practice.