ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 08 April 2021
doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2021.635514

1

Edited by:
Helen Killaspy,
University College London,
United Kingdom

Reviewed by:
Christian Dalton-Locke,
University College London,
United Kingdom
Joanna Fox,
Anglia Ruskin University,
United Kingdom

*Correspondence:
Lisette van der Meer

Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric
Rehabilitation,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Psychiatry

Received: 30 November 2020
Accepted: 25 January 2021
Published: 08 April 2021

Citation:
van der Meer L, Jonker T, Wadman H,
Wunderink C, van Weeghel J,
Pijnenborg GHM and van Setten ERH
(2021) Targeting Personal Recovery of
People With Complex Mental Health
Needs: The Development of a
Psychosocial Intervention Through
User-Centered Design.
Front. Psychiatry 12:635514.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2021.635514

Targeting Personal Recovery of
People With Complex Mental Health
Needs: The Development of a
Psychosocial Intervention Through
User-Centered Design

Lisette van der Meer 1,2*, Tessa Jonker 1, Heleen Wadman 3, Charlotte Wunderink 1,4,
Jaap van Weeghel 5,6,7, Gerdina Hendrika Maria Pijnenborg 8,9 and Ellie R. H. van Setten 1,10

1 Department of Rehabilitation, Lentis Center for Mental Health Care, Zuidlaren, Netherlands, 2 Department of Clinical and
Developmental Neuropsychology, University of Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 3 BuurtzorgT Mental Health Institution,
Groningen, Netherlands, 4 Research and Innovation Center for Rehabilitation, Hanze University of Applied Sciences,
Groningen, Netherlands, 5 Department of TRANZO, Tilburg School of Social and Behavioral Sciences, Tilburg University,
Tilburg, Netherlands, 6 Parnassia Group, Parnassia Noord Holland, Castricum, Netherlands, 7 Phrenos Center of Expertise on
Severe Mental Illness, Utrecht, Netherlands, 8 Department of Clinical Psychology and Experimental Psychopathology,
University of Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 9 Department of Psychotic Disorders, GGZ-Drenthe, Assen, Netherlands,

10 Rob Giel Research Center, University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands

Long-term admissions in psychiatric facilities often result in a gradual erosion of the
identity of people diagnosed with severe mental illnesses (SMIs) into merely “patient.”
Moreover, experiences of loss often reduced people’s sense of purpose. Although
regaining a multidimensional identity and a sense of purpose are essential for personal
recovery, few interventions speciﬁcally address this, while at the same time take people’s
often considerable cognitive and communicative disabilities into consideration. This study
describes the development process of a new intervention through user-centered design
(UCD). UCD is an iterative process in which a product (in this case, an intervention) is
developed in close cooperation with future users, such that the ﬁnal product matches
their needs. The design process included three phases: an analysis, design, and
evaluation phase. In the analysis phase, the “problem” was deﬁned, users’ needs were
identiﬁed, and design criteria were established. In the design phase, the collected
information served as input to create a testable prototype using a process of design
and redesign, in close collaboration with service users and other stakeholders. This
resulted in an intervention entitled “This is Me” (TiM) in which service users, together
with a self-chosen teammate, actively engage in new experiences on which they
are prompted to reﬂect. Finally, in the evaluation phase, TiM was implemented and
evaluated in a real-life setting. In a small feasibility pilot, we found indications that some
people indeed demonstrated increased reﬂection on their identity during the intervention.
Furthermore, TiM seemed to beneﬁt the relationship between the service users and the
mental health professionals with whom they underwent the experiences. The pilot also
revealed some aspects of the (implementation of) TiM that can be improved. Overall,
we conclude that UCD is a useful method for the development of a new psychosocial

intervention. The method additionally increased our knowledge about necessary factors
in targeting personal recovery for people with complex mental health needs. Moreover,
we conclude that TiM is a promising tool for supporting people with SMI in redeveloping
a multidimensional identity and a renewed sense of purpose.

Keywords: personal recovery, identity, sense of purpose, user-centered design, severe mental illness

INTRODUCTION

People diagnosed with a severe mental illness (SMI; e.g.,
schizophrenia,
bipolar
disorder)
frequently
experienced
meaningful losses [e.g., losing employment/housing/(romantic)
relationships/dreams], because of their illness and lengthy
admissions. Approximately 20% of people with SMI need
these lengthy admissions in psychiatric hospitals or sheltered
housing facilities (1–3), because of the severity and persistence
of problems in multiple life domains [e.g., treatment-resistant
symptoms (4), severe cognitive impairments (5), somatic health
problems (6), poor self-care (7), and psychosocial dysfunction
(8)]. Unfortunately, these lengthy admissions often lead to
losing a sense of purpose, which makes formulating (and thus
obtaining) long-term recovery goals extremely challenging
(9). Despite the fundamental existential challenges this group
of service users faces, the dominant focus during the lengthy
psychiatric admissions is on symptom reduction and everyday
functioning, so-called clinical recovery. Relatively little attention
is devoted to personal recovery, which is the highly individual,
often nonlinear, process of learning to live well, despite the
consequences of a mental disorder (10, 11).
An
important
aspect
of
personal
recovery
is
the
transformation
process
of
redeﬁning
one’s
identity
from
being illness-dominated to a multidimensional self that includes
many other self-deﬁning characteristics (12–15). Yanos et al.
[(15), p. 2] deﬁned this illness-dominated identity as “...the set
of roles and attitudes that a person has developed about him or
herself in relation to his or her understanding of mental illness.”
The importance of (re)developing a multidimensional self-
identity that goes beyond the illness identity is also highlighted in
a conceptual framework for personal recovery in mental health,
the CHIME framework, consisting of connectedness, hope
and optimism about the future, identity, meaning in life, and
empowerment (16, 17). Supporting service users in their process
of personal recovery thus requires (among other highly related
concepts as highlighted in the CHIME taxonomy) attention for
the (re)development of a multidimensional self-identity.
Self-identity is considered to be an integrated construct
and encompasses interpersonal and intergroup identities [Social
Identity Approach; (18, 19)]. Interpersonal identity builds upon
personal interests, attitudes, and behavior that diﬀers from other
individuals, whereas intergroup identity builds upon social group
memberships (18, 19). Importantly, self-identity does not refer to
one single intergroup/interpersonal identity; rather, it comprises
a multitude of intergroup and interpersonal identities that are in
constant internal dialogue and are highly embedded in a cultural
and historical context (20, 21).

Several factors negatively aﬀect self-identity in people in need
of intensive and longer-term psychiatric services [see for a review
(22)]. First, as a result of the diﬃculty to integrate the illness into
a multidimensional self-identity, self-identity may be narrowed
down to a more or less unidimensional self-identity of mental
illness (14). This may be reinforced by the struggles of many
people with SMI to self-reﬂect (23) and to express themselves
because of cognitive impairments (24). Second, because of
lengthy admissions, social isolation increasingly reduces self-
identity to a unidimensional and illness-dominated construct
(25, 26). Societal integration is challenging for people with SMI in
general (27), and for those living in a residential care setting, the
gap with society is even wider (28). Third, (self) stigma negatively
aﬀects self-identity if someone considers himself/herself part of a
group that is devalued by society (18, 29). In their illness identity
model, Yanos et al. (15) describe the impact a unidimensional
and illness-dominated identity can have upon multiple recovery
outcomes (e.g., hope, vocational outcomes, and even symptoms
severity), particularly if combined with good clinical insight. In
a recent review, Yanos et al. (30) demonstrated that in the past
decade several articles have conﬁrmed various components of
their illness identity model, particularly the relationships between
self-stigma and diminished self-esteem, hope, and impaired
social relationships. However, this review also showed that
studies speciﬁcally investigating (illness) identity are scarce, both
in young adults in the early stages of mental illness, where identity
development is still in full swing, and in service users in later
stages of SMI. Because of the paucity of studies on identity
development in SMI and because acquiring a sense of self is
needed to be an active agent in one’s own recovery process (31–
33), both mental health research and practice should make the
(re)development of a multidimensional self-identity a priority.
The literature indicates the availability of a variety of
psychosocial interventions and tools that may help mental health
workers to support service users with complex mental health
needs in their recovery [see for an overview: (34)]. Integrated
models of rehabilitation, such as the Boston Psychiatric
Rehabilitation Approach [BPRA; (35–37)] and the Strengths
model (38), provide tools to gain insight into and work toward
recovery goals. Additionally, rehabilitation interventions that
focus on recovery in speciﬁc (life)domains are available, ranging
from cognitive remediation programs with a focus on functional
impairment due to cognitive impairments [e.g., (39, 40)], lifestyle
interventions [e.g., (41, 42)], and interventions aiming for
recovery in the domain of work/school such as supported
employment [e.g., (43)] or supported education programs [e.g.,
(44)]. In the last decade, user-led/user-developed interventions
have gained increasing ground, such as Wellness Recovery and

2

Action Planning [WRAP; (45)], “Recovery is up to you” (46),
and Toward Recovery, Empowerment and Experiential Expertise
(47). Additionally, digital technological developments, such as
virtual reality, provide increasing possibilities for application in
psychiatric rehabilitation interventions [e.g., (48, 49)].
Although these psychosocial interventions can be very useful
in supporting the recovery process of people with complex
mental health needs, these interventions do not explicitly address
the recovery of self-identity from a unidimensional “patient
only” construct into a multidimensional construct encompassing
a wider range of self-identity deﬁning characteristics. One
psychological therapy that does incorporate the transformation
of self-identity is narrative enhancement and cognitive therapy
(NECT) (50). NECT is based on the principles of cognitive
behavioral therapy and provides a structured group-based
treatment using psychoeducation, cognitive restructuring, and
narrative enhancement to target a reduction of internalized
stigma that may result in an illness-dominated self-identity.
The ﬁrst results of NECT suggest a reduction of people’s self-
stigma in people with SMI receiving community care (51, 52)
and people with schizophrenia-spectrum disorders receiving
community care or partial hospitalization (53), although not all
studies conﬁrm the eﬀectiveness of NECT in people with SMI
in community or partial hospitalization programs (54). However,
NECT still considerably calls upon cognitive and communicative
resources of service users and may therefore be less feasible
in people with SMI in need of long-term intensive psychiatric
care. Another integrative psychotherapy that speciﬁcally focuses
on improving metacognitive processing (which includes self-
reﬂection) and the integration of a sense of self and others is
metacognitive and insight therapy [MERIT; (55)]. Although the
ﬁrst results of MERIT are promising in terms of their eﬀect
upon recovery in people with schizophrenia and schizoaﬀective
disorder in community treatment (56, 57), the therapy is
highly verbal in nature, making it less feasible for the current
target group.
In the present article, we describe the development of
a new psychosocial intervention that aims to stimulate the
(re)development of a multidimensional self-identity and that
is closely tailored to the recovery-related needs of the service
users with SMI. In order to do so, the intervention should
follow the principles of recovery-oriented care, implying that
it should be person-centered and strength-based [e.g., (38,
58)]. Moreover, the intervention should incorporate nonverbal
components to meet the cognitive and communicative skills of
the designated service users given their considerable impairments
in these domains [e.g., (5, 8, 59)]. Examples of existing nonverbal
methods include the use of photographs [Photovoice; e.g., (60)]
or colored building blocks [e.g., (61)] to visualize a person’s lived
experience on a certain topic. Moreover, to optimize usability
of the intervention, the needs of both service users as well
as other stakeholders who support the recovery process (e.g.,
relatives and mental health professionals) with regard to the
usability will be taken into account, as well throughout the
development process.
In the development process, we adopted the innovative
approach of user-centered design (UCD). UCD is an iterative

design process in which the users’ needs are central in each phase
of the design process (62). UCD includes a variety of research
and design techniques, such as the identiﬁcation of the users
and their needs, rapid prototyping, and design simpliﬁcation
(63–65). Although the advantages of the UCD process in
the development of psychosocial interventions are increasingly
recognized in digital therapies and interventions [e.g., (66–68)],
to our knowledge it is only minimally applied in nondigital
interventions or therapies. Nevertheless, the advantages of
the UCD process are highly relevant for the latter type of
treatment as the design goals, such as high learnability, eﬃciency,
memorability, usability, and satisfaction, are very important for
psychosocial interventions (64, 69).
It is part of UCD to explore the natural constraints to improve
the implementability of an intervention. Therefore, applying
UCD to the development of new psychosocial interventions may
help to bridge the gap between research and clinical practice (64).
This gap may arise from diﬀerences between the context in which
the intervention is designed (e.g., a university) and the setting
in which the intervention will be implemented [e.g., mental
healthcare; (64)]. However, when such interventions prove to
be eﬃcacious, problems embedding the protocol in service
systems, local circumstances, or other unforeseen complications
(70) may limit eﬀectiveness in routine clinical practice (71–
73). The importance of considering these fundamental factors
in the design of an intervention in the treatment of people
with SMI becomes apparent upon looking at the success rate of
implementing evidence-based treatments (EBTs) in people with
SMI. Only 8–32% of the people receive EBT (74), and as few as
0–7% of the service teams oﬀer EBT to more than 70% of the
people serviced by the team, despite the availability of EBTs (75).
When looking at factors that impact this implementation
success, the usability of the intervention seems to be of
great importance [e.g., (64, 76)]. From the review conducted
by Lyon and Koerner (64), particularly the design factors
ﬂexibility and complexity seem to aﬀect the usability (and
implementability) of psychosocial interventions. Flexibility refers
to the extent to which an intervention can be ﬂexibly used
by (mental) health workers to accommodate individual service
users. In the tradeoﬀbetween ﬁdelity and ﬂexibility, Cohen
et al. (77) demonstrated that more ﬂexible interventions seem
to be better implementable, whereas interventions for which
ﬁdelity requires strict adherence without room for ﬂexibly
adapting to the context may be more diﬃcult to implement.
When interventions are too complex, they are also diﬃcult to
implement. Considering complexity is particularly important
in the context of people with cognitive and communicative
impairments because they should be able to understand and
use the intervention and its components (78, 79). Proctor
and colleagues (80) even suggest that factors such as the
acceptability of interventions (e.g., costs, low complexity) may
be equally important for successful implementation as treatment
eﬀectiveness. That is, interventions with lower eﬀectiveness,
which are more acceptable to stakeholders and are less costly,
may ultimately achieve more behavior change than interventions
with higher demonstrated eﬀectiveness that are more complex
and expensive.

3

The current article aims to describe the UCD development
process of an intervention that targets the (re)development
of a multidimensional self-identity in service users with an
SMI and complex mental health needs, who need long-
term intensive psychiatric care (e.g., in residential facilities or
institutions for sheltered living). In addition, we will present
the results of a qualitative pilot study in which we evaluate
whether the developed intervention indeed targets the concept of
(re)development of a multidimensional self-identity. Moreover,
we will evaluate the feasibility of the intervention as well as
determine factors that improve or impede its implementation.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Development of the Intervention: A
User-Centered Design Process
The ﬁrst step in the UCD process was the formation of a
design team, including a peer support worker, family peer
support worker, and mental health nurse, alongside a junior
and senior scientist, to ensure ﬁrm embedding of experiential
knowledge in the process of intervention development. The
design team was based on the grounds of a long-term psychiatric
facility in the North of the Netherlands. In addition to the
establishment of a diverse research design team, an ongoing
process of expert consultation took place in the project. Upon
formation of the design team, the UCD process commenced.
Although UCD is a circular and iterative process, three main
phases can be distinguished in the design process: (1) analysis
phase, in which the primary components of the intervention were
identiﬁed in close collaboration with the users; (2) design phase,
which includes (re)design; and (3) evaluation phase, including
implementation and evaluation in a real-life setting (see Figure 1
for a visual representation of the UCD cycle).

The Analysis Phase
The analysis phase can also be regarded as the “empathy” phase,
which is an important step in gaining a deeper understanding
of users and their experience. Input for the design phase on
speciﬁcally the topics identity and personality, life cycle, personal
narrative, and wishes and goals was collected through individual
meetings with service users, mental health workers from various
disciplines, peer support workers, rehabilitation professionals,
and professionals in the ﬁeld of intellectual disabilities, as
some of the cognitive and communication needs of people
with SMI overlap with the needs of this group. Furthermore,
we organized two focus group meetings [one meeting with
service users (n = 5), researchers (n = 2), and one mental
health nurse; one meeting with signiﬁcant others (e.g., family
members/friends; n = 2), mental health workers (n = 3),
rehabilitation professionals (n = 2), and researchers (n = 2)]. All
consulted informants emphasized the importance of the focus
of the proposed intervention. In addition, they agreed that the
intervention should be strengths based. The service user focus
group demonstrated that the discussion in itself of topics such
as identity was helpful for some participants. For example, when
asked to describe her identity, one participant answered, “I do
not have an identity, I sleep and that’s about it,” whereas another

participant replied by naming three positive traits that he noticed
about her. This triggered her in realizing that she had a nonillness
identity, which she forgot. This example also demonstrated that
identity is a social construct, indicating that the process should
include shared experiences (e.g., with other service users, family,
friends, or healthcare professionals). Importantly, some service
users preferred not to discuss their childhood or past, because
of painful memories and trauma, whereas others like it as this
provides others with information about “you as a person (who are
your parents, where are you from, what do you like, etc.).” This
indicates that choosing what (not) to discuss is a delicate matter
and should be an individual choice.
The
focus
group
with
signiﬁcant
others
(e.g.,
family
members or friends), mental health workers, and rehabilitation
professionals/researchers agreed to integrate the ﬁve life domains
(work and education, social contacts, living, leisure, and ﬁnance)
of the BPRA as a framework for the intervention [as proposed
by the rehabilitation professionals; see for a review: (81)].
Participants agreed to add “health” as a sixth domain and to
integrate “ﬁnance” in the “leisure and work” areas as ﬁnancial
aspects are often a means for further development instead of a
goal in itself. Furthermore, the second focus group, as well as
interviewed professionals in the ﬁeld of intellectual disabilities,
emphasized the importance of learning through experience, as
discovering talents, qualities, and (dis)likes is often a result of
undertaking activities. All participants agreed that experiences
should not only entail past experiences and memories, but
also include gaining new experiences. Finally, the second focus
group underlined the importance of learning through using
objects, in addition to learning through experience and language.
Externalizing thoughts by using objects or visual aids can be
particularly beneﬁcial for service users with communicative and
cognitive challenges [e.g., (60, 61, 82, 83)].
Summarizing the collected information from the various
sources of information led to the following design criteria:
(1) the importance of simplicity as the intervention should be
suitable for use by service users, signiﬁcant others, and healthcare
professionals; (2) making use of a group process; (3) a strength-
based focus; (4) focus on ﬁve life domains; (5) learning through
using experience, objects, and language; and (6) equality of
the service users and others supporting service users in their
recovery process.

The Design Phase
Brain Storm Session
A 1-day creative brainstorming session with two peer support
representatives, one service user, one family representative,
one music therapist, one art therapist, one psychomotor
therapist, one psychologist specialized in the care for people
with intellectual disabilities, one psychiatric rehabilitation
professional, one student from the institute for positive technical
design, two philosophers/artists, one graphical designer/artist,
and three researchers was the ﬁrst step in the design phase.
The day followed the principles of “Design Thinking” in which
several practical solutions are invented to solve a “problem”
[see for a discussion how these principles can be applied to
healthcare management and innovation: (65)]. Participants of

4

FIGURE 1 | Visual UCD.

the brainstorm session were challenged to think “out of the
box” and to use their ability and experience regarding nonverbal
means such as photography, art, or music and to ﬁnd a solution
for the main “problem”: “how can we help service users re-
discovering their identities while meeting their cognitive and
communicative needs?” The ultimate goal of this day was do
develop a ﬁrst prototype of the intervention based on the six
design criteria established in the analysis phase. Participants
proposed to frame the intervention as a “journey of discovery
of my life” in which the service user chooses their own fellow
“traveler(s)” (e.g., healthcare professional, peer support worker,
relative, friend) and to use language to which people can relate
instead of professional jargon. The nonverbal aspect of the
journey consisted of collecting tangible and visual souvenirs
along the way such as pictures or objects or using nonverbal tools
such as pictures, foods, and smells to prompt memories.

Focus Groups Facilitating/Hampering Factors for
Recovery
At this point, we aimed to gain important additional information
from diﬀerent perspectives regarding facilitating and hampering
factors for personal recovery in an additional round of focus
groups (three focus groups with peer support workers in training,
who represented the service user perspective, two with mental
health nurses, and one with family members). In this phase,
we approached peer support workers in training, because of
their trained ability to reﬂect upon their recovery process. These
focus groups largely elicited similar information as the focus
groups and interviews in the analysis phase, but revealed two
additional design criteria that were deemed crucial by all three
focus groups. First, there should be room for uniqueness of
the service users’ recovery process, and second, (self) stigma

is an important barrier to the recovery process that should
be addressed. Together, this culminated into eight important
design criteria that should be considered in the development of
the intervention.
The intervention should

1) be simple and intuitive;
2) allow for the use of a group process;
3) have a strength-based focus;
4) apply a framework of the life domains work, social contacts,
living, leisure, and health;
5) facilitate learning through experience, objects, and language;
6) stimulate equality;
7) account for the uniqueness of each individual; and
8) incorporate the topic of (self) stigma;

Development of the First Testable Prototype
Based on the eight deﬁned design criteria and during the
brainstorming session developed design concept entitled “the
journey of discovery of my life,” we developed a ﬁrst testable
prototype of the intervention, which we named “This is
Me” (TiM).
TiM commences with the formation of a TiM pair, consisting
of the service user and a person of their choosing (e.g., a relative,
friend, mental health worker). In the following description of
the intervention, we refer to the design criteria deﬁned in Focus
Groups Facilitating/Hampering Factors for Recovery. Together
they undertake an activity aimed at reliving memories from the
past or gaining a new experience (criterion 5: facilitate learning
through experience, objects, and language). Possible activities
are oﬀered by the intervention along the ﬁve life domains
(criterion 4: domains work and education, social contacts, living,
leisure, and health). The content of the activities was designed in

5

cocreation with service users, family, and mental health worker
representatives and have a strength-based focus (criterion 3:
strength-based). Examples of activities are “Visit your place of
residence of in the past,” “Introduce the other person to your
favorite music,” or “Teach the other person something you are
good at.” In case the activity in question turns out to be unsuitable
for (either one of) the pair, or for the moment, the pair will
be oﬀered a new activity. This way TiM remains attuned to the
wishes of the individual participants (criterion 7: uniqueness of
the individual). In addition, both participants have equal control
because the activity is assigned based on chance, and neither
participant is in the lead (criterion 6: equality). In accordance

with the criterion of equality, it is also important that the
activity is performed by both team members and not just by the
service user (e.g., showing each other your favorite painting). The
activities also include topics with the underlying theme (self)
stigma and restoring old or establishing new contacts [criterion
8: (self) stigma]. The activities are formulated in a simple and
action-oriented manner (criterion 1: simple & intuitive), so that
the pairs actually enter into the experience (non-verbal) and
not just engage in conversation (criterion 5; facilitate learning
through experience, objects, and language). Finally, the journey
should be captured and reﬂected upon by taking a picture or
choosing an object that helps remember the speciﬁc activity.

FIGURE 2 | Second prototype.

6

Although TiM aims to couple two people who engage in activities
together, it is possible to organize the selection and sharing of
experiences in a group process (criterion 2: group process).

User Evaluation Meeting
In an evaluation meeting with future possible users [service
users (n = 7), a signiﬁcant other (n = 1), peer support workers
(n = 3), other mental health workers (n = 3), rehabilitation
professionals (n = 2), and researchers/university teachers (n =
3)], we tested and evaluated this ﬁrst prototype. Participants
formed pairs, picked a card describing an unknown activity
(switching activities was possible), were given 60 min to execute
the activity, and were asked to reﬂect upon their activity.
Participants indicated the activities positively inﬂuenced the
equality between participants. Undertaking experiences aided the
conversation between participants, even when participants knew
each other. The reﬂecting questions were deemed unnecessary,
as most of the topics were already discussed during the activity.
Some participants indicated they felt uncomfortable leaving the
institutional grounds, mostly out of habit or anxiety. Therefore,
some activities may not be suitable for all users. Thus, the design
should be adapted such that there is variation in challenges
related to leaving the current destination and involving other
people. Finally, participants felt that uniqueness was accounted
for by the opportunity to choose pairs and the possibility to
switch activities when desired.

Further Testing in Other Clinical Settings
Experiences of the user evaluation meeting served as input for
ﬁne tuning the prototype into a second prototype. We created
more cards and activities in order to gain more experience in a
clinical setting, where TiM will most likely be used. Moreover,
to stimulate equality between users, we transformed TiM into
a picker wheel, such that the category of the activity would be
determined by chance (Figure 2). The categories represented the
aforementioned ﬁve life domains (work, social contacts, living,
leisure, and health). In this phase, in addition to content and
form of TiM, the implementation procedure was evaluated in (1)
group vs. pairs testing and (2) introduction at a random moment
during the day, during a previously organized activity, upon
invitation, and in an individual manner to pairs (service user
& mental health worker). Five diﬀerent locations/departments
at two Dutch psychiatric rehabilitation facilities (four at Lentis
Zuidlaren, in the North of the Netherlands; one at Dijk en
Duin, in the West of the Netherlands) participated in testing
the prototype.
Importantly, this round of testing taught us that the equality
that people experienced in the user evaluation meeting was
not always experienced in a similar way in a clinical setting.
In many cases, the existing division of roles between client
and care provider implied that (nursing) professionals took
the lead when choosing activities. Although the picker wheel
ensured that category of the activity was now determined by
chance, the activities within each category were printed upon
separate cards. In practice, mostly the care providers took the
initiative in selecting a card, rather than it being a shared
decision. Additionally, it appeared necessary to explicitly add

the possibility to reject an activity and spin the wheel again in
case the activity does not suit either one of the team members.
Furthermore, testing the prototype at clinical departments
revealed that people were tempted to remain seated and talk
about, instead of actively engaging in an activity. We encountered
barriers when the activity required people to leave the location.
This was sometimes due to service users feeling uncomfortable
to leave the home, but also for lack of time of nursing staﬀ
to undertake activities elsewhere. Therefore, for each activity,
three “challenge” levels in terms of location and involvement of
others were created. In terms of location, the most challenging
level requires people to leave the premises, whereas the least
challenging allows people to stay in their own home. In terms
of involvement of others, the most challenging level requires the
involvement of other people than the TiM pair, whereas the least
challenging does not require this.
The collected results of the evaluation in this phase indicate
that, despite the lessons learned, participants were enthusiastic
about TiM. They like engaging in the activities, and in all cases,
participants learned something new about their TiM partner,
even if they had known each other for a long time. Participants
also appreciated the opportunity to choose their own activity.

Designing a Third Prototype
We used the results from the previous rounds of testing to
adapt TiM into a third prototype. To ensure an attractive and
intuitive design, we appointed a graphic designer/artist (present
during the brainstorm session) for the prototype design. We
transformed the prototype into a larger picker wheel (Figure 3),
now requiring a standing position and thus stimulating users
to adopt an active posture. We also designed a travelogue that
TiM team members could use to log (1) with whom they
undertook the activity, (2) which activity they undertook, (3) how
they experienced the activity, and (4) their experience through
a souvenir (Supplementary Material 1 for an impression of
the travelogue). The latter was included to commemorate the
experience and reﬂect upon it by assigning thought and emotions
to the experience, as well as the opportunity to share the
experiences with others. Moreover, in this third prototype, the
activities within the categories were no longer presented upon
separate cards, but rather on the picker wheel to ensure the choice
of activity would not be decided by the care provider.
Based on the UCD process up to this point, we integrated the
“TiM training” in the design for two main reasons. First, simple
instructions are imperative to guarantee accessibility for all
possible participants (clients, relatives, signiﬁcant others, mental
health workers). In addition, a “professional training” may bring
about an unfair advantage for professionals and create inequality
between users. Therefore, the following simple instructions were
printed on the wheel and in the travelogue: (1) Pick a TiM
partner, (2) Spin the wheel, (3) Do the activity, and (4) Log the
activity in the travelogue.

Evaluating the Third Prototype
Evaluation Meeting With Users of TiM
The third prototype was tested in two separate group meetings,
organized at a central location in two long-term clinical facilities,

7

FIGURE 3 | Third prototype.

such that service users could also decide to participate on
the spot. Participants included service users (n = 9), mental
health workers (n = 5), students’ user-centered design (n =
4), a signiﬁcant other (n = 2), a researcher (n = 1), peer
support worker in training (n = 1), and the graphic designer
responsible for the prototype. The responses indicated that the
wheel was inviting and stimulated participants to spin it and
read the activities. The appearance of the wheel also triggered
the curiosity of nurses and service users who passed by, some
of whom participated (n = 3). Nevertheless, a number of
critical points did emerge. First, participants were confused
by the word “travel destination” that we initially used instead
of the word “activity,” which they associated with a vacation
or actual journey. Second, the wheel simultaneously presented
three activities, each representing one of ﬁve life domains and
each at a diﬀerent challenge level. This was confusing for
participants; they preferred organization of activities per theme
and to apply the three levels of challenge based upon this

activity. Third, the diﬀerent print color for each challenge level
hampered the readability. Fourth, the instructions and game
rules page in the travelogue caused confusion, inactivity, and a
focus upon understanding TiM instead of engaging in activities.
Finally, the verbal nature of the travelogue was not suitable
for all participants. Participants preferred a visual log and use
photographs, drawing, etc. Finally, two individual TiM pairs who
tested TiM separately most importantly indicated that the various
activities often resulted in meeting people who (have) play(ed) an
important role in the lives of the service users.

Consultation of Rehabilitation Professionals
At this stage, diﬀerent professionals in the ﬁeld of research on
recovery and rehabilitation (n = 6), a peer support worker (n =
1), a family peer support worker (n = 1), and social innovators
(n = 2) were consulted to address ﬁnal issues encountered with
the third prototype. First, reﬂection upon experiences remains a
diﬃcult process for the service users as well as their TiM partners.

8

The various professionals emphasized that verbal reﬂection may
not be feasible, especially as most service users experience
diﬃculties in verbal communication. They noted that not the
learning experience, but rather the experience itself should be
emphasized to stimulate personal recovery. Reﬂection upon the
experience can be facilitated by enabling users to visually capture
the experience (e.g., by taking a photograph) and by valuing this
experience (visually). This value assignment should not be an
emotional reﬂection but rather an appreciation of the moment
(I liked this experience) that may include a short elaboration why
they did (not) appreciate the experience.
Another diﬃculty we kept encountering was how to
activate participants to go out and experience smells, music,
interactions, or other activities. The professionals agreed that
the activities/experiences should be actively formulated (“visit
place X, listen to music, taste food”) to make TiM more action
oriented. Furthermore, both service users and staﬀoften have a
ﬁxed routine and behavior. From our own experience with TiM
up to this point as well as from the experience of the professionals,
we learned that “breaking routine” is a great way to activate
participants and trigger behavior out of the usual pattern. For
example, when we tested the prototype in a festival-like meeting
outside a clinical setting, most participants were likely to join,
to experience, and even to reﬂect upon the experience. However,
when we used the prototype inside a clinical department, people
showed mostly the behavior that conﬁrmed the role of patient
vs. healthcare professional. Through making TiM movable and
placing it on the locations only temporarily, we prevent TiM
becoming a ﬁxed object in the usual setting. Thus, TiM can
remain to “disrupt” the environment to some extent, attract
attention, and possibly trigger diﬀerent behavior. Finally, the
professionals suggested to create diﬀerent designs of TiM, for
example, a pocket-size edition, to facilitate the use of TiM out
of a clinical setting (e.g., use by relatives).
Based on the second evaluation meeting and the consultation
of rehabilitation professionals, the form and content of TiM
were ﬁne-tuned, and a pocket edition was made, which
was essentially a smaller version of the large picker wheel.
The Supplementary Material 1 provides a complete overview
of activities that were included in the ﬁnal version of the
intervention. Additionally, the form of the travelogue was
adapted and now resembled a large handheld fan. The travelogue
was organized in the exact same way as the large picker
wheel, such that when laid out completely, it formed a large
circle (Figure 4). The travelogue allowed people to now visually
represent the activity and value the experience.

The Evaluation Phase: A Pilot Study
In this phase, we implemented and evaluated TiM in a real-
life setting through organizing an implementation tour at 16
residential care facilities for people with SMI in the north of
the Netherlands. This entailed a festival-like (including music,
food, drinks) introduction event at each location to create an
easy-going and activating atmosphere that stimulated other than
usual role patterns and to maximize attendance of all parties.
At the event TiM was introduced and explained. People had
the opportunity to use TiM for the ﬁrst time and to gain,

share, and exchange their experiences. All potential users were
invited to these events: service users, family and signiﬁcant-
others, and mental health professionals. At 3 of the 16 locations
(one city and two rural), all service users who were present at the
festival-like introduction event (n = 30) were additionally invited
to participate in a qualitative evaluation study. They received
verbal information about the study, and if they indicated to be
interested, they also received a written information leaﬂet with
additional information. After 1 week, a researcher revisited the
location to answer questions. All service users were allowed to
participate in TiM, regardless of their decision to participate in
the pilot study. Before signing informed consent, participants
were informed that they could withdraw from the study at any
given moment. Service users received a gift certiﬁcate of 15 euros
at the start of the study, and another one of 15 euros at the
end of the study. The Medical Ethical Testing Committee at the
University Medical Center Groningen provided ethical clearance
for the study.

Participants
Eleven service users with an SMI (out of the 30 approached)
who live in a sheltered living environment agreed to take part
in the qualitative evaluation study. One service user withdrew
from the study before the interview (reasons unspeciﬁed).
Of the 10 participating service users, six were female and
four were male; the median age was 52.5 years (range, 29–
61 years). On average, service users had lived 14 years
(range, 1–30 years) in sheltered living facilities or other
clinical psychiatric settings. Self-reported diagnoses included
schizophrenia, schizoaﬀective disorder, autism, bipolar disorder,
borderline personality disorder, anxiety, and depression. In
addition to the service users, three mental health professionals
(one social worker, two peer support workers in training; age
range, 30–38 years old), who used TiM with the service users,
were interviewed. The mental health professionals also signed
informed consent, and the service users gave written permission
for the professionals to share information about them. Service
users and mental health professionals were instructed to use TiM
at least once every 2 weeks. However, we did not further control
this, as we were interested in the natural usage of TiM.

Materials and Procedure
The semistructured interviews for service users and mental
health professionals were created with four questions in mind:
(1) how do people use TiM in practice; (2) what is the
eﬀect of TiM on the service user, more speciﬁcally on identity
development and the relationship with the TiM partner; (3) how
do service users and mental health professionals evaluate (the
separate components of) TiM; and (4) which factors inﬂuence
the implementation of TiM. The interviews were created by
the research team in two consensus meetings. To evaluate to
feasibility of the questions of interview, one service user who had
used TiM, but did not participate in this study, was consulted for
feedback. The questions were only used to guide the interview;
participants were free to share their own experiences. Interviews
were conducted face-to-face in a quiet room at the sheltered
living facilities. The interviews were conducted by a master

9

FIGURE 4 | Hand fan travelogue.

student in clinical neuropsychology, who also worked as a clinical
intern in a residential setting for people with an SMI. In some
cases, a mental health worker was present because the service
users wanted their support as they did not know the interviewer.
The interviews were recorded such that they could be transcribed.

Analysis
Thematic analysis in Atlas.ti 8.0 for Windows (Scientiﬁc Software
Development GmbH) was used to analyze the transcripts. The

analysis was carried out by two authors (LvdM and EvS) who
represent diﬀerent perspectives (respectively, a researcher in the
ﬁeld of SMIs and self-reﬂection, and a researcher with experience
as a mental health service user). A priori, the main themes Usage,
Eﬀects, Evaluation, and Implementation were deﬁned, as they
relate to our research questions. Usage refers to the manner in
which people used TiM, including which subcomponents people
used and the usage frequency. Eﬀects refers to changes people
noticed as a result of their usage of TiM. We anticipated the
subthemes Identity and Relationships within the main theme

10

Eﬀects, as identity was the target of TiM, and identity change
occurs in a social context. Evaluation refers to the appraisal of
(aspects of) TiM. Implementation refers to the circumstances
inﬂuencing (successful) usage of TiM. Next, EvS did the ﬁrst
round of coding using the Noticing-Collecting-Thinking method
described by Friese (84). A recursive strategy was used during this
process. After grouping the codes into the main themes, EvS and
LvdM discussed and interpreted the results. Finally, EvS did an
additional round of (re)coding and (re)grouping, including the
induction and division of subthemes, based on this discussion.

RESULTS

No new main themes were derived by induction, in addition
to the a priori–deﬁned themes Usage, Eﬀects, Evaluation, and
Implementation. Under the main theme Eﬀects, Activation was
found as a new subtheme, next to the subthemes Identity and
Relationships. Results will be presented per theme, although it
should be noted that themes were linked (e.g., positive eﬀects
were reasons for positive evaluations; better implementation was
associated with more usage, etc.); therefore, links between themes
will be described as well. All quotes were translated from Dutch
to English. For privacy reasons, proper names were removed, and
the pronouns she/her will be used for third-person singular.

Usage of TiM
Six of 10 service users participating in the pilot study used TiM
after the introduction event. The frequency of usage varied from
often (ﬁve or more times; n = 3), to regularly (3 or 4 times; n =
2) to once (n = 1). All service users who used TiM used it with a
mental health professional. Two other service users formed a TiM
pair together, but did not use TiM because the activity they had
planned was no longer possible because of a physical disability
of one of them. As they were not assisted in planning something
else, they abstained from using TiM. The ﬁnal two service users
did not use TiM because of health problems and because they
were not reminded by the staﬀto use TiM; the latter becomes
clear from the following statement: “Nothing was said to me,
nobody said anything. If that does not happen, I don’t do it on
my own accord, because I don’t know how that thing (the TiM
picker wheel) works.”
Some people also used TiM in a group in addition to
individual meetings (n = 3), by taking turns in answering
questions or doing an activity together (e.g., sharing their favorite
music, visiting an outdoor workout park). In other cases, TiM was
used one-to-one, and activities took place both inside and outside
people’s living environment (e.g., visiting the parental house or a
relative, visiting a Buddhist monastery, a digital tour of someone’s
former place of residence, meditating together). In one case,
family was involved; they made a short video of the service user’s
former place of residence, including the old house and school.
The travelogue was not used at all locations. One participant
said she “did not see the point” of documenting the activities
in the travelogue. However, at another location, people used the
travelogue instead of the wheel to select activities, because they
used TiM frequently and spinning the wheel did not provide
them with suﬃcient variation in activities.

Despite the intention of establishing equality, it was usually
the mental health professional who took the lead in the usage
of TiM. For example, when picking one activity out of three
alternatives, one professional noted:

“It can be a little bit diﬃcult to make a choice out of three things.
I left that choice as much as possible with <name service user>,
but sometimes you have to make that choice yourself because she
found it somewhat diﬃcult.”

At another location, a service user described that the mental
health worker usually proposed an activity, but always consulted
the users whether they liked the idea. Thus, while the professional
took the lead, service users still had an active role in the choices.
Spinning the picker wheel itself was done by both the service
users and the mental health professionals.
The type of personal information that professionals were
willing to share with service users varied. While one professional
shared only “superﬁcial things,” another shared a lot of
personal information, especially related to childhood and family.
When asked whether she found it diﬃcult to share personal
information, she replied:

“Not for me personally, I am also a peer support worker in
training and then you are more inclined to use personal things
in your work anyway. And I ﬁnd it especially nice that there is
more equality in that relationship, or something. I ﬁnd it harder
to navigate when there is more distance. I don’t ﬁnd it diﬃcult,
but I can imagine that it is diﬀerent for other people.”

The amount of personal information service users shared with
professionals also diﬀered. This may be a personal preference
according to one of the professionals: “then I come inside her
head, and then I do too much with her... she has that with a lot of
people.” The personal information shared by service users did not
necessarily correspond with what professionals shared, as some
service users still shared in-depth personal information when the
professional did not.

Effects of TiM
Within the theme Eﬀects, we anticipated a priori the subthemes
Identity and Relationships, and inductively we also found the
subtheme Activation, which contains statements about becoming
more active as a result of TiM. Regarding the subtheme Identity,
one service user was very articulate about how TiM helped to
deepen and broaden the way she saw herself: “In a certain sense
it clariﬁes things about yourself, you can put things in order...
That is nice to know, because maybe you come across thing you
never knew about yourself.” Furthermore, TiM made this person
reﬂect on her past: “I came more in touch with my youth, I
used to think about that already, but now I dwell upon it more.”
Other service users described how TiM made them think about
their past, especially activities such as visiting or drawing their
old house or talking about family. Some people said they were
emotionally touched by these kinds of activities; someone stated:
“You do come across yourself, across your own things; they
come up, yes you do feel things....” The most memorable TiM
activities that service users reported were activities where people

11

were physically active, like visiting their old house, meditating
together, or visiting an outdoor work-out park, although most
people said they did not think a lot about the TiM activities.
Four service users indicated that TiM did not lead to perceived
changes in the way they saw themselves, although one of them
said that she still learned something new about herself, namely,
“That I should look at the positive aspects and to use my
capabilities... That I do not diminish or sideline myself, those
kind of things, I am allowed to be there.” Regarding the subtheme
Relationships, four service users mentioned that relationship with
the TiM partner became better, closer, and more equal. Another
person indicated that the process of getting acquainted was much
quicker: “That same connection between me and my mentor, that
took more than 2 years, before I thought I can tell them about this
and that. With <name TiM partner>, it was two/three weeks.”
For this person, TiM worked very well to get acquainted with a
new mental health professional. The fact is that TiM oﬀered this
service user and professional topics where they could talk about
“worked wonders.” The mental health professionals also noticed
changes in the relationship with the service users. One mental
health worker described the contact as a result of TiM with the
service user in the following way:

“Much more, well... not really like you have become friends or
something, but much friendlier or something. Much more open,
easier, barrier-free so to say. That you have made a little bit of a
connection in that sense. Because you share things of and with
each other.”

This mental health worker also noted a change in roles
that resulted from the service user learning the professional
mediation skills:

“Normally you are a bit in the role of learning or educating
someone about something, or something, and that role turns
around a bit. I have noticed about <name service user> that the
contact has become much more equal, or something.”

This role change was also noticed by the service user who saw
the professional diﬀerently: “I have seen the possibility that I can
see <name TiM partner> as a common-meditator, or something
what every that may be, because she also meditates.”
Regarding the third subtheme, Activation, a professional
clearly described changes in the behavior of two service users with
whom she used TiM. They would more easily approach her, take
initiative, and ask questions. When discussing the openness of
service users during a TiM activity this professional said:

“Oh well, that parental house, there she was very open and honest.
Then she told me much more about her past than she normally
would. And she said, how did she say that... nobody has ever
done this with me. So, you do get appreciation. And they ask can
we again sometimes...”

Two service users indicated that TiM had sparked their interest
in certain activities. For example, a service user who previously
visited an outdoor exercise park said that when cycling through
that park, she thought: “Well, let’s try that again sometime.”

Evaluation of TiM
Most people indicated that it was “fun” to work with TiM. Most
service users did not elaborate much, for example, someone said
doing TiM was “a nice way of keeping yourself busy.” Someone
else said she liked it because TiM oﬀers some distraction, and she
liked that she was working on the project with others. The service
user who used TiM to get acquainted with a new care provider
liked that there is no pressure behind TiM, the fact that TiM sets
the topic for a conversation, and the element of chance. None
of the service users evaluated TiM overall negatively. All service
users were positive about the fact they had to use TiM together
with someone else.
The mental health professionals were generally positive about
TiM as well, one professional said:

“I am very enthusiastic about the project myself and then you
pull residents into it. If you ﬁnd something very nice yourself it
will spread to the residents, because now they already come with
things themselves.”

Another professional praised the visual aspect of TiM:

“Well, you make things visual, that is actually always good.
Because they are actually very abstract concepts, an old hobby that
you have lost, quite abstract, but with this you can make it visual
very well. Uhm... I only see the beneﬁt of it.”

A number of components of TiM received a mixed evaluation.
Some people really liked the travelogue and used it to select
activities, whereas others found it redundant. People generally
liked spinning the picker wheel, but some service users found
it diﬃcult to pick one (of three) activity the wheel provides.
Furthermore, one service user indicated that improving some
activities on the wheel should be rephrased, and one professional
stated that there was too much similarity between activities.
The ﬁrst impression of TiM yielded anxiety in some service
users, as they initially expected that it would be diﬃcult. Someone
who ended up not using TiM said: “If I look at it, it looks really
complicated.” However, someone else ending up not using TiM,
but who still intended to do so, indicated she would like TiM
because “You do things that you otherwise would not do, not
so easily. It’s playful so there’s no pressure behind it, so that’s
okay.” All professionals and all except one service user found TiM
easy to use once using it. A service user summarized: “The wheel
itself was wonderfully simple. 1, 2, or 3. Okay if we’ve already
had this one, then we’ll continue with two.” The person who
still experienced diﬃculties using TiM had particular problems
describing the activities she undertook and did not comprehend
all the text on the wheel. Most service users said they would
recommend TiM to others. When asked why, the service user
who had been most articulate about the eﬀect of TiM on identity
said, “Well, it forces you to think about yourself, and then you
might come across new things and that is quite nice.” Two
other service users were more ambiguous; they believed everyone
should personally decide whether or not they wanted to use TiM.

12

Implementation of TiM
Within the theme of Implementation, several factors were
perceived as barriers to or facilitators for the usage and success
of TiM, some of which have already been described. First, with
regard to barriers at the service user level, TiM was not used when
(mental) health reasons or other problems were too prominent
or urgent in a persons’ life. Furthermore, not knowing how
TiM works and a ﬁrst impression that TiM is too complicated
may be barriers to using TiM. Some service users had diﬃculty
selecting an activity from the three options or to come up with an
alternative activity when the originally planned activity was no
longer possible. Finally, a service user said that the barrier to ask
someone to do TiM was too high for her, especially as she was
already otherwise engaged.
Some personal characteristics of the service users may also
inﬂuence the eﬀect of TiM; people may not like it when
people come too close, have diﬃculty to recall experiences due
to memory impairments, have diﬃculty reﬂecting upon their
experiences with TiM, or are hesitant to reﬂect: “I found it quite
nice, but it also made me a bit hesitant, because you are going to
think a lot about yourself and I ﬁnd that quite diﬃcult.” Thus, as
one of the service users remarked, TiM may not be for everybody:
“You have to agree with it, it has to be something for you. You
should think about it well before you start.”
Another important barrier in using TiM was the lack of
someone to use TiM with, as staﬀwas not always available
or willing to participate. One service user said that using TiM
in a group was not optimal for her: “Because there are more
who get a turn, because you have to consider others, then
you only have a small opportunity to tell something about
yourself.” Sometimes, activities were diﬃcult to organize and
require substantial planning, a point raised by both a professional
and a service user. This may lead to the abandonment of plans or
require ﬂexibility, as one professional phrased this:

“If they really want something... like going to the parental house,
then it takes me a few hours... then I need to come back for it, and
it costs a few hours of my time... but I write down those hours, it
is not really a bother.”

Professionals found it diﬃcult to be the only one in the team who
used TiM, as nurses and carers were already otherwise engaged.
Although according to one professional, this may also be a matter
of perspective:

“For them it is more the idea that it is something extra, that it is
not really required and then there is no time for it. While it really
can be a nice component of your work, and it is not really seen in
that way.”

The ﬁrst facilitator indicated by one service user was the
introduction event: “that indeed made the next step with <name
Tim partner> a bit easier.” Regarding how service users should
be approached to engage in TiM, one service user said: “Just
approach people really carefully, because they often have a certain
image, something like what has someone else got to do with what
I know. So, ﬁrst convince and then the person has to decide for

themselves.” Another service user said that using TiM should be
an individual’s choice and not be obligatory. Service users who
used TiM as well as those who did not said regular appointments
would improve the usage of TiM, because “If I have to do it on my
own accord, it will not happen, I know that about myself.” This
corresponds to the ﬁnding that generally someone other than the
service user needs to take the initiative, a point raised by multiple
service users and professionals. According to a service user, the
person you use TiM with should not be just anybody:

“Well, it is good to do it together with someone, and then with
somebody who is interested in you doing it. Because if it is
somebody who just sits there, then they are of no use. You have to
do it with somebody who thinks along.”

Both peer support workers in training who were interviewed
suggested TiM would be especially appropriate for use by peer
support workers, given their diﬀerent relationship with the
service user. They all did not agree that TiM would be appropriate
to use by peer support worker in training. For one person, TiM
was part of her learning goals, giving her more room to use TiM,
whereas it was diﬃcult for the other to use TiM alongside the
large number of assignments within her internship. One peer
support worker in training indicated that other colleagues should
also make time for TiM, because “Such conversations can bring
you a lot in the long run and can also bring the clients further,
I think.” Finally, a professional noted that the importance of
positioning TiM within a team of professionals:

“So maybe it is an idea that these methods, TiM, are less proﬁled
like a standard method, but more like an extra tool that can be
used, and then it must continue to receive attention.”

DISCUSSION

The aim of the current article was to describe the UCD process
and the qualitative pilot study of an innovative psychosocial
intervention to support recovery of a multidimensional self-
identity in people with an SMI. Most importantly, the process
of UCD proved to be a thorough and inspiring process that
leaves ample room for adaptation and improvement according
to wishes and needs of its users (be it service users as well as
people supporting service users). The pilot study demonstrated
that the ﬁnal product, TiM, seems useful and promising. Service
users indicated that they enjoyed TiM, and some noticed eﬀects,
although some challenges with regard to the implementation and
design remain.
Understanding the problems and the needs of the end-users
for whom the product is developed is a core principle of UCD
(62) and the main goal of the analysis phase of this project.
Subsequently addressing the deﬁned problem in a way that is
meaningful to the user is a basic precondition for the usability
of an intervention (64). Therefore, service users were consulted
in various ways at all stages of the project. We found that
service users with complex mental health problems were able
to meaningfully participate and contribute to the understanding
of the problem as well as to thinking about the form and

13

content of the intervention. Even people who were less capable
to express their needs and wishes regarding the content or design
of the intervention were still able to indicate factors that they
felt were important to consider. Apart from the service users,
we also included other potential users and stakeholders (e.g.,
family, signiﬁcant others, mental health workers, researchers, and
rehabilitation professionals) in the UCD process. This revealed
additional insights into the design criteria of the intervention
that we formulated at the end of the analysis phase. These design
criteria were used as a basis for developing a ﬁrst prototype
of TiM during the brainstorm session and were considered
helpful by the participants. In addition, participants perceived
the involvement of creative professionals during this session
as helpful in order to stimulate thinking “out of the box.”
Building upon the insights from the brainstorm session, as well
as the subsequent input of focus groups with peer support
workers, relatives, and psychiatric nurses, the six initial design
criteria were supplemented to a total of eight design criteria (see
Focus Groups Facilitating/Hampering Factors for Recovery). The
subsequent iterative process of prototyping, testing, evaluating,
and redesigning, which is typical of UCD [e.g., (63)], was crucial
in adapting and ﬁne-tuning TiM to the needs of the service users
as well as mental health workers and family members.
In the pilot study, we investigated four main questions
concerning the usage, eﬀects, evaluation, and the implementation
of the newly developed intervention. We found that TiM was
used, but not with the frequency (biweekly) we originally
suggested. People used TiM in various ways, in groups or
in pairs, and inside and outside the service user’s place of
residence. For service users, it turned out important to use
TiM in the presence of someone who took the lead, but who
was supportive, made appointments, and helped suggest/choose
activities. Results additionally suggest that people may abstain
from using TiM because they initially had trouble to understand
how to use TiM. Some people described their ﬁrst impression
of TiM as complicated, although once using it, almost everyone,
including the professionals, found TiM understandable and
enjoyable. The introduction event to acquaint people with TiM
seemed to lower the barrier for the usage of TiM and helped
people understand TiM. The introduction even also stimulated
role patterns that deviated from the traditional role patterns,
underlining the role of context in which TiM is oﬀered. Upon
using TiM, TiM pairs varied with regard to the amount of
personal information that they exchanged. This was the case
for both service users as well as mental health professionals
and may be a matter of personal preference. Eﬀects that were
noticed by some participants particularly referred to the quality
of the relationship between service users and professionals.
Most people experienced that they had gotten closer, and there
was more equality than before. One TiM pair used TiM to
get acquainted with one another, which worked really well for
them. Furthermore, we observed that TiM activated some service
users. They demonstrated an increased interest to perform some
new activities more often and took more initiative according
to the professionals. Questions regarding identity were diﬃcult
to answer for most service users; most people did not notice
changes. One person indicated to reﬂect more on himself/herself,

whereas another person experienced to learn something new
about himself/herself.
The results of the pilot study suggest that TiM may be a
useful tool for peer support workers, as it ﬁts well with their role.
However, professionals indicated to expect a beneﬁcial eﬀect if
other colleagues would use TiM as well, as they could see the
beneﬁt for the service users. However, they also expected barriers
in this regard, given the many tasks already expected from nurses
and caretakers, as well as the belief that an intervention such
as TiM was not considered part of their professional proﬁle.
The implementation process of TiM thus requires continued
attention within mental health teams. It was suggested that
coupling of TiM to speciﬁc situations (e.g., intake procedure,
new case manager) might facilitate implementation. However, as
suggested by the service users, using TiM will not be suitable
for all service users and thus should remain optional and up to
the user.
Both with respect to the UCD development process and
the evaluation of TiM, several discussion points can be raised.
During the development process, the goal was to create a
highly usable intervention, given the importance of usability
for the implementation process [e.g., (64, 76)] and given the
availability of many eﬀective, but hardly used treatments (74,
75). An important factor in this regard was ﬂexibility, as more
ﬂexible interventions tend to be better implementable (77).
The importance of ﬂexibility of an intervention is conﬁrmed
by the results of the focus group meeting with peer support
workers, relatives, and psychiatric nurses in the design phase.
In all focus groups, the necessity to adapt to the uniqueness
of the individual was underlined. Moreover, the importance of
accounting for individual diﬀerences in the process of treatment
is at the very basis of recovery-oriented practice (17). The
ﬁnal product of the UCD process, TiM, contains high levels
of ﬂexibility. Although people are recommended to use TiM
biweekly, they can alternate the frequency depending on their
own preferences; the pilot study conﬁrms that people indeed
diﬀer in their preferences regarding frequency. In addition, TiM
includes an element of choice both in the selection of the activity
and the manner in which the activity is executed. The pilot
study indeed demonstrated variability in the use of TiM (pairs
vs. groups), and choices regarding exact nature and location of
activities were variable.
The current study conﬁrmed the importance of minimizing
the complexity of the intervention, to ensure usability and thus
implementability (64). The iterative UCD process revealed the
initial complexity of TiM and allowed us to further ﬁne-tune
and adapt the intervention. Nevertheless, despite the ﬁnding that
the ﬁnal product was perceived understandable and intuitive to
all except one user in the pilot, initially a number of people
initially believed TiM to be too complex. Although internalized
stigma may have (partially) caused this experience (85), it does
conﬁrm the importance of the factor of complexity, as well as the
importance of prototyping, testing, and redesigning.
When an intervention is found eﬀective, this may facilitate
the implementation success of an intervention (64). Although
the eﬀectiveness of TiM cannot be evaluated with the current
data, the expectation of eﬀectiveness of TiM that some service

14

users and mental health workers expressed stimulated them to
use or recommend TiM. In addition, some users reported to
experience beneﬁcial eﬀects of the intervention. Interestingly,
while the aim of TiM was to stimulate identity development
in order to establish personal recovery, the most noticeable
eﬀects concerned the improved relationship with the TiM
partner and activation of the service users. This may be
due to the timely process of rebuilding a multidimensional
identity (86), for which the duration of the pilot study may
have been too short. Alternatively, changes in the relationship
between TiM partners may be more noticeable and concrete,
relative to changes in identity. However, it is also possible
that changes in the relationship represent a ﬁrst eﬀect of
identity development. Indeed, literature suggests that intergroup
identity, which is an important part of self-identity, is something
that often arises from a social context (18, 19). The equality
that some people experienced as they progressed with the
intervention may, in due time, impact the intergroup identity
of the services users. In addition, newly gained experiences and
roles, as a result of the employed activities, may contribute
to the process of rebuilding this intergroup identity and
contribute to establishing a sense of purpose. This latter point
is particularly relevant for the current target population, people
with SMI with both cognitive and communication challenges
(24). Diﬃculties with self-reﬂection have been described for
people with schizophrenia in general (23, 87, 88), and these may
be even more substantial in this subgroup of service users. It is
possible that changes in identity were too subtle to notice with
the current measurements.

STRENGTHS AND WEAKNESSES

Because of the relatively small sample size as well as the fact
that not all participants used TiM, we may not have reached
data saturation and thus may have missed opinions about
TiM. This is something that we need to consider upon the
continued UCD process in ﬁne tuning TiM. Furthermore, we
run the risk of a selection bias, as people were approached at
the introduction event. For some service users, participating
in an event like this may have been out of their comfort
zone. Additionally, participants volunteered to participate in
the study. Possibly people who were unwilling to participate
had diﬀerent opinions regarding the intervention. Although we
attempted to involve family members in the implementation
process, this was not successful. This may be due to the fact
that many service users have lost contact over time with their
families, and where there still is contact, people may not always
be open to getting involved in the (89). However, there was
diversity in the group of included participants. In addition,
we included both the perspectives of service users and mental
health professionals, which increases diversity of listed opinions.
Furthermore, analysis and discussion were done by two authors
who represent diﬀerent perspectives, to improve thorough
description and interpretation of the data. A strength of the study
design was the uncontrolled usage of TiM (which is typically
highly controlled in randomized controlled trials), which gave

us a more realistic idea about the usage and implementation
of TiM in clinical practice. An important lesson is that, while
the UCD process will have substantially improve usability (and
thus implementability), we still encountered implementation
diﬃculties. For example, despite involvement of mental health
nurses in the UCD process, many mental health nurses indicated
that they had no time to use TiM. However, as one professional
noted, some mental health workers did not consider TiM part
of their task description, lowering the acceptability of TiM
for these stakeholders. This observation may also represent a
more general diﬃculty among mental health workers to shift
from a symptom-oriented toward recovery-oriented practice. For
now, interventions with the focus upon identity development
and sense of purpose may be best allocated to peer support
workers, who are speciﬁcally trained in this recovery-oriented
perspective, or occupational therapists, who are involved in
supporting service users in establishing diﬀerent roles in life.
Finally, although we developed TiM with a focus upon nonverbal
communication, the measurements in the pilot were largely
verbal. Upon this point, further research into the development of
nonverbal measurement instruments is needed, to be equipped
for studying the topic of identity in people with cognitive and
communicative impairments.
With respect to the design of TiM we believe that
improvements could still be made, particularly regarding
the amount of available activities, the nonverbal nature of
TiM design, and options for adaptability and personalization.
Importantly, these drawbacks may be partly associated with the
physical nature of the current design. Exploring the options for
digitalization of TiM may be worthwhile in the continued UCD
process. A digital interface facilitates sharing experiences with
family members or others, and it would increase accessibility
for a larger group of people because physical materials are not
required. Furthermore, future endeavors may include extending
TiM to other target population, who may experience similar
struggles with self-identity and sense of purpose (e.g., people
with traumatic brain injury or other life-changing physical or
mental conditions). The major advantage of a UCD process
is that it is circular, which enables us to take the input from
the development process and the evaluation study as described
in this article into account and use it for the development of
an improved (digital) version of TiM in the future. A ﬁnal
strength of the study is that we were able to demonstrate
that the process of participating in the UCD process itself
contributed to the process of recovery in some service users.
People indicated that they rediscovered their ability to help others
with their input, a new meaningful role. As one service user
put it: “ﬁnally somebody asked me to use my brain again.”
Although not all service users will be interested or are able
to contribute to these kinds of processes, the value of their
contribution often remains unrecognized by many, or their
capabilities may be underestimated as a result of stigma. Overall,
we can conclude that UCD process is a useful and usable method
for the development of a new psychosocial intervention, as well
as increases the knowledge regarding factors that are important
in supporting personal recovery for people with complex mental
health needs.

15

DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT

The datasets generated for this article are not readily available
because Participants did not consent to sharing their data with
third parties. Requests to access the datasets should be directed
to l.van.der.meer@rug.nl.

ETHICS STATEMENT

The studies involving human participants were reviewed and
approved by Medisch Ethische Toetsingscommissie UMCG. The
patients/participants provided their written informed consent to
participate in this study.

LvM
was
initiator
and
principle
investigator
of
the
study. TJ conducted the study in cooperation with HW,
LvM, and CW. CW, JvW, and GP contributed to the
project
with
additional
scientiﬁc
and
clinical
input
to
the
UCD
process.
EvS
conducted
the
qualitative
pilot
and
data
analysis
in
cooperation
with
LvM
and
TJ.
LvM and EvS drafted a ﬁrst version of the manuscript.

All authors contributed to the article and approved the
submitted version.