01

Development of the Huntington 
Support App (HD-eHelp study): a 
human-centered and co-design 
approach

Pearl J. C. van Lonkhuizen 1,2,3*, Anne-Wil Heemskerk 1,3, 
Eline Meijer 1,2, Erik van Duijn 1,3, Susanne T. de Bot 4, Jiri Klempir 5, 
G. Bernhard Landwehrmeyer 6, Alzbeta Mühlbäck 6,7, 
Jennifer Hoblyn 8, Ferdinando Squitieri 9,10, Niels H. Chavannes 1,2, 
Niko J. H. Vegt 1,2,11, and on behalf of the HEALTHE-RND 
consortium

1 Department of Public Health and Primary Care, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, 
Netherlands, 2 National eHealth Living Lab, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 

3 Huntington Center Topaz Overduin, Katwijk, Netherlands, 4 Department of Neurology, Leiden 
University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 5 Department of Neurology and Center of Clinical 
Neuroscience, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University and General University Hospital in Prague, 
Prague, Czechia, 6 Department of Neurology, University Hospital Ulm, Ulm, Germany, 7 Isar-Amper-
Klinikum, Huntington-Zentrum-Süd, Klinik Taufkirchen, Munich, Germany, 8 St. John of God Hospital, 
Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland, 9 Huntington and Rare Diseases Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Casa 
Sollievo della Sofferenza Research Hospital, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, 10 Centro Malattie 
Neurologiche Rare (CMNR), Italian League for Research on Huntington (LIRH) Foundation, Rome, 
Italy, 11 Faculty of Industrial Design Engineering, Delft University of Technology, Delft, Netherlands

Introduction: eHealth seems promising in addressing challenges in the provision 
of care for Huntington’s disease (HD) across Europe. By harnessing information 
and communication technologies, eHealth can partially relocate care from 
specialized centers to the patients’ home, thereby increasing the availability 
and accessibility of specialty care services beyond regional borders. Previous 
research on eHealth (development) in HD is however limited, especially when 
it comes to including eHealth services specifically designed together with HD 
gene expansion carriers (HDGECs) and their partners to fit their needs and 
expectations.

Methods: This article describes the qualitative human-centered design process 
and first evaluations of the Huntington Support App prototype: a web-app aimed 
to support the quality of life (QoL) of HDGECs and their partners in Europe. 
Prospective end-users, i.e., HDGECs, their partners, and healthcare providers 
(HCPs), from different countries were involved throughout the development 
process. Through interviews, we  captured people’s experiences with the 
disease, quality of life (QoL), and eHealth. We translated their stories into design 
directions that were further co-designed and subsequently evaluated with the 
user groups.

Results: The resulting prototype centralizes clear and reliable information on 
the disease, HD-related news and events, as well as direct contact possibilities 
with HCPs via an online walk-in hour or by scheduling an appointment. The 
app’s prototype was positively received and rated as (very) appealing, pleasant, 
easy to use and helpful by both HDGECs and partners.

Discussion: By involving end-users in every step, we developed a healthcare 
app that meets relevant needs of individuals affected by HD and therefore may 

OPEN ACCESS

EDITED BY
Giovanni Rizzo, 
IRCCS Institute of Neurological Sciences of 
Bologna (ISNB), Italy

REVIEWED BY
Mariana H. G. Monje, 
Northwestern University, United States
Esther Cubo, 
Burgos University Hospital, Spain

*CORRESPONDENCE
Pearl J. C. van Lonkhuizen 

RECEIVED 11 March 2024

ACCEPTED 10 June 2024

PUBLISHED 01 July 2024

CITATION
van Lonkhuizen PJC, Heemskerk A-W, 
Meijer E, van Duijn E, de Bot ST, Klempir J, 
Landwehrmeyer GB, Mühlbäck A, Hoblyn J, 
Squitieri F, Chavannes NH, Vegt NJH and on 
behalf of the HEALTHE-RND consortium 
(2024) Development of the Huntington 
Support App (HD-eHelp study): a 
human-centered and co-design approach.
Front. Neurol. 15:1399126.
doi: 10.3389/fneur.2024.1399126

COPYRIGHT
© 2024 van Lonkhuizen, Heemskerk, Meijer, 
van Duijn, de Bot, Klempir, Landwehrmeyer, 
Mühlbäck, Hoblyn, Squitieri, Chavannes, Vegt 
and on behalf of the HEALTHE-RND 
consortium. This is an open-access article 
distributed under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The 
use, distribution or reproduction in other 
forums is permitted, provided the original 
author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are 
credited and that the original publication in 
this journal is cited, in accordance with 
accepted academic practice. No use, 
distribution or reproduction is permitted 
which does not comply with these terms.

TYPE  Original Research

PUBLISHED  01 July 2024

DOI  10.3389/fneur.2024.1399126

02

lead to high adoption and retention rates. As a result, the app provides low-
threshold access to reliable information and specialized care for HD in Europe. 
A description of the Huntington Support App as well as implications for further 
development of the app’s prototype are provided.

KEYWORDS

Huntington’s disease, neurodegenerative diseases, telemedicine, eHealth, human-
centered, quality of life, tele-neurology

1 Introduction

Huntington’s disease (HD) is a rare, neurodegenerative disease that is 
characterized by a gradual progression in motor, cognitive and 
neuropsychiatric functioning (1–3). HD is caused by an expanded 
cytosine-adenine-guanine (CAG) repeat in the huntingtin gene, which is 
autosomal dominantly inherited (3). HD gene expansion carriers 
(HDGECs) often start to experience clinical motor changes between 30 
and 50 years of age, leading to a diagnosis of manifest disease (2, 4). Prior 
to these changes in motor functioning, HDGECs are in the premanifest 
stage in which they may not experience any symptoms yet (i.e., 
pre-symptomatic) or can already start experiencing (subtle) changes in 
motor, cognitive and/or neuropsychiatric functioning (i.e., prodromal) (5, 
6). After diagnosis with manifest disease, average lifespan varies between 
15 and 20 years (2).

Due to the complex nature of HD and its impact on the quality of 
life (QoL) of both HDGECs (7) and their partners (8–10), there is a 
high need for multidisciplinary care services (11, 12) especially in the 
light of the absence of a cure. Despite the emergence of HD expertise 
centers across Europe (2, 13, 14), access to these specialty care services 
is often impeded by the distance of centers (2, 13, 15), health care and 
transportation costs (2, 13), or physical limitations in later stages of 
the disease (13, 16). eHealth can overcome these barriers by harnessing 
information and communication technologies to deliver and/or 
enhance health care services (17). In this way, eHealth can partially 
relocate care from specialized centers to the patients’ home (16, 18), 
thereby reducing travel time and increasing the availability and 
accessibility of specialty care beyond regional borders.

Although eHealth seems promising for HD, little attention has 
been paid to eHealth (development) in HD (19–24), especially 
when it comes to including services specifically designed together 
with HDGECs and their partners to fit their needs and expectations. 
Moreover, a recent study suggests that the uptake of telehealth 
services in HD was relatively low during the COVID-19 pandemic 
(25). Although the underlying reasons for this limited uptake have 
not been investigated (25), poor uptake of telehealth services in 
general is often related to a lack of functionalities desired from 
users, and/or a poor usability and user experience (26–30). These 
could be addressed by actively involving end-users in an early stage 
of the development of such services (18, 26, 31, 32). In other 
neurodegenerative and neurological diseases (e.g., dementia, 
Parkinson’s disease, and multiple sclerosis), co-design initiatives 
have been shown to be beneficial (33–35). Active involvement of 
end-users is especially important in a disease as complex and rare 
as HD given the variety in symptoms and needs experienced across 
disease stages.

We therefore utilized a qualitative human-centered design 
approach (HCD) (36) by actively involving HDGECs, their partners 
and health care providers (HCPs) in the development of the 
Huntington Support App: a web-app aimed to support the QoL of 
HDGECs and their partners in Europe. This article builds on the 
previously outlined procedures of the HD-eHelp study (37) by 
describing the performed development steps and presenting the first 
versions and evaluations of the prototype of the Huntington Support 
App. We also describe how we adapted our HCD approach to the 
challenges we faced while developing the app in the midst of the 
COVID-19 pandemic and the resulting pressure on the health care 
systems and HCPs in the participating countries at the time.

2 Materials and methods

2.1 Study design

The study protocol of this study has been published previously 
(37). Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, we encountered some delays, 
which in turn impacted the outlined procedures of the design process 
in each participating country. As a result, we occasionally had to 
deviate from the original study protocol. In this methods section, 
we therefore summarize the key steps of the performed procedures as 
well as the deviations from the study protocol. For more information 
on the procedures, we refer to van Lonkhuizen et al. (37).

We used a participatory, qualitative human-centered design 
approach (36) in which end-users participated in all phases of the 
iterative development process through expert meetings, interviews, 
focus groups, co-creation sessions, and prototype tests. End-users 
included HDGECs, partners and HCPs. Figure 1 displays the phases 
of the development process: (0) preparatory phase; (1) understanding 
disease and QoL experiences, needs and wishes; (2) designing the 
Huntington Support App concept; and (3) developing and testing 
prototypes of the Huntington Support App (37).

This study was part of the HEALTHE-RND project, aimed at 
enhancing HD care across Europe, conducted between 2019 and 2022. 
The study was led by the Dutch research team. Research sites from 
Germany, Czech Republic, Italy, and Ireland also participated. The 
Dutch research team consisted of professionals with expertise in HD 
(i.e., senior researcher, psychiatrist, and neurologist) as well as other 
disciplines (i.e., human-centered design expert, design researcher, 
neuropsychologist, and health psychologist with expertise in 
qualitative research and eHealth). The research teams of the other 
countries included psychiatrists, neurologists, psychologists, and 
physiotherapists with expertise in HD. Moreover, we established a

03

Dutch advisory board consisting of HCPs from Huntington expertise 
center Topaz Overduin (i.e., physiotherapist, social worker, elderly 
care physician, dietician, occupational therapist, speech therapist, 
team leader, and policy advisor) and an international family patient 
expert panel (FPEP) [see (37)]. The advisory board, FPEP, and 
research sites from each country were actively involved throughout 
the study to enable the app’s suitability within the different healthcare 
systems and cultural contexts.

2.2 Study sample

Premanifest and manifest HDGECs who were 18 years or older and 
living at home at the time of the study were recruited from the local 
Enroll-HD databases (38) held at the participating sites (i.e., Leiden 
University Medical Center, University Hospital Ulm, Charles University/
General University Hospital Prague, Fondazione IRCCS Casa Sollievo 
della Sofferenza Research Hospital Italy, and Bloomfield Hospital/Trinity 
College Dublin). Partners of premanifest and manifest HDGECs as well 
as HCPs involved in HD care were recruited via the research site’s primary 
and secondary care networks (including HD clinics, patient groups, and 
social media). Sample size was estimated based on guidelines for user 
testing (39) and differed per stage and country. Dutch end-users were 
included in all phases of the development process. Due to feasibility and 
time constraints posed by the COVID-19 pandemic, end-users from the 
other participating countries were only involved in phase 1, which was 
less involvement than originally planned (37). To enable the development 
of an app targeting QoL of HDGECs and their partners across Europe, 
we considered the collection of end-user experiences (phase 1) in the 
other countries to be crucial, whereas for the other phases, relying on 
expert feedback from the other sites was expected to be sufficient.

2.3 Study procedures

Figure  2 provides an overview of the iterative development 
process. A description of the study procedures per development phase 
is provided below.

The medical research ethics committee of Leiden Den Haag Delft 
cleared this study for ethics in the Netherlands (file number: N20.013). 
For the other participating countries, ethical approval was obtained 

by the local medical ethics committees at the respective sites. A 
detailed information letter was provided to all individuals who 
expressed their interest in this study and informed consent was signed 
prior to the start of the study activities (37).

2.3.1 Preparatory phase

Meetings were held with the Dutch advisory board to familiarize 
the researchers with HD experiences from the perspectives of HCPs 
through patient journey mapping (40). During journey mapping, the 
advisory board provided input from their expert perspective on 
different stages that HDGECs may experience during their healthcare 
journey, including their interactions with human (e.g., family 
members, HCPs) and non-human actors (e.g., municipalities and 
information websites). The HD patient journey diagram was checked 
by the FPEP for cultural and lingual differences and then used to 
identify promising opportunities for innovation and to gain an 
understanding of eHealth possibilities within the HD care context. 
This was done via brainstorm sessions with the advisory board and 
members of the larger HD community during patient and peer 
group meetings.

Moreover, the meetings with the advisory board and FPEP set 
course to the study procedures and materials, including a workbook 
with sensitizing assignments. These served as preparation to help 
participants to better express their experiences and needs and were 
used as reference throughout the study sessions. Both the advisory 
board and FPEP reviewed the study materials and procedures to 
ensure comprehensibility and suitability, and to minimize burden on 
participants. All study materials were translated into the languages 
relevant for the participating sites.

2.3.2 Phase 1: Understanding disease and QoL 
experiences, needs, and wishes

Individual semi-structured interviews with Dutch HDGECs and 
partners were conducted to explore and gather a comprehensive 
understanding of participants’ daily experiences with HD (caregiving) 
and their perspectives on eHealth and QoL. The interviews also 
provided insight in how participants define their own QoL and what 
HD-related aspects they perceive to affect their QoL (41). This helped 
in putting participants’ experiences in relation to QoL and eHealth 
into context in the present article. In addition, we held focus groups 
with Dutch HCPs about their daily work experience with HD and HD 

FIGURE 1
Development phases of the Huntington Support App. QoL, Quality of Life; HD, Huntington’s disease; HDGECs, HD gene expansion carriers; and HCPs, 
Health care providers. The development process of the Huntington Support App consisted of a preparatory and three design phases. The design was 
an iterative process of co-designing, evaluating, and adjusting across the different phases. The steps of each phase are described in more detail in the 
main text. The numbers refer to the numbered subheadings in the main text.

04

FIGURE 2
Overview of the iterative development process of the Huntington Support App. HD, Huntington’s disease; HDGECs, HD gene expansion carriers; and 
HCPs, Health care providers.

05

treatment, as well as the challenges and opportunities they face in HD 
care and their perspectives on eHealth applications (37).

All interviews and focus groups were conducted jointly by a 
human-centered design expert (NV) and neuropsychologist (PL) via 
an online videoconferencing platform due to the COVID-19 
restrictions at the time, and were audio-recorded and transcribed 
intelligent verbatim. The other sites collected perspectives of 
HDGECs, partners and HCPs in their respective countries via digital 
and/or face-to-face interviews and focus groups.

Transcripts of interviews with Dutch HDGECs and partners were 
analyzed on themes by two design researchers. To inform the eHealth 
development process, it was not necessary to analyze all interviews in full 
detail. Instead, the aim was to gather themes that were mentioned by the 
majority of interviewees. Interviews were analyzed until no new themes 
emerged (i.e., thematic saturation) (42). Thematic saturation was defined 
as the point at which no new themes or insights emerged from the 
interviews, indicating that additional interviews were unlikely to yield 
new information relevant to our analysis process. This was the case after 
coding approximately four interviews in each end-user group (i.e., 
premanifest HDGECs, manifest HDGECs, partners of premanifest 
HDGECs, and partners of manifest HDGECs). The remaining interviews 
were used as contextual background knowledge for the research team to 
prepare and interpret every participant’s personal contribution in the 
following phases. The resulting themes were complemented with 
common themes that emerged from the focus group sessions with HCPs 
and the themes reported by the other countries. Due to significant delays 
resulting from the COVID-pandemic, we were unable to perform an 
in-depth analysis on the transcripts of the other countries as initially 
planned (37). To include the perspectives of end-users from the other 
countries, each site analyzed the transcripts on main themes and 
provided a summary of their findings instead.

2.3.3 Phase 2: Designing the Huntington Support 
App concept

The Dutch research team combined the resulting themes into 
specific HD-related scenarios that are prototypical for the most 
common experiences, needs, and wishes of HDGECs and their partners, 
see Figure 3 for an example. The resulting scenarios were drawn in 
simple comic style, starting with a frame introducing a particular 
situation, a frame depicting the problem, an empty frame, and a frame 
depicting the needed or desired end result. The comics were combined 
into a printed booklet to serve as the preparatory activity (i.e., sensitizing 
assignment) for the co-creation sessions. Participants were asked to fill 
in the empty frame in each comic, which was meant to make them think 
how they would prefer to go from the problem toward the solution.

Co-creation sessions aimed at creating concept directions for the 
eHealth application were held with the same HDGECs and partners 
that participated in the previous phase. Followed procedures were 
inspired by previous work on (co-)design research (43). The 
co-creation sessions were conducted online by at least two trained 
researchers and were audio-recorded. In each session, participants 
discussed several scenarios from the booklet and talked about what 
would be their ideal experience while a researcher drew new scenarios 
using a prepared set of PowerPoint props from the scenes-set.1

1  https://apphaus.sap.com/resource/scenes

During the development process, we  learned that it was not 
possible to focus on all end-user groups and prioritized HDGECs and 
their partners as the primary end-users for this study given the 
remaining time/budget left. HCPs were considered as secondary users 
and the initially planned co-creation and prototype test sessions with 
Dutch HCPs (37) were therefore not performed. To ensure the 
inclusion of HCPs’ perspectives, findings from the co-creation sessions 
with HDGECs and partners were therefore checked with the advisory 
board and international team of HD experts. Additional features 
relevant for international contexts of the eHealth application were 
subsequently co-created through group sessions with HD experts 
from the research teams of the other countries.

2.3.4 Phase 3: Developing and testing prototypes 
of the Huntington Support App

The input from the above-described co-creation sessions was 
summarized and the final concept direction and system requirements 
for the prototype of the eHealth application were defined by the most 
salient needs and wishes that were expressed and prioritized during 
the sessions with all stakeholders. The final concept direction was 
translated into specific functionalities through user stories (i.e., short 
statements of what the eHealth application should do for the user). An 
app-developer built a web-based app prototype.

Dutch end-users (i.e., HDGECs and partners from this point 
forward) that participated in the previous phases were invited to test 
and provide feedback on the first and second working prototype of the 
app. The prototype was a partially implemented web-app with sufficient 
content for testing. Participants were instructed to explore the prototype 
once, either on their phone or computer. In case of the latter, the mobile 
version was shown on their computer screen. Participants were able to 
test the prototype from within their home by granting them access to 
the prototype URL. During the first round (from December 2021 to 
January 2022), participants filled-in questions on functions and lay-out 
of the prototype. The questions covered first impressions, uniqueness, 
pleasantness, and ease of use of the app. Participants rated these 
questions on a five-point Likert scale (e.g., ranging from 1 = strongly 
agree to 5 = strongly disagree). Examples of open-ended questions 
included: “What do you like/dislike most about the app/its functions?” 
and “Do you have any additional suggestions for improving the app?” 
Participants were able to share any additional feedback with the 
research team in subsequent online feedback sessions during which 
participants were encouraged to share their thoughts on the prototype.

As the process was iterative, the development of the first prototype 
based on the Dutch input partly ran in parallel with co-creating 
additional functionalities with experts from the research sites in the 
other countries. As a result, we were able to combine concept testing, 
which was originally planned for phase 2 (37), with testing the first 
version of the prototype. Hence, next to testing the first prototype, 
Dutch participants were asked to provide feedback on digital mock-ups 
of potential additional interactive features (such as a walk-in hour or 
live chat) of the app that resulted from the co-creation sessions with the 
other countries. In this way, the preferences of the Dutch end-users and 
those of the experts from the other countries, including the fit with care 
systems and privacy and security legislation, were combined in deciding 
on which interactive features were going to be developed in the second 
version of the prototype. Based on participants’ feedback during the 
first test, refinements were made to the first version of the prototype. 
During the second round of prototype testing (from April to May

06

2022), the same procedures were followed as for the first version, yet 
with a stronger focus on the newly implemented interactive features.

The subsequent refinements to the second prototype into a final 
prototype marked the end of the human-centered design process as 
described in this paper.

3 Results

3.1 Characteristics of end-users

In the Netherlands, 12 HDGECs (six premanifest, six manifest), 
12 partners of HDGECs (six of premanifest and six of manifest 
HDGECs), and 12 HCPS were included in this study. The HCPs 
represented a variety of professionals working in Dutch HD expertise 
centers (see Table 1).

For the additionally collected experiences of end-users in the other 
participating countries, the following numbers were recruited: Germany: 
six HDGECs and five partners; Italy: six HDGECs and six partners; 
Ireland: seven HDGECs, seven partners, and six HCPs; Czech Republic: 
no end-users were included (see Supplementary Table 1 for an overview 
of the end-users characteristics from each participating country).

3.2 Preparatory phase

3.2.1 Map patient journey

The creative group sessions with the Dutch advisory board and 
the FPEP resulted in a visual representation of a European patient 
journey, consisting of eight phases that, in the experience of board 
and panel participants, HDGECs and their partners may go through 
throughout the course of the disease, see Figure  4. It should 
be noted that this patient journey is a comprehensive visualization 
of all possible phases HDGECs and their partners may go through. 
It does not represent the common disease experience as HDGECs 
and/or their partners may not experience all phases in most cases, 
for instance because the disease is only recognized in later phases 
or because people at risk may decide not to test.

3.2.2 Brainstorm on eHealth possibilities within 
HD care context

Brainstorm sessions with several stakeholders led to a 
comprehensive list of eHealth possibilities that could support QoL, 

including information provision, communication, and (self)
monitoring. Important key features of eHealth according to the 
advisory board included tailored, remote care that is always and 
quickly accessible. At the same time, the board emphasized that the 
quality of information and communication as well as privacy and 
security should be ensured. Participants at the patient and peer group 
meetings expressed to have difficulty with finding relevant and reliable 
information on the disease and HD-care services due to its diffusion 
across the internet. Moreover, they indicated that several digital tools 
are already available, yet not tailored to HD.

3.2.3 Develop study materials

Several 
study 
materials 
were 
developed, 
including 
sociodemographic questionnaires, interview/focus group protocols, 
and workbooks with sensitizing assignments (see (37) for the 
workbook of phase 1). Separate workbooks were developed for 
premanifest and manifest HDGECs each, and subsequently pilot 
tested. This resulted in some important changes to the workbook for 
manifest HDGECs that have been described previously (37).

3.3 Phase 1: Understanding disease and 
QoL experiences, needs, and wishes

3.3.1 Collect experiences of Dutch HDGECs and 
partners

Through the sensitizing assignments and interview data, 
we collected disease experiences, and needs and wishes from Dutch 
HDGECs and partners. During the analysis, the research team 
gathered a broad understanding of participants’ personal experiences 
with the disease, their symptoms, coping strategies, and specific 
moments in their lives when HD had a major impact. A major topic 
that came forward in most interviews was how the disease influences 
social relationships. Most participants talked about the challenges they 
faced concerning talking about the disease with others, and how the 
symptoms may or already were influencing their contact with friends, 
family, and colleagues.

The needs and wishes that were expressed mostly involved 
references to staying active and being able to live at home. Another 
recurring wish expressed the commonly shared hope for a medicine 
that could cure HD. Most HDGECs and partners did not mention any 
digital tools and mentioned that not much is available specifically for 
HD. Other participants were quite well informed and explained that 

FIGURE 3
Example of a resulting scenario, included as part of the sensitizing assignments. HD, Huntington’s disease. The scenarios were drawn in simple comic 
style. Participants were asked to fill in the empty frame based on how they would prefer to go from the problem (frame 2) to a solution (frame 4).

07

there are some useful digital tools, such as agendas and timers, yet the 
online information about HD is for most interviewees difficult to find 
as they found it to be very scattered.

3.3.2 Collect experiences of HDGECs and 
partners in other countries

For the other participating countries most of the findings 
overlapped, yet we also found variations. In Germany, HDGECs 
and partners mentioned financial stability more often compared to 
Dutch participants. They were more concerned with staying at work 
and having insurance to cover health costs. They also expressed the 
wish for more HD-expertise among healthcare professionals, and 
taboo and stigmatization were strong barriers for them to talk about 
HD with anyone, even family. Participants in Ireland and Italy often 

mentioned taboo, stigma and guilt, as well as lack of support and 
resources in the care system. Italian participants often expressed the 
need for contact with peers.

3.3.3 Collect HD perspectives of Dutch HCPs

During the three focus group sessions, with four Dutch HCPs 
each, most indicated that they were involved in later phases of the 
journey and only social workers were involved throughout the 
complete journey.

The discussed topics included reduced disease awareness by 
manifest HDGECs, care avoidance, and the current HD care path in 
the Netherlands. This helped the research team to better understand 
HD care and challenges that HCPs struggle with. Moreover, it 
provided the research team a broader perspective to better position 

TABLE 1  Sociodemographic characteristics and participation rates of Dutch end-users.

HDGECs, Huntington’s disease gene expansion carriers; HCPs, Health care providers; n, Number of participants; HD, Huntington’s disease. UHDRS-TFC score: Unified Huntington’s Disease 
Rating Scale – Total Functioning Capacity score, ranging from 0 to 13 with lower scores indicating more decline in functioning (44). Numbers and percentages are rounded to the nearest 
whole number.

08

the stories of HDGECs and their partners and would later help in 
deciding on functionalities and defining an implementation strategy 
of the to-be-developed eHealth application.

Regarding the use of eHealth, HCPs mainly mentioned which 
digital information and communication tools already exist. In contrast 
with HDGECs and their partners, HCPs explained that a lot is already 
available and adding something new might be a challenge. They, for 
example, mentioned online training videos, information resources, 
and tele-care technologies. A common remark at the end of a focus 
group was that they “liked to hear about experiences from colleague 
HCPs with expertise in HD,” suggesting that strengthening the 
coordination and communication between HCPs would be  an 
interesting direction for applying eHealth as well.

3.3.4 Define common themes and opportunities 
for innovation

From the conversations with Dutch end-users, we concluded that 
many digital information resources, communication possibilities, and 
supportive tools exist yet most participants have a hard time finding 
them. Especially in the earlier phases of the disease, when people do 
not have much contact with HCPs yet, HDGECs and their partners 
often suffer from lack of information.

Two phases in the patient journey for HDGECs and three 
phases for partners were identified as opportunities for innovation, 
i.e., where QoL can be  significantly impaired and an eHealth 
solution could be  of value (see Figure  5). Receiving a positive 
predictive test result can lower people’s QoL due to a major shift in 
one’s expectations for the future. In this phase, reliable, clear and 
person-centered information early on might alleviate a decrease in 

QoL. We also identified a possible decrease in QoL in later phases, 
when the first symptoms set in and people are often very attentive 
to symptoms and wonder whether the disease has truly started. 
HDGECs and partners may start to look for more practical 
knowledge regarding dealing with specific situations and symptoms 
to keep on living an autonomous, active and social life and keep on 
living at home as long as possible. In other cases, when people have 
not had a predictive test, the first symptoms are often very impactful 
on one’s daily functioning. Maladaptive coping strategies, such as 
avoiding conversations about the disease, and the taboo and stigma 
surrounding HD may complicate care provision. The anonymous 
nature of eHealth could help with such complications. Therefore, 
providing support at the time of discovering first symptoms could 
significantly improve HDGEC’s and partner’s QoL. Among 
partners, we identified a possible third decrease in QoL when the 
informal caregiver role requires too much from them. In this phase, 
partners may benefit from (digital) contact with peers 
and caregivers.

3.4 Phase 2: Designing the Huntington 
Support App concept

3.4.1 Translate common themes into design goals

The knowledge gathered in the preparatory and understanding 
phase with Dutch participants was translated into four design goals by 
the research team: (1) early guidance, (2) navigating through the 
knowledge landscape, (3) counseling in coping with HD, and (4) 
dealing with symptoms. These goals were based on the decision to 

FIGURE 4
The HD patient journey based on advisory board and panel participants. HD, Huntington’s disease; HDGECs, HD gene expansion carriers; and HCPs, 
Health care providers. The European patient journey represents the phases that HDGECs and their partners may go through throughout the course of 
the disease, based on the experience of board and panel participants. The patient journey also depicts the corresponding actors, feelings, and activities 
relevant for eHealth development.

09

primarily focus on HDGECs and their partners as end-users, and 
formulated based on the major and common themes that 
they mentioned.

“Early guidance” relates to the finding that the disease is often still 
a taboo subject and barriers have to be overcome in order to talk about 
it and find help and support. Digital resources can play an important 
role in providing carefully structured information, allowing users to 
manage what information they want to see and what not. Providing a 
tool to “navigate through the knowledge landscape” is based on the 
finding that online HD-related information is very scattered and the 
need for tailored, nuanced information that addresses users’ specific 
needs. Digital tools can facilitate this by offering clear navigation 
structures that distinguish between theoretical and practical 
information, ensuring relevance for different target groups. The goal 
of providing “counseling in coping with HD” through digital tools 
relates to the different coping strategies that participants discussed in 
relation to dealing with HD. Digital tools can support these strategies 
by offering low-threshold contact with HCPs. The goal of “dealing 
with symptoms” through digital tools came from the realization that 
there are already all kinds of resources that help deal with the 
symptoms of HD. For this, however, centralizing commonly used tools 
and providing referrals for specific complaints can aid individuals in 
effectively managing their symptoms. For more information about the 
design goals, the Supplementary material can be referenced.

3.4.2 Co-create concept directions with Dutch 
HDGECs and partners

In total, four co-creation sessions were held, one with each Dutch 
end-user group (i.e., premanifest HDGECs, manifest HDGECs, 
partners of premanifest HDGECs, and partners of manifest HDGECs). 
Five participants (two partners and three HDGECs) were unable to 
attend the session due to summer holidays (n = 2), other obligations 
(n = 2), or not wanting to partake in a group video call (n = 1, partner 
of manifest HDGEC).

In these sessions, the four above-described design goals were 
explored by creating small stories within predefined scenarios that 
represented the goals. In general, the stories from the participants 
were about two basic functionalities that an eHealth solution for HD 
should have: information and contact possibilities. The different 
groups had varying wishes regarding these functions, such as more 

generic information about HD for the pre-manifest groups and 
specific information about care and coping for the manifest groups. 
Regarding contact possibilities, all groups wished for informal and 
formal contact options to exchange experiences and find help. The 
manifest HDGEC group mentioned supportive tools as an additional 
functionality in the eHealth application, such as therapy instructions 
and an agenda with a program of activities.

Discussions during the co-creation sessions led to four overall 
user needs that HDGECs and partners have concerning eHealth 
solutions reflecting the concept directions of information and contact 
possibilities. First, they want complete and correct information about 
HD. Secondly, they wish for one place where all available professional 
and informal support is listed. The third user need was to enable an 
actual connection with a professional or peer. The final user need was 
information for friends and family that HDGECs or partners 
themselves can forward, which could help them in “fighting” to 
be understood and letting others know how they are doing.

3.4.3 Co-create concept directions with other 
countries

HD-experts and patient representatives from the other 
participating countries indicated that HD expertise is either scarce or 
scattered across the country. The experts from the Czech Republic 
mainly expressed interest in discussion groups among professionals 
to improve HD-expertise in the care system and a “help-line” for 
HDGECs and partners. A good feature of a new information platform 
would be that HCPs themselves can easily update the information, 
because the knowledge about HD is developing rapidly. In Germany, 
there was the wish to better centralize HD knowledge and spread HD 
expertise across the country. Yet this was considered difficult because 
there are several autonomously operating care regions. Hence, a 
central location for information and contact, such as streaming events 
and online group sessions, was desired yet challenging to organize. For 
the Irish team, the eHealth solution was mainly seen as a medium to 
put HD more on the map as expertise in HD is scattered across the 
country. A central digital platform would thus be a helpful medium in 
Ireland to increase awareness among policy makers and HCPs. 
Additionally, the international collaboration on the platform would 
help Irish end-users because the Irish care system is not well organized 
for HD and could benefit from the knowledge and expertise of other 

FIGURE 5
Opportunities for innovation within the patient journey map. HD, Huntington’s disease. The decreases in quality of life mark the identified opportunities 
in which an eHealth solution could contribute to the quality of life of HDGECs and their partners. Two phases in the patient journey for HDGECs and 
three phases for partners were identified where QoL is impaired, and an eHealth solution could be of value.

10

countries. In Italy, the main interest was in a telemedicine functionality, 
to overcome the large distances in the country. This would mainly help 
the HD expertise center in distributing their expertise across the 
country. Hence, functionalities such as video consultation, home 
monitoring, and consultation booking, were expected to be interesting 
features for Italian end-users according to the experts from the Italian 
research site.

Based on the gathered information, some potential additional 
interactive features were envisioned, including an online walk-in hour 
in which participants could ask questions to an HCP, the possibility to 
book an appointment with an HCP for an online or in-person visit, a 
live chat function to ask questions directly, and a contact form.

3.4.4 Define final concept for the Huntington 
Support App

Based on the findings from all participatory activities as described 
above, the research team defined a final concept for the eHealth 
solution, i.e., a web-app that should serve as a trusted safety net to 
support the QoL of people affected by HD. This app should function as 
an HD helpdesk with understandable general information, answers to 
frequently asked questions, and referral/contact information. The 
general information should provide a simple, compact, and reassuring 
description of HD for outsiders and a detailed description with a patient 
journey, conditions for care, and referrals for people directly affected by 
the disease. Specific information should be  provided through a 
Q&A-like database, including descriptions of symptoms, care pathways, 
and information tailored to specific situations. Contact information 
should support online and offline connections with peers, family and 
friends, and HCPs. And ideally, the app should contain tools, such as a 
calendar with events and scientific studies that people can participate 
in, a personal agenda with day and week schedule, therapy instructions, 
and a quick contact button for crisis moments. Considering these 
components, the app could be of value in the previously identified 
phases in the patient journey map (as described under the Section 3.3.4).

3.5 Phase 3: Developing and testing 
prototypes of the Huntington Support App

3.5.1 Develop first prototype

To increase accessibility, it was decided to build a web-app that is 
accessible on different devices (e.g., phone, computer, and tablet). This 
was considered important as it circumvents potential difficulties with 
downloading or logging into the app once motor and/or cognitive 
decline sets in, and, at the same time, allows for the use of custom 
devices if they have a web browser.

The first version of the so-called “Huntington Service Portal” at the 
time, is displayed in Figure 6. The first version of the web-app was based 
on two main concept ideas from the previous phase, i.e., information and 
contact possibilities. The following components were implemented in the 
first version: (1) Home page, consisting of featured articles, quick access 
to contact information from peers and HCPs and the option to change 
text size; (2) Knowledge repository, including structured information on 
HD in general, symptoms, specific situations that individuals might 
encounter (e.g., housing and financial situation, concerns about having 
children at risk), and news articles about HD; (3) Contact page, 
consisting of an overview of all national HD centers and experts 

categorized per discipline, as well as an overview of future HD events 
(e.g., peer groups, Huntington café’s) and experience stories of peers; and 
(4) Personal page, including a privacy statement, the possibility to get in 
contact about the app and to change preferences regarding text size and 
region (i.e., the Netherlands, England, Czech Republic, Germany, and 
Italy). As the app provides a clear and layered navigation structure, users 
can easily decide on which information they would like to see.

In parallel, a content management system was developed to manage 
the content of the web-app in each country. The initial structure of the 
content (i.e., topics and headings) and some examples were drafted 
together with the Dutch advisory board and was considered sufficient 
for prototype testing. Content was written from the point of view of 
either the HDGEC or partner as end-user (e.g., “I experience” instead 
of “the patient may experience”) in a clear and simple way and tailored 
to specific situations HDGECs (e.g., information on mortgage, child 
wish) and/or partners (e.g., care role, intimacy) may encounter.

With regard to the envisioned interactive features in the 
co-creation sessions with the other countries, digital mock-ups were 
drafted to gather participants’ feedback on the concepts of these 
potential features during prototype testing.

3.5.2 Evaluate first prototype and additional 
concepts

In total, 16 of the Dutch participants that participated in the 
previous phases tested the first version of the prototype and provided 
their feedback (i.e., five premanifest HDGECs, four manifest 
HDGECs, four partners of premanifest HDGECs, and three partners 
of manifest HDGECs).

The initial reaction of all participants to the first version of the 
prototype was (very) positive (n = 16). More particularly, most 
participants rated the app as (very) appealing (n = 14), pleasant 
(n = 14), and easy to use (n = 15). Participants indicated that the app 
bundled all relevant information on HD. A partner of a manifest 
HDGEC wrote: “[The app is] built from/based on the demand of the 
‘customer’. And especially: everything is now finally clearly bundled 
together.” Participants additionally commented that the app consisted 
of correct, clear and the right amount of information about the 
disease, and valued how the information of the app was arranged and 
also tailored to a specific situation someone is in. A slight majority 
(n = 10) rated the app as (very) unique compared to current websites 
available for individuals affected by HD, and indicated that using the 
app would be  (very) helpful to them. One premanifest HDGEC 
commented: “I think it looks nice and it would help me a lot if I did not 
know much about Huntington’s. I would also recommend my friends to 
check out this app so they can get a better idea [about HD].”

With regard to the additional concepts that resulted from the 
co-creation sessions with other countries, all participants were (very) 
positive about the digital mock-ups of the online walk-in hour and the 
possibility to book an appointment with an HCP. The majority of 
participants were also (very) positive about the contact form (n = 13) 
and live chat (n = 12). A partner of a manifest HDGEC wrote about 
the additional value of the live chat: “I definitely would have used this 
[live chat] during the time I had doubts about my partner’s behavior and 
found it difficult to find help.” Participants indicated the additional 
features to be an “easily accessible” way to “quickly” and “directly” get 
in touch with an HCP. The digital mock-ups encouraged them to list 
some important requirements to consider when implementing such

11

features (e.g., expected technical difficulties once the disease 
progresses, staff costs, privacy/security issues, and creating clarity 
about the aim of these features).

Although the main focus during prototype testing was on the 
desirability and usability of its functions, some participants wrote 
down some points for improvements regarding the app’s content, these 
have been described in the Supplementary material.

3.5.3 Develop second prototype

Based on the input from the other countries and the positive 
feedback from Dutch participants on the digital mock-ups, three of 
the interactive features were implemented in the second prototype, 
i.e., the online walk-in hour, appointment booking, and contact form. 
To enable implementation in a feasible way, the walk-in hour and 
appointment booking functionalities redirected to third party apps 
(i.e., Microsoft Teams and Calendly, respectively). The live chat was 
not implemented due to privacy and security regulations. No additions 
to the initial content structure and topics were made due to the strong 
focus on implementing the interactive features during this version.

The second prototype was shielded from public access by 
implementing a pin code to avoid raising expectations among the HD 
community, which was expected to happen if the prototype would 
have been made public.

3.5.4 Evaluate second prototype

The second version of the prototype was tested by 15 of the Dutch 
participants that participated in earlier phases (i.e., four premanifest 
HDGECs, three manifest HDGECs, five partners of premanifest 
HDGECs, and three partners of manifest HDGECs). Twelve of them 
also tested the first version of the prototype.

The initial reaction of all participants to the second version of the 
app was (very) positive. All participants found the app, as well as the 
pin code (very) easy to use. One premanifest HDGEC wrote: 
“Furthermore, I am very positive about this portal and I am certain that 
this meets a need.”

With regard to the newly implemented features, all participants 
rated the walk-in hour and appointment booking feature as (very) 
positive and pleasant. Participants valued that these features invite 
individuals to seek help/counseling and that they could schedule 
an appointment or visit the walk-in hour whenever it suits them: 
“Especially the possibility to get in touch from home is really great, 
especially for people who live far away or have difficulty walking” (a 
premanifest HDGEC). More particularly, participants liked the 
description of the procedures of the walk-in hour, and the button 
to contact someone when no walk-in hour is scheduled (for 
instance a social worker who can direct incoming questions to the 
right HCP). The majority rated the walk-in hour and appointment 

FIGURE 6
Home page of the first (left) and final (right) prototype of the Huntington Support App. The print screens of both prototypes were translated to English 
for this article. Prototype testing was performed with the Dutch versions of the prototypes. The first version of the home page of the prototype (left) 
included two functionalities: information and contact possibilities. In the final version of the prototype (right), interactive features to the app were 
added, including the online walk-in hour on the home page.

12

booking tool to be very unique (n = 10 and n = 11 respectively) 
compared to other HD services. Participants found these features 
(very) easy to use (n = 14) and indicated that they would like to 
use these features either regularly or maybe/sometimes. Regarding 
the contact form feature, participants were also (very) positive 
about its pleasantness (n = 14) and ease of use (n = 13), yet found 
it only a bit unique compared to other available HD services 
(n = 9).

Some participants wrote down suggestions for the app’s 
improvement, 
which 
have 
been 
described 
in 
the 
Supplementary material.

3.5.5 Refine second prototype

Refinements resulted in a final prototype (see Figure 6), in which 
the majority of the Dutch content was drafted and subsequently 
uploaded. Content was based on existing resources and checked by 
HD experts. Moreover, some additions proposed by participants 
during both prototype testing rounds were incorporated [i.e., more 
regional information on other HD centers, links to YouTube videos, 
instruction videos, alternative contact possibilities for when the 
interactive features are unavailable, warning notification on (not) 
sharing privacy-sensitive data, and a description of the aim of the 
interactive features]. Due to budget and time constraints, some major 
changes could not be implemented such as adding an indication of the 
waiting time in the walk-in hour waiting room or booking an 
appointment in the respective language (rather than in English), as 
these would require integrating these interactive features of third-
party apps in the app itself.

Several name suggestions for the prototype’s working title 
“Huntington Service Portal” were made by the international team. 
Each country decided on a top 3 of names for the app (i.e., Huntington 
Support, Huntington Info, and Huntington Portal). Discussions with 
the international team led to renaming the app to “Huntington 
Support App” as the term “portal” was not considered that common 
in all countries and the app consisted of more than just information 
(i.e., “info”) alone.

4 Discussion

In this article, we described the exploration and development 
process of an eHealth application that aims to support the quality of 
life (QoL) of HD gene expansion carriers (HDGECs) and their 
partners across Europe. This is the first study that used the principles 
of human-centered design (HCD) to develop an eHealth service that 
ensures suitability with the needs and wishes of HDGECs, partners, 
and health care providers (HCPs) by actively involving them as 
end-users throughout each stage of the development process (i.e., 
from ideation to prototype). Our study provides a comprehensive 
documentation of the application of HCD, and how we adopted this 
approach in the context of HD. We described the iterative process of 
co-designing, evaluating and adjusting an eHealth application 
together with end-users in the context of different health care systems 
in the Netherlands, Germany, Czech Republic, Italy, and Ireland, in 
the midst of the COVID-19 pandemic. The resulting Huntington 
Support App prototype provides support and guidance in the form of 
a central online place with clear and reliable information on the 
disease, HD-related news and events, as well as direct contact 

possibilities with HCPs via an online walk-in hour or by scheduling 
an appointment.

4.1 Human-centered design for HD

While eHealth holds promise for HD, there has been limited 
research on this topic (19–24), especially regarding eHealth services 
designed in active collaboration with HDGECs and their partners. 
Participatory development is, however, strongly recommended for 
developing solutions to fit the end-users’ needs (18, 26, 31, 32) and is 
found to be beneficial in other neurodegenerative and neurological 
diseases (e.g., dementia, Parkinson’s disease, and multiple sclerosis) 
(33–35). In line with this, our findings illustrate that such a 
participatory development process, and an HCD approach in 
particular, is valuable in developing and tailoring an eHealth solution 
for a disease as rare and complex as HD. As the implications of a 
neurodegenerative disease like HD vary widely among individuals, a 
holistic systemic approach toward human needs is paramount to 
ensure that solutions fit the dynamics of the healthcare system users 
are part of (36). Hence, we involved patients and partners in varying 
disease stages, HCPs, and an international family patient expert panel 
(FPEP) to capture and support the full scope of HD.

Moreover, both HDGECs and partners were highly motivated 
for study participation and talked openly about their experiences 
during the individual and group-based sessions. We were able to 
gain a deeper level of understanding of their experiences (45, 46) 
by using generative techniques like sensitizing assignments and 
journey mapping (37) in addition to the more conventional 
techniques of interviews and focus groups. We  also included 
participants in the identification of technical solutions, co-creation 
of concepts and evaluations of the prototypes. These sessions 
contributed to valuable findings in terms of content and navigation 
ideas, most of which we were able to implement directly. Our HCD 
approach was also well received by the FPEP and the 
advisory board.

Given the advances in the field of design thinking, we believe that 
the term “user-centered design” as previously used in our study 
protocol (37), does not fully cover all the steps of our development 
process. In addition to end-users testing our eHealth solution, we took 
a broader, more inclusive approach to user-centered design by 
focusing on the “human” behind the product rather than the “user” of 
a product. By emphasizing and gaining a comprehensive 
understanding of the end-users’ personal experiences and their 
context (47), our study reflects a novel case of HCD research in 
HD (48).

4.2 Dealing with differences in needs 
across end-user groups and countries

Throughout the development of the Huntington Support App, 
we included a variety of perspectives from different end-user groups 
(premanifest/manifest HDGECs and partners, as well as HCPs). This 
was considered important given the variety in needs and symptoms 
experienced across disease stages. At the same time, integrating a 
variety of perspectives into a single eHealth solution is challenging. 
For instance, in contrast to the need for information addressed by

13

HDGECs and their partners, the participating Dutch HCPs mentioned 
that a lot of services for HD are already available and adding 
something new might be a challenge. They, for example, mentioned 
online training videos, information resources, and tele-care 
technologies. Moreover, needs and wishes varied across the 
participating countries as well. While in the Netherlands end-users 
mainly focused on information and contact possibilities, HD-experts 
from the other countries expressed a higher need for interactive 
elements in the app.

Co-designing and developing an app is a time and resource-
intensive process, especially amid a pandemic. During our 
development process, we learned that the needs and wishes of multiple 
end-user groups could not be met by a single eHealth solution. The 
development of multiple eHealth solutions should therefore 
be  considered when defining several end-user groups. To make 
optimal use of our available resources (i.e., time and budget), 
we prioritized HDGECs and partners as the main end-user groups 
when moving along the development process due to their overlapping 
needs. The inclusion of a partner group is a key strength of this study 
as partners also experience impaired QoL (8–10) and often find it 
difficult to look after their own needs and experiences (10). Their 
perspectives should not be  overlooked as partners often play an 
important role throughout the course of the disease. By actively 
involving the advisory board and co-creating functionalities together 
with HCPs from the participating countries, we ensured the inclusion 
of relevant clinical expertise and considered challenges that might 
arise throughout the course of the disease that could affect engagement 
of HDGECs later on (e.g., motor impairments, apathy).

Moreover, as multiple eHealth solutions could fit a single need, 
we had to prioritize which solutions to implement and which not. For 
instance, in case of facilitating contact, solutions could range from a 
list with contact details of care institutions/HCPs and peer groups to 
group chats and video-conferencing. Together with end-users, 
we decided which solution(s) to further develop and implement in the 
app considering contextual constraints. For example, we  did not 
implement a live chat function as, next to security/privacy challenges, 
this would place a large responsibility on HCPs and also increase the 
expectation 
among 
users 
that 
they 
would 
receive 
an 
immediate response.

Despite the differences across end-user groups and countries, 
we were able to address a variety of the needs and wishes expressed, 
by designing a customizable set of functions and features that were 
considered beneficial in the care context of each country. This 
flexibility in design, together with the underlying content management 
system for each country, is of particular value as the app can be easily 
adapted and tailored to specific target groups and different healthcare 
systems/language regions, and extended with new features if new 
needs arise.

4.3 The Huntington Support App

With information and facilitating contact as key components of 
the app, the Huntington Support App prototype closely fits with the 
end-users’ wish for a central place with complete and correct 
information on HD, as well as opportunities for professional and 
informal support. With the addition of the interactive elements, the 
Huntington Support App also provides a low threshold for consulting 

an HCP by either visiting an online walk-in hour or by scheduling an 
appointment. This could in turn support early guidance and 
counseling in coping with HD. As suggested in a recent study on 
telehealth use in HD (24), we tailored the user interface to future 
HD-associated challenges. For example, with the future progression 
of the disease in mind, we specifically decided on a web-app format 
that is openly accessible to both HDGECs and partners as well as the 
larger HD community to facilitate accessibility of the app. In this way, 
individuals can access the app regardless of preferred device (e.g., 
mobile phone, tablet, and personal computer), its’ operating system or 
the location that someone is at. This circumvents potential difficulties 
with downloading or logging into the app once motor and/or cognitive 
decline sets in, and, at the same time, allows for the use of custom 
devices if they have a web browser.

The prototype of the Huntington Support App and its interactive 
elements were positively received by both Dutch HDGECs and 
partners. Only a slight majority rated the app as (very) unique 
compared to other services currently available for HD. This is not 
surprising, as our needs analysis and co-creation results indicated that 
although information and tools are indeed already available, these are 
not easily found and integrated for HD. Findability of information 
should therefore not be considered as a matter of course. This shows 
the importance of engaging end-users throughout the design process 
as, in our case, utilizing and integrating existing information and 
resources can accommodate the end-users’ needs and wishes rather 
than developing a new solution from scratch.

Regarding the interactive features of the app, privacy and security 
matters were a major concern. The combination of certain personal 
information (e.g., birth date and place of residence) can be easily 
identifiable in a disease as rare as HD. A secure app that guarantees 
the end-users’ privacy is therefore mandatory, yet securing such 
interactive features did not fit within the scope and budget for this 
project. Without tracking personal data, as is the case with our focus 
on information provision of the app, such issues are circumvented. To 
still be able to facilitate interactive features, we decided to redirect to 
third party apps that have their own privacy and security 
policies implemented.

4.4 Study limitations

Some limitations of this study should be  addressed. First, 
we included a relatively well-functioning and motivated sample of 
HDGECs, thereby possibly omitting the needs and wishes of more 
severely affected HDGECs and/or people with fewer digital skills or 
who were less motivated for research participation. Efforts were made 
to include HDGECs with varying disease stages, gender, age, and 
digital literacy. By also including partners of HDGECs with different 
disease stages, as well as HCPs with relevant expertise and experience 
with HDGECs across these stages, we were able to ensure a wide range 
of different perspectives. We also incorporated different scenarios in 
the co-design preparations, which encouraged participants to think 
beyond their personal experiences. Other limitations mainly resulted 
from the contextual constraints (i.e., time, budget, and feasibility) 
posed by the COVID-19 pandemic. We believe that the resulting 
deviations from our study protocol (37) were minor and did not 
impact the study’s results due to the flexibility of our HCD approach. 
Involvement of the other countries amid a pandemic was especially

14

challenging as each country and health care system was affected 
differently. Although the other participating countries were therefore 
involved to a lesser extent as initially planned (37), we believe that 
actively including HD experts from the participating sites as well as 
the FPEP was sufficient to adapt the app to each language and 
healthcare system. Due to the COVID-measures in place at the time, 
most study sessions were conducted online. Recent studies show that 
the data quality of online interviews and focus groups is comparable 
to that of in-person interviews (49–52). As most Dutch participants 
were able to connect easily to the videoconferencing platform and 
shared detailed personal experiences with us, we  believe online 
sessions were both feasible and suitable for our population given the 
posed COVID-19 restrictions. At the same time, it allowed 
participants to get used to remote services, which fits well with their 
contribution to the development of such a service during this study as 
well as with the post-pandemic shift toward blended care (53) that 
likely increases the use of such services in the future.

4.5 Future directions

Although the present article focused on the development of the 
Huntington Support App prototype, future efforts should focus on an 
in-depth user experience and usability evaluation as well as pilot-
testing the app in the different countries. Given the potential of the 
Huntington Support App, a feasibility study of the app is needed to 
identify implementation challenges that could be addressed in the 
future. For instance, an in-depth evaluation of the use and feasibility 
of certain features that are currently available via third-party apps (e.g., 
walk-in hour, appointment booking) is recommended prior to fully 
integrating such features within the app. These interactive features 
were recommended by HD experts from the project consortium and 
did not address the major needs and wishes of Dutch end-users in our 
HCD approach. Future research should investigate the value of such 
applications from both the expert and end-user perspective. Follow-up 
research should further focus on how to successfully implement the 
Huntington Support App, while at the same time taking privacy, 
security and other contextual issues (i.e., staff availability, updating the 
app’s content) into account. Important areas of focus include 
investigating barriers and facilitators to implementation [e.g., 
awareness and acceptance of the app, financial constraints (54)], as 
well as identifying key stakeholders for implementation, such as HD 
expertise centers but also general practitioners as they are typically the 
first point of contact when people access the Dutch healthcare system.

Moreover, as we were not able to focus on all expressed needs 
and wishes in the current prototype, future efforts could be directed 
toward addressing these. For instance, by further investigating the 
expressed needs of HCPs regarding strengthening the coordination 
and communication between HCPs both nationally and 
internationally. Given that HD is a rare and complex disease, 
international connection and collaboration between experts is of 
great value. Future developments should be directed at further 
amending the Huntington Support App prototype to the local HD 
care context and respective languages in each country. The needs 
and wishes of HCPs should be  integrated to optimally align 
eHealth services to HCPs as end-users, as this will likely enhance 
the future adoption and implementation of eHealth services 
across Europe.

4.6 Conclusion

The present study demonstrates that a participatory HCD 
approach is valuable in developing and tailoring an eHealth 
application to the needs and wishes of HDGECs and their partners 
across Europe. This high level and active involvement of end-users is 
important to increase uptake and improve the usability and 
acceptability of eHealth services once implemented (18, 26–31, 55). 
As QoL maintenance is one of the main goals in HD care, the app 
could be a first step in supporting QoL by harnessing the power of 
eHealth, especially as effective interventions specifically targeting QoL 
are limited to date (7). The Huntington Support App has the potential 
to (partially) overcome challenges of time, distance, and costs in 
current HD care provision (32). Future efforts should focus on 
evaluating the app’s feasibility, as well as its effectiveness in supporting 
QoL while taking into account challenges that may arise during 
implementation (e.g., staff and reimbursement issues) (56). With these 
implications in mind, the Huntington Support App could contribute 
to increasing accessibility of HD care and enhancing QoL care across 
Europe. Low-threshold access to health care and reliable information 
can be considered pivotal in the management of long-term complex 
conditions (57). With our detailed description of the lessons learned 
while developing the app in the midst of the COVID-19 pandemic and 
how we adopted a HCD approach when designing eHealth for HD, 
we believe that our results are of great relevance for future co-design 
initiatives of telehealth services aimed at enhancing supportive care 
service for other rare neurodegenerative diseases worldwide.

Data availability statement

The raw data supporting the conclusions of this article will 
be made available by the authors, without undue reservation, upon 
reasonable request.

Ethics statement

The medical research ethics committee of Leiden Den Haag Delft 
cleared this study for ethics in the Netherlands (file number: N20.013). 
For the other participating countries, ethical approval was obtained by the 
local medical ethics committees at the respective sites. These were: 
Germany: Ethics committee of Ulm University; Czech Republic: Ethics 
committee of the General University Hospital Prague; Italy: Ethics 
committee of the Casa Sollievo della Sofferenze; Ireland: Faculty of Health 
Sciences Ethics Committee of Trinity College Dublin. The studies were 
conducted in accordance with the local legislation and institutional 
requirements. The participants provided their written informed consent 
to participate in this study.

HEALTHE-RND consortium

The Netherlands: Niels H. Chavannes, Eline Meijer, Anne-Wil 
Heemskerk, Erik van Duijn, Susanne T. de Bot, Pearl J. C. van 
Lonkhuizen, Niko Vegt, Leanne Slutter, Stephanie Feleus, Esther 
C. Arendts, and Amy Putman; Germany: G. Bernhard 
Landwehrmeyer, Alzbeta Mühlbäck, Wiebke Frank, and Franziska

15

Steck; Czech  Republic: Jiří Klempíř, Romama Konvalinková, Eva 
Bezuchová, Kristýna Dolečková, Olga Klempířová, Jan Roth, and Olga 
Ulmanová; Italy: Ferdinando Squitieri, Sabrina Maffi, Giulia 
Giancaterino, Chiara Di Giorgio, Barbara D’Alessio, and Melissa 
Casella; Ireland: Jennifer Hoblyn, Muthukumaran Thangaramanujam, 
Tom Burke, and Emer O’Malley; United Kingdom: Stephen McKenna, 
Ian McKenna, Jeanette Thorpe, Ellie Johnstone, Isobel Spray, Mariusz 
Grzeda, Ramona Moldovan, Peter Foley, and Jacqueline Kerr.

PL: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Validation, 
Formal analysis. A-WH: Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Formal 
analysis. EM: Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Funding 
acquisition, Formal analysis, Conceptualization. ED: Writing – review & 
editing, Supervision. SB: Writing – review & editing, Supervision. JK: 
Writing – review & editing, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization. GL: 
Writing – review & editing, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization. AM: 
Writing – review & editing, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization. JH: 
Writing – review & editing, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization. FS: 
Writing – review & editing, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization. NC: 
Writing – review & editing, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization. NV: 
Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Formal analysis.