ISSN: 0954-4828 (Print) 1466-1837 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/cjen20

Engaging children in healthcare technology
design: developing rehabilitation technology for
children with cerebral palsy

Andrew Patrick Hayes Weightman, Nick Preston, Raymond Holt, Matthew
Allsop, Martin Levesley & Bipinchandra Bhakta

To cite this article: Andrew Patrick Hayes Weightman, Nick Preston, Raymond Holt, Matthew
Allsop, Martin Levesley & Bipinchandra Bhakta (2010) Engaging children in healthcare
technology design: developing rehabilitation technology for children with cerebral palsy,
Journal of Engineering Design, 21:5, 579-600, DOI: 10.1080/09544820802441092

To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/09544820802441092

Published online: 25 Mar 2009.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 5376

View related articles 

Citing articles: 5 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=cjen20

Vol. 21, No. 5, October 2010, 579–600

Engaging children in healthcare technology design: developing
rehabilitation technology for children with cerebral palsy

Andrew Patrick Hayes Weightman*, Nick Preston, Raymond Holt, Matthew Allsop,
Martin Levesley and Bipinchandra Bhakta

Charterhouse Rehabilitation Technologies Laboratory, Department of Mechanical
Engineering, University of Leeds, Worsley Building, Leeds LS2 9NL, UK

(Received 2 June 2008; ﬁnal version received 29 August 2008)

This paper presents a case study of users’involvement in the design and evaluation of two devices for upper
limb rehabilitation for children with cerebral palsy to use in their homes. The devices comprise a computer
game and a force feedback interface, designed to stimulate children with cerebral palsy to undertake
fun arm exercises that are beneﬁcial in terms of improving overall functional use of their impaired arm.
This device was developed for children using a combination of informal and formal user-centred design
methods. The methods used include standard questionnaires, interviews, a modiﬁed peer tutoring process
and a comparative method, and have been applied to the iterative design of both the hardware and software
components of the rehabilitation systems. Thirty-seven non-disabled children and 15 children with cerebral
palsy in the 5–12-year-old age group were involved in the evaluation, held at six local primary schools.
Prototypes of the ﬁnal design were used by 18 patients with cerebral palsy for approximately 4 weeks as a
therapeutic intervention. To evaluate the designs, qualitative and questionnaire-based opinion was sought
from these children, and their parents, at the end of the intervention. An evaluation of the methodologies
employed is presented.

Keywords: rehabilitation technology; user-centred design; cerebral palsy

1.
Introduction

The term ‘rehabilitation engineering’ can be considered as the application of technological
solutions to problems confronted by individuals with impairments such as those occurring after
stroke or cerebral palsy (CP). The use of assistive or restorative rehabilitation technology aims
to promote independence and to help integrate users into mainstream society. Assistive technolo-
gies largely focus on improving disabled people’s interaction with their environment. Restorative
technologies, the focus of this paper, aim to accelerate skill acquisition and so people are able
to increase their functional abilities without device assistance. The beneﬁts of restorative reha-
bilitation technology to healthcare providers such as the UK National Health Service (NHS)
include enhancing the impact of existing rehabilitation treatments which are largely delivered by
therapy staff, increasing the amount of rehabilitation treatment delivered to patients at the same
cost resulting in a more cost-effective service and better quality of life for patients.

ISSN 0954-4828 print/ISSN 1466-1837 online
© 2010 Taylor & Francis
DOI: 10.1080/09544820802441092
http://www.informaworld.com

580

CP is one area where rehabilitation technology can be applied for therapeutic beneﬁt. CP is
the commonest cause of childhood physical disability (Hagberg and Hagberg 1993). CP arises
because of anoxic brain injury during the antenatal or perinatal periods. The child has difﬁculties
in posture and movement of the body because of weakness, muscle spasticity, loss of dexterity
and coordination difﬁculties. Some children may develop progressive skeletal deformity as they
grow because of the neurological problems. Some children may also have other problems such as
epilepsy, learning disability, visual and hearing impairment (Hagberg and Hagberg 1993). CP can
affect one or both upper limbs causing difﬁculties with voluntary movement and affecting their
ability to reach, grasp and manipulate objects. Their balance and protective reﬂex movements
may also be affected so that children may not be able to use their arms appropriately to protect
themselves if they are falling. Therapeutic arm exercises based on useful movements such as
reach–retrieve actions have been shown to improve upper limb function (Kluzik et al. 1990). The
degree of improvement observed is dependent on the amount of appropriate practice undertaken,
as testiﬁed by the beneﬁts of constraint therapy (Taub et al. 2004). While this approach can be
helpful, it is limited by difﬁculties in implementing the exercise regime. Motivating a child to
perform uninteresting, frustrating and repetitive movements by themselves is challenging, whilst
therapist-assisted practice is labour-intensive and therefore resource-limited.
To address these limitations, a rehabilitation system that would motivate the child to under-
take therapeutic useful exercises in a home environment was proposed. The research group and
children envisaged a computer game system with a force feedback interface, in order to assist
children with arm movement difﬁculties to complete useful therapeutic exercises. The system was
targeted at children with CP in the age range 5–12 years with software to provide an enjoyable
game setting where the resulting exercise would have a potential therapeutic beneﬁt. We did not
intend the system to be a substitute for expert ‘hands-on’ therapy, but rather to supplement the
work of physiotherapists and occupational therapists, by enabling therapists to prescribe individ-
ualised game-exercises between formal therapy sessions. It was recognised that the success of
the technology depended not only on its functionality, but also on its acceptability to the users of
the system (Keates and Clarkson 2003). Merging and integrating the technical capabilities of the
technology with the desires of these users was the key challenge in this project, and addressing this
would mean active involvement of users in evaluating both the hardware and software elements
of the device.
Theaimofthispaperistodescribethemethodsusedandtheirimpactonthedesignprocessinthe
development of the low-cost, home-based rehabilitation systems.A systematic review highlighted
the limited published literature about protocols for engaging children in healthcare technology
design. Development of the methods used to inform the design process, how user opinion was
embedded into device development and limitations are described in the subsequent sections.

2.
Review of current methods

2.1.
Engaging users in the design of medical devices

Within the NHS and the wider healthcare community, there has been increased emphasis on
the need for user involvement within healthcare research to ensure that issues of importance to
end users, and not just those of academic or clinical interest, are addressed (e.g. Lightfoot and
Sloper 2002, Hogg 2006, Shah and Robinson 2006, Bristow and Lamey 2007). This led to the
establishmentofadvisorygroupssuchasINVOLVE,whopromoteandsupportpublicinvolvement
in the NHS. There has also been growing interest in how knowledge gathered from service users
can be used to gain a greater understanding of speciﬁc populations, whilst acting to further ensure
the development of usable and clinically effective devices (Ram et al. 2007).

581

The emphasis on involving service users in healthcare research extends to the development
of medical devices, through groups such as the Multidisciplinary Assessment of Technology
Centre for Healthcare (MATCH 2008). Shah and Robinson (2006), from MATCH, emphasise that
gathering users’ needs has been shown to determine both the success/failure of the development
of technology (e.g. Shaw 1998) and the quality associated with the product (e.g. Keiser and Smith
1994). Furthermore, researchers such as Ram et al. (2007) go on to say that by involving users
throughout the cycle of device development, it ‘. . . increases the likelihood of producing devices
that are safe, usable, clinically effective and appropriate to cultural context’.
Involving users in product development has been advocated for some time, particularly as a way
of improving the usability (Bekker and Long 2000) and inclusivity (Keates and Clarkson 2003)
of mainstream products. A range of methods are available for doing this, and Shah and Robinson
(2006) highlight a number of methods that have been applied to medical device development,
including usability tests, focus groups, observation and simulations. However, children present
a range of unique challenges that can make conventional methods to engage them challenging
(Holt et al. 2007).

2.2.
Engaging children in the design of medical devices

Published literature on engaging children in design has largely been focussed on the domain of
human–computer interaction (HCI), where engagement of children with new technology is of
particular interest (Markopoulos et al. 2007). The processes that developers of new technology
use are focussed at gathering information from parents and teachers with children being marginal
to this process (Druin 2002). Involving children in the design process is clearly more difﬁcult than
involving adults. They have greater difﬁculty verbalising their thoughts (Hanna et al. 1999), a
more limited attention span (Markopoulos and Bekker 2003) and methodologies need to address
children’straditional‘power’relationshipwithadults(Punch2002).Nevertheless,arangeofmeth-
ods have been developed to address these issues and engage children in the design of technology,
particularly educational software and Websites.
Particular attention has been paid to eliciting verbal feedback for usability testing, which is
normally achieved by asking participants to ‘think aloud’as they use a product or piece of software.
Children’s difﬁculty in verbalising their thoughts means that they struggle with this approach, and
a number of alternatives have been developed which get children to use a product in pairs, so
that their discussions can be analysed instead. These methods include peer tutoring (Höysniemi
etal.2003)andco-operativeinquiry(Druin1999,HarvardandLøvind2002,Isomursuetal.2004).
Van Kesteren et al. (2003) compared the effectiveness of six methods, including peer tutoring, for
eliciting verbal feedback from children and found that peer tutoring elicited more useful comments
than any other method except active intervention (verbal prompting and questioning from the
researcher). Although the active intervention approach gathered more information, the child was
continually being interrupted and the intervention maintained the cognitive/social-dependent
relationship of the child on the adult. Read et al. (2002) argue that usability is best measured by
measuring ‘fun’, and have proposed a ‘Fun Toolkit’ to capture the ‘fun’ dimension to technology.
This includes a ‘Smileyometer’, a simple visual Likert scale developed for children. MacFarlane
et al. (2005) use the observation of facial expression and comments made during testing sessions
as a basis for assessing children’s enjoyment of playing educational games. Yet these methods
have been applied only in the HCI domain. The generalisability of these ﬁndings to other domains
needs further exploration (Markopoulos and Bekker 2003), in particular their suitability for use
in medical device development has to be investigated.
Evidence of engaging children in the design of healthcare technology remains limited. Cooke
(2004) provides an example of the design of a hospital building for children by using interviews

582

and focus groups with children, where it is emphasised that ‘. . . working with children really
works’. However, there is no literature addressing the effectiveness of the methods developed in
HCI when applied to the medical domain with children and particularly children with impairments
such as CP.Although empirically some of these methods seem sensible to use, a formal evaluation
process of these methods in the context of device development would be beneﬁcial to the research
community. Such a formal comparison, however, is beyond the scope of the work presented here:
rather this paper discusses the use of some of these methods in the development of the rehabilitative
device described in Section 1 and their beneﬁts and disadvantages.

3.
Overview of the design process

The users of the device include not only the children who will use the device for rehabilitation
purposes, but also their parents and carers who will play an important role in facilitating the
child’s use of the device. This section describes the process used to engage these stakeholders in
the design and evaluation of the device throughout its development.
The following ﬁve design requirements were considered to be fundamental to the design of the
home-based rehabilitation exercise system. Throughout the design cycle, the prototypes and ﬁnal
designs were evaluated with respect to these parameters.

(1) Therapeutic beneﬁt. The type of arm exercises that the rehabilitation system should promote
and how these matched the desired movements a physiotherapist would encourage a child to
practice.
(2) Mechanical functionality. The device performance, including the controlling level of
assistance, the functional workspace, smoothness of movement and robustness.
(3) Safety. A strong emphasis was placed on the safety of the rehabilitation system, both in terms
of mechanical and electrical functionality.
(4) Social acceptability. How the device was perceived by the users, peers of the users and adults
was considered. Perceptions regarding the ‘image’ of the device were sought.
(5) Motivational factors. This encompassed any aspect of the device considered to motivate the
child to use the device such as game graphics, game theme, etc.

The ﬁrst three requirements are technical and objective, and can be addressed through engineering
and clinical analyses. The last two requirements, however, are subjective and therefore require
input from children. These two requirements gave rise to four questions to be answered by the
user throughout the design process:

Q1: Did the children associate the appearance of the device with disability? (Social
Acceptability).
Q2: Did the children ﬁnd the joystick comfortable to use after a 15-min playing session?
(Motivation).
Q3: Were the children able to operate games for themselves, once the hardware was set up?
(Motivation).
Q4: Did the children enjoy playing the games? (Motivation).

These were the main issues to be addressed in evaluating prototypes with users: supplementary
questions could then be used to better understand why children felt the way they did and how the
device might be improved.
User involvement in this device development was in three stages: (a) preliminary rehabilitation
device development; (b) evaluation of the rehabilitation devices in the school environment; and
(c) feedback after a period of using the equipment in the home environment. Figure 1 presents a
ﬂow diagram illustrating the design process and its constituent stages.

583

Figure 1.
A ﬂow diagram of the design process implemented.

3.1.
Stage 1: preliminary rehabilitation device development

This phase focussed on understanding and developing the technology that underpinned the device.
Age- and size-matched non-impaired children were utilised to iterate the designs of the prototypes
so that ﬁnal design would be comfortable, and not have a ‘rehabilitation/disability’ feel to it, as
well as satisfying the three technical requirements.
The two systems were developed in parallel, using a process similar to Boehm’s risk-based
Spiral Model of systems development (Boehm 1986). This involved testing and reﬁning progress-
ively more detailed prototypes with input from the relevant stakeholders.

3.2.
Stage 2: evaluation of rehabilitation devices in school environment

Having developed a prototype of the technology able to provide the required exercises, the next
step was to evaluate its usability, ergonomics, and practical and social acceptability with potential
users in order to ﬁnalise the design. Although Stage 1 had used a small group of non-disabled
children to identify and address any obvious problems, at this stage the aim was to get a more

584

representative response from a larger group of users. The process for this was again similar to
Boehm’s Spiral Model of systems development (Boehm 1986): the prototype was presented to a
group of children for evaluation, amended in line with their feedback and re-evaluated to see if
improvements had been achieved. Initially, an adapted peer tutoring process was used to evaluate
the usability of the software (Q3), with later sessions using a comparative evaluation process to
comparetwojoystickdesigns.Users’feedbackwasgatheredusingpre-sessioninterviews(Q1)and
post-session questionnaires (Q2 and Q4). Additionally, audio and visual data were collected with
both evaluation processes. Based on this feedback, the design was ﬁnalised for home-based testing.

3.3.
Stage 3: home use and feedback with user group

Although Stage 2 had focussed on immediate reactions to the device, the emphasis of this stage was
to identify how children responded over a longer period and in the intended home environment.
The prototypes of the ﬁnal design were distributed for the children to use within their own homes
for a period of 4–5 weeks following which informal verbal feedback and questionnaires were
used to capture opinion of the rehabilitation technology and the method of user engagement.

4.
Ethics

The ethical considerations in research such as this relate to engaging both able-bodied children
and children with CP in the design process, speciﬁcally the design of rehabilitation technology in
this instance. There are many ethical considerations in conducting research such as this: a detailed
discussion of these issues is beyond the scope of this paper. However, to summarise, an approach
was adopted such that children, both able-bodied and with CP, and parents of children were fully
informed of the nature of the research, the methodologies employed, the use of the collected data
and its storage. This was implemented by research information sheets and consent forms, for both
children and parents. Children and parents were free to withdraw from the study at any time. NHS
protocols relating to the collection and storage of patient data were adhered to, for both children
with CP and able-bodied children.
This research project involved a multidisciplinary research team consisting of engineers and
clinicians from the University of Leeds and teaching hospitals of Leeds. The University of Leeds
has its own processes for conducting ethical reviews, which are reﬂected in the comments made
here; other institutions will also have their own procedures. All research proposals must be
screened by the University before they are submitted, to determine whether ethical review will
be required before the work on the project can go ahead. Projects involving vulnerable popula-
tions (such as children) or which might interfere with the health of a patient (such as taking tissue
samples or trying a new treatment) will require ethical review. Each faculty has its own ethical
review panel, and in most cases these will be able to review the proposals. However, for Leeds
teaching hospitals, West Leeds ethics Central Ofﬁce for Research Ethics Committees (COREC)
is the point of contact for ethical approval of research involving NHS patients. The University
requires that any projects which recruit participants through the NHS are approved by COREC.
It is worth noting that for Stages 1 and 2 of the research, the able-bodied children were recruited
through the participating schools, and if these had been the only stages of the research, then
approval could have been sought internally from the Faculty Ethical Review Committee. However,
the recruitment of children with CP for Stages 2 and 3 of this project was accomplished through
NHS clinicians, consultants and paediatric physiotherapists, and COREC approval was therefore
required. Once COREC approval has been granted for a project, the University does not require
an internal ethical review.

585

The submission process itself involved completion of the online forms and submission of
all information and consent forms for children and parents. Applications for ethical approval
involving NHS recruitment of participants should now be conducted through the NHS Research
Ethics Committee (NRES), the replacement for COREC.

5.
Preliminary rehabilitation device development

The ﬁrst phase of the design process involved gathering information, identifying the design
requirements, developing initial prototypes and validating the efﬁcacy of the prototypes for eval-
uation in the school environment. This phase involved numerous meetings involving engineers,
medical doctors, paediatric physiotherapists and computer scientists to outline preliminary design
requirements.

5.1.
Hardware development

Initial prototypes were designed and developed with two age- and size-matched non-impaired
children. The children were asked to use the rehabilitation device prototypes. The research team

Figure 2.
(a) The PSAMD prototype and (b) the RSAMD prototype.

586

observed this and evaluated the prototypes in relation to the design requirements. This lead to
iterations of the prototypes until they were deemed suitable enough to be used in the evaluation
in school phase. At this stage, data relating to the four questions highlighted in Section 3 were
gatheredthroughinformaldiscussionsandfeedbackwiththechildren,theaimbeingtoidentifyand
address obvious problems before larger-scale testing, rather than to gain representative feedback.
A prototype was developed which offered the highest level of assisted movement, speciﬁcally
both support and assistance in the saggital plane, named the planar space-assistive movement
device (PSAMD), however the device had a large footprint which would make it unsuitable in
some home environments. As a consequence, a secondary device, the restricted space-assistive
movement device (RSAMD), was developed which would be suited to a more conﬁned home
environment. Whilst the RSAMD would not offer the same quality and level of assistance, as it
does not support the arm in the transverse plane, it still had the potential to provide therapeutic
exercise for children. Five of each of the rehabilitation devices were constructed (Figure 2).

5.2.
Software development

The software aspect of the rehabilitation technology provides the motivation for the therapeutic
movement whilst implementing the control algorithms which determine the level of assistance
provided to supplement voluntary effort made by the child. Previously developed rehabilitation
software was initially utilised for evaluation in the school environment (Figure 3). The feedback
collected during all of the user engagement stages was used to inform the development of the
software which ran in parallel with the evaluation. The software was designed with the aim of
making it as simple and logical to use from the user’s perspective as possible.
Inspection of Figure 3 illustrates that the user is required to move the sprite (monkey) towards
the active target (banana) along the green lines. The level of assistance is determined in the
software dependent on the parameters set by the physiotherapist.

Figure 3.
A screen shot of the preliminary rehabilitation software.

587

6.
Evaluation within schools

ChildrenwithCPwererecruitedtotheevaluationsessionsthroughschoolheadteachers,paediatric
neurologists and community-based children’s physiotherapists.The evaluation sessions took place
at the children’s schools, which provided a familiar environment and were easily accessible for
parents. Parents and children were given detailed information sheets about the evaluation process,
and informed consent was obtained. Each child who agreed to participate chose three friends to
take part in the evaluation, and similar information and consent forms were given to the parents
of these children. A total of 37 able-bodied children and ﬁve children with CP took part. This
approach ensured both children with CP and other children without neurological problems were
recruited so that their ideas about the design of the system could be compared and integrated
into the ﬁnal design of the hardware and software. It was important to get the views of children
without CP as we did not want the device to be seen as ‘for the disabled’, aiming to develop a
system which able-bodied children would be equally willing to use.
Figure 4 illustrates the format of the evaluation sessions within schools. This evaluation was
divided into two phases. Phase 1 used a peer tutoring process to assess the usability of the software
(Q3) and interviews to address the issues of the appearance (Q1) and comfort (Q2) of the joysticks
and the children’s enjoyment of the games (Q4). Peer tutoring was chosen based on the review
by Van Kesteren et al. (2003), which identiﬁed this as the most promising approach for usability
evaluation with children.
The goal of Phase 2 was to choose which of the two designs (PSAMD and RSAMD) should be
used for the ﬁnal device. To do this, a comparative approach was adopted, illustrated in Figure 4,
in which a participant used both the rehabilitation devices, in a randomised order, and was asked

Figure 4.
Evaluation within school process.

588

standardised questions which encouraged the child to contrast the two devices. The research team
postulated that as the software was a constant for both rehabilitation hardware systems this method
would provide feedback on the hardware aspect with comparative questions included in the second
questionnaire. For this reason, only the appearance (Q1) and comfort (Q3) of the devices needed
to be considered. Phase 3 involved observation by an engineer and a physiotherapist of children
with CP who used both versions of the rehabilitation device, to verify whether the movements
provided by each design were therapeutically appropriate.

6.1.
Phase 1: peer tutoring approach

6.1.1.
Pre-session interview

A questionnaire was designed to be completed before the evaluation sessions to determine the
child’s computer games experience and their impression of different handgrip designs in terms of
shape, style, feel and colours. Open ended questions evaluated their previous computer experience
and their initial impressions of the device’s purpose on ﬁrst seeing it (to address Q1). The children
were shown a number of possible handgrip designs and asked to rate them using a Smileyometer
(visual Likert scale – from Read et al. 2002), as illustrated in Figure 5. The Smileyometer provides
a method of eliciting responses from children about preferences.

6.1.2.
Peer tutoring session

The emphasis of this stage of the evaluation session was on addressing Q3: whether children were
able to use the system without adult intervention, though observation of the sessions also offered
an opportunity to capture any comments made by the children about comfort (Q2) and enjoyment
(Q3). For each evaluation, the session involved one recruited child and three of their friends
who were asked to use the system following a peer tutoring protocol. To test the usability of the
rehabilitation system, the order of tutoring was randomised.A researcher introduced the ﬁrst child
to the device and software, and showed the child how to use it. After 15 min of practice, the child
became a tutor to the second child. After 15 min the second child, the tutee, became the tutor to a
third child and so on. The researcher remained present but discreet and only interacted with the
children in response to direct questions from them in line with Druin’s (2002) recommendations.
This researcher did not make written notes of this interaction but was solely focused on observing
the children’s interactions, so as not to distract them.
A secondary observer discreetly monitored the peer tutoring session observing the user’s pos-
ture, grip, arm movement, observed non-verbal communication and any interventions made by the
researchers during the peer tutoring process. With younger children, the peer tutoring approach
was modiﬁed such that parents entered the room and sat with the ﬁrst researcher, as it was found
that some of the younger children became apprehensive and distracted without their parents
present.

Figure 5.
The Smileyometer.

589

6.1.3.
Post-session questionnaire

The post-session questionnaire asked the children to use a Smileyometer to rate the system for
comfort (Q2), ease of control (Q3), preference for games (Q4) and how their arm felt after
the session (Q2). To help identify suitable themes for future games, the children were asked
their favourite school games, their favourite TV programme and TV/movie characters and how
we might improve our computer system. As with the pre-test questionnaires, a researcher went
through the questionnaire with the children. As this required feedback about their experience, the
questionnaire was administered immediately after the child had ﬁnished using the system as a
tutor, except for the last child in each session, who was only a tutee.

6.1.4.
Analysis session

To help understand the effectiveness of this approach and to develop guidelines for future
evaluation sessions, the questionnaire sessions were audio-recorded and protocol analysis was
undertaken to formally categorise issues raised by the children. In addition, the data were used
to investigate the evaluation process itself. A debrieﬁng was held after each evaluation session
so that the researchers could discuss what they felt worked with this approach and what did not,
providing data that could be compared with the evaluation of the recordings.

6.1.5.
Information and feedback collected

The responses were used to inform the design process with design iterations performed several
times within the project timescale such that the ﬁnal design satisﬁed the identiﬁed design
requirements to the greatest extent possible.
The Smileyometer results were predominantly positive when the children were asked about
how comfortable the handle of the device was during use. However, some children mentioned
that a particular type of handle was ‘uncomfortable after a while and made a mark’and ‘handgrip
was slippery’. In response to this feedback, it was decided in the next trials that Tensowrap™
material would be placed on one of the rehabilitation systems’ handles to see the effect on the
users’ responses. This material has a soft texture whilst providing a non-slip grip.
What do you think the purpose of the device/equipment is? The children’s responses to what
they thought the device was for varied from ‘to see how you move your arm’ to ‘a computer tool
for helping children with cerebral palsy’. There were a number of comments regarding the system
as ‘for the disabled’ during one of the trials. Interestingly, these comments only occurred after a
child with CP had used the system.
How easy was it to control the character using the joystick? The feedback was positive in all
but two children. The children provided speciﬁc comments on how the system moved their arm:
‘didn’t know would move so much’ and ‘pulled a bit too far’. These came from children with
prior experience with conventional joysticks using in proprietary computer games which have a
much smaller range of movements.
How did the joystick feel when it moved? Sixteen children gave positive responses with only two
negative responses.A speciﬁc comment made by one of the children ‘bumps a bit’led to alteration
of the manner in which the assistive force is applied. A ramping function was implemented to
reduce the jerk felt by the child. This illustrates the value of recording comments made by users.
How does your arm feel? All the children found the exercise system comfortable. Only one
child commented that the arm ‘aches a little’.
What do you think of the game? In one of the peer tutoring trials, 14 children were asked what
they thought of the monkey chasing bananas game, nine responded ‘brilliant’, two ‘really good’,

590

two ‘good’and one ‘not very good’. Comments included ‘comfortable’, ‘fun’and ‘alright’. In the
second peer tutoring trial, two games were played: the monkey game and a football one, in which
the monkey game was preferred.
What is your favourite TV show? Why? What are your favourite school games? Why? The
majority of the children identiﬁed cartoons, such as Scooby Doo and The Simpsons, as their
favourite TV shows. They reported that the types of games they played in the evaluation sessions
were enjoyable. In one trial, 12 children enjoyed the games with only one exception. Favourite
school games included twister, football and drama type improvisation, whilst some educational
games like ‘text twist’ and ‘table aliens’ were also mentioned. Interestingly, analysis of the com-
ments collected identiﬁed high-level graphics as not being as important as was initially perceived
by the research team.
Did you like the type of game here? Why? 13 out of 14 children in one trial stated they liked the
type of game (monkey with bananas) with comments such as ‘liked the monkey’, ‘liked chasing
bananas’, ‘liked the cartoon element’ and ‘it was fun to play’. Interestingly, the one no-response
stated ‘liked to play on own’ highlights the importance of allowing open ended responses as well
as yes/no answers when working with children. Furthermore, it illustrates that for some children
the peer tutoring process is not an effective tool.
The visual data collected by the observers indicated that some children with CP had difﬁculty
gripping the rehabilitation system handle due to the weakness in their arm, causing their hand to
slip off the handle on occasion.

6.1.6.
Analysis of peer tutoring approach

The peer tutoring process worked well in that the children would appear to have been able to
ignore the researchers’ presence somewhat whilst asking for help when needed. The users were
able to interact with each other with limited intervention. It had been hoped that the visual and
audio recording would allow the level of child enjoyment and the functionality of the rehabilitation
systems to be monitored. This would have the beneﬁt of not requiring intervention which may
stimulate the child to respond in a manner they perceive as being favourable (particularly in the
presence of an adult). However, it would require the observers to make subjective interpretations
of the children’s facial expressions that are used to assess enjoyment.
In the event, the audio and video recordings were found to be unsatisfactory as a source of
information about the hardware. The children’s comments focussed on how to use the software:
they did not discuss the appearance of the device, and none made any reference to feeling tired or
any discomfort during the session, even when this was reported in the subsequent questionnaire.
Analysing the children’s facial expressions proved impossible: all the children tended to adopt a
blank or frowning expression while concentrating on the game. This may be due to the nature of
the game, which requires concentration and reﬂexes – this problem may be lessened in the type
of educational games analysed by MacFarlane et al. (2005).
Two further issues arose in using the peer tutoring approach:

(1) The researcher acting as the ﬁrst tutor avoided leading questions, whereas the children acting
as tutor often used them, for example, asking the child they were tutoring ‘This is easy, isn’t
it?’ This raised concerns that peer pressure may have inﬂuenced the comments made by the
children.
(2) The child acting as a tutor sometimes became bored once they had explained the game. This
raised the concern that these children might report artiﬁcially low scores due to their boredom
with a role that is not a normal part of using the joystick. In the studies, the scores of children
who exhibited boredom did not differ signiﬁcantly from those who did not, but this aspect
should be monitored when using this approach in device development.

591

As an additional observation, it was noted that the younger children with CP tended to use their
lesser affected hand to control the device and had to be repeatedly prompted to use their affected
hand. Again, this was not a problem with the older children.
The pre- and post-peer tutoring questionnaires provided some feedback regarding the hardware
aspect of the rehabilitation devices. The Smileyometer’s responses offered quantitative responses
to speciﬁc design questions. The responses provided valuable insights into hardware modiﬁca-
tions.Speciﬁccommentsfromthechildrenwereparticularlyusefulininformingthedesignprocess
rather than just the rating of predeﬁned questions. Flexibility and a mixed methods approach in
obtaining user feedback are essential.
In summary, this method enabled children to interact with each other without external inﬂuence
which may have inﬂuenced their behaviour. Observations were useful in evaluating the soft-
ware usability but not for assessing comfort and enjoyment. The pre- and post-questionnaires/
interviews were useful in collecting quantitative and qualitative data. The quantitative data were
useful in determining the children’s perspectives as a group, whilst the qualitative data on occasion
were very useful in informing the design of the rehabilitation systems.

6.2.
Phase 2: comparative approach

The comparative approach was implemented to compliment the information gained from the peer
tutoring process in relation to the hardware aspect of the rehabilitation technology. This approach
allowed the child to use both versions of the devices and directed the child to compare and contrast
the two systems. The emphasis here was on Q1 (appearance) and Q2 (comfort), which relate to
the hardware being compared, rather than Q3 (usability) and Q4 (enjoyment) which related to the
software. Figure 4 illustrates the format of these sessions.

6.2.1.
Pre-session interview

The same pre-test questionnaire used for the peer tutoring approach was used for the comparative
approach.

6.2.2.
Comparative session

A further evaluation exercise was conducted using both versions of the rehabilitation device
to gain comparative feedback. The child used each device for about 5 min. After each session,
a questionnaire was completed with comparative questions asked in the second questionnaire
(Figure 4).Thechildrenwereaskedwhichofthetworehabilitationsystemstheypreferredandwhy.
The order in which the children used the two versions of the rehabilitation device was randomised.
The randomisation involved whichever child came into the room ﬁrst using the PSAMD device.

6.2.3.
Analysis session

As with the peer tutoring approach, once all the children had completed the post-session ques-
tionnaire, the data were analysed with researchers discussing the protocol, speciﬁc observations
and how improvements to the protocol could be made.

6.2.4.
Information and feedback collected

The users gave similar feedback to the same questions asked with the peer tutoring questionnaires.
The users’ responses to how the joystick felt when it moved itself were either positive or some

592

stated they did not feel the joystick move itself. Most of the users stated that their arm felt ‘really
good’ or ‘brilliant’ after the sessions. Most of the children thought the games were either ‘good’
or ‘really good’. The questionnaire responses showed that irrespective of which rehabilitation
system was used ﬁrst, the users found it easy to control the character.
In the ﬁrst comparative trial, there were 12 participants, seven boys and ﬁve girls aged 5–12
years old. One of the children had CP and needed to use a wheelchair. The RSAMD system
was ﬁtted with the Tensowrap™material around the handgrip to allow a comparison of the
different grips to be made. Seven children preferred the RSAMD device. Of the seven children
who preferred the RSAMD system, three stated that it was the grip that was the reason (‘didn’t
hurt hand so much’, ‘more comfy’ and ‘helps grip better’).
To ascertain the preference of RSMAD related to the presence of Tensowrap™, a second
comparative trial involving eight children aged 5–12 years old was undertaken. On this occasion,
both versions of the rehabilitation system had Tensowrap™material attached to the hand grip. The
responses here showed no clear favourite with four preferring RSAMD, three preferring PSAMD
and one with no preference suggesting that the presence of Tensowrap™was the reason for
children preferring the RSAMD version. There was a range of positive comments for each of the
devices. The comments recorded provided a useful insight into the hardware aspect of the systems
(‘. . . didn’t have to push in and out’, ‘moves better’ and ‘too fast, too slow’) providing feedback
on the hardware aspect. The feedback was useful in modifying some aspects of each device.

6.2.5.
Analysis of comparative approach

This approach appeared to be successful with the children using the rehabilitation systems in pairs.
This seemed to remove the child’s shyness which may have occurred otherwise. The children did
notappeartobedistractedbyaresearchersittingnearbymakingbriefnotesandofferingassistance.
In comparison to the peer tutoring approach, this method ensured all the children were taught
initially how to use the system properly unlike the peer tutoring in which the children taught each
other with information being forgotten or not relayed further along the chain of teaching. However,
the comparative approach could not be used to observe the children interacting with one another
as they were not ‘playing’ with a friend, hence useful verbal information could not be gathered.
Information was collected from the questionnaires/interviews and the visual observation.
The comparative method provided speciﬁc feedback regarding the functionality of the devices.
Asking a question which required the users to choose and justify their choice ensured it related
to the hardware functionality as the software was the same for both devices.

6.3.
Phase 3: ﬁnal prototype user evaluation

The research team conducted two feedback sessions in inclusive schools evaluating the ﬁnal
prototypes of the rehabilitation systems to determine whether any ﬁnal adjustments were needed
before deploying the device in the home setting.

6.3.1.
Feedback session

As with the comparative sessions, each child played on a rehabilitation system for 5 min with
assistance from the school-based occupational therapist or physiotherapist. An engineer and
physiotherapist observed the session making notes from distance. This information provided
the basis for discussing the functionality of the two versions of the device. A total of 10 children
with CP were involved in this stage.

593

6.3.2.
Information and feedback collected

Information collected from these sessions conﬁrmed the observations and feedback gained in the
previous two phases. The sessions also provided valuable information about alignment of the child
in relation to the rehabilitation systems to promote good posture. Clearly, this would be essential
when setting up the system in the home environment and teaching the parents how to set up the
system at home.

6.3.3.
The rehabilitation system

The ﬁnal PSAMD system is illustrated in Figure 6. This design supports the child’s arm in the
transverse plane and has a fully adjustable workspace size.All moving parts are shielded from the
child, whilst a supportive handgrip is utilised.An infrared safety sensor is incorporated into the grip
to disable the system when the child is not using it or loses grip. Figure 7 illustrates the RSAMD
system which has the same features as the PSAMD system with the exceptions that it does not
support the users’ arm in the transverse plane and it does not have a fully adjustable workspace.
The RSAMD system did, however, come in two sizes such that it could be interchanged to suit the
user – an issue identiﬁed at the preliminary rehabilitation device development stage. The RSAMD
system utilised aluminium tubing for decreased weight and improved dynamic response. Both
systems were deployed to patients’ homes with Tensowrap™around the handgrip, identiﬁed
at the evaluation within schools stage, and supported by adjustable frames which enabled their
positioning such that the patients were in a favourable posture.
Figure 8 illustrates the computer game. As a direct consequence of the feedback obtained from
previous stages on this project, the assistive force was modiﬁed to include a sigmoid ramping
function such that the jerk imparted to the upper limb was minimised. Five games were identiﬁed
during the evaluation within school phase: (1) a football type, (2) a monkey chasing bananas,
(3) a spaceship, (4) a shark and (5) a helicopter game. All of these games utilised the same code
with just the sprite, background image and sounds changed.
Figure 9 illustrates the graphical user interface of the software that was developed. The software
was designed such that all the users’ settings were stored in a ﬁle setup by the paediatric
physiotherapist. This ﬁle speciﬁed all of the control parameters used by the software to determine
the magnitude and manner in which assistance was provided to the patient. The software was set
up in such a way that the user merely had to click the start button to play.

Figure 6.
The ﬁnal planar space-assistive movement device.

594

Figure 7.
The ﬁnal restricted space-assistive movement device.

7.
Evaluation after a trial period of use at home

A pilot investigation of the rehabilitation devices to determine whether they would be used by
children at home was undertaken. Children were loaned the equipment for a period of 4–5 weeks.
The equipment was set up at home by members of the research team. The system was designed
to log the usage by the child. At the end of the trial period, a user group meeting was organised
to gain feedback from the children and parents on the home usage and ascertain the users’ views
on their experiences of the design process.

7.1.
Feedback after home use

Eighteen children were recruited for the pilot investigation of the home-based rehabilitation
exercise system. Parents and children were offered the choice of the PSAMD or the RSAMD
system along with advice from the physiotherapist for the home trial. The rehabilitation system
chosen by the users was loaned to the child for 4 weeks. Baseline functional and kinematic assess-
ments were undertaken on each child at the Charterhouse Rehabilitation Technologies (CRT)
Laboratory, at the University of Leeds. The children had practiced, on average, over 600 reaching

595

Figure 8.
A screenshot from the ‘spaceship’ game.

and retrieving movements using the system over a period of 4 weeks. Individualised functional
beneﬁts were identiﬁed, with kinematic analysis showing improvement in upper limb function.

7.2.
Feedback from parents and children

Feedback was sought from the users of the rehabilitation systems with a view to redesigning the
rehabilitation systems for future use.A focus group meeting was organised at the CRT Laboratory
at the University of Leeds, with children, parents, physiotherapists and teachers participating. Both
informal interviewing and questionnaires were used to gather information from the group. Two
questionnaires were designed: one for children and one for the parents. A summary of the project
was presented with an opportunity for verbal feedback from anyone involved in the project,
and notes were taken of the conversations that ensued. The questionnaires were collected before
the attendees left the meeting. In total, nine sets of questionnaires (parents and children) were
completed.

7.3.
Parents’ questionnaire

This questionnaire did not focus on using the system directly but focussed on eliciting opinion
on the child’s interaction with the technology including how much they used it and perceived
beneﬁts. The items within the questionnaire included those requiring a dichotomous response

596

Figure 9.
The graphical user interface.

(yes/no), polytonomous response options (i.e. various levels of agreement) and opportunity for
free text.

7.4.
Parents’ feedback

Were there any periods when you had the exercise system at home and your child could not use
it? Five respondents stated no with four stating yes. Of the four positive responses, one stated for
more than 7 days, one for less than 5 days and two for less than 3 days.
Did your child use the exercise system regularly? All of the parents stated that the children had
used the system regularly.
Did you use incentives to help motivate your child to use the exercise system? Five respondents
stated that they used incentives, three stated they did not and there was one no-response. The
comments on incentives used included: ‘sticker chart’, ‘competing against dad’, ‘reminders’ and
‘extra time on XBOX’.
Did your child get bored using the exercise system? There were seven responses stating that
their child did get bored, whilst two stated they did not. The respondents stated that boredom
was present towards the end of the 4-week period. Comments included: ‘felt it was easy until the
team modiﬁed it to make it harder’ and ‘toward the end due to repetitiveness’. This feedback was
expected as the variety of games was limited during this proof-of-concept study. The researchers
have identiﬁed the need to modify the software to develop the challenge, curiosity, control and
fantasy aspects, as identiﬁed by Fabricatore et al. (2002) in future versions.
When did you ﬁnd was the best time for your child to use the exercise system? The parents felt
that the best time to use the rehabilitation system was after school or in the early evening.

597

Was there anything that stopped your child using the exercise system? Six of the respondents
answered no and three yes. Of the positive responses comments included ‘if no one was available
to keep changing to the next game and set it up’, ‘access to husbands laptop, he worked away at
times’ and ‘only on odd occasions when we went out and got back late’.
Do you think the exercise system helped your child? The general response to the rehabilitation
system was favourable. A total of eight parents stated that they ‘strongly agree’ that beneﬁt was
present and one parent indicated that they ‘agree’ with the statement.
What improvements, if any, would you like to see made to the exercise system? One of the most
interesting comments arising from this question was ‘. . . two players or more so siblings/friends
could play of different ages’. Development of the system for use with the child’s peers would be
beneﬁcial by improving opportunities for social integration and provide motivation. The game
themes were developed through the user group feedback, however the comment ‘a little more girl
friendly, i.e. colours and games’was stated. The research team was solely composed of males and
hence it is thought a more appealing choice for girls would be if it could have been developed
with a more diverse group considering the game development, even with the user group feedback.
Is there anything else you would like to mention regarding the study or the use of the system?
The parents of users made several favourable comments such as ‘the way researcher one and
researcher two interacted with patients was fantastic; he was made to feel relaxed and important’
and ‘really enjoyed helping you, it was a really good experience’. Interestingly, one comment
suggested developing an educational aspect to the game, something the research team had already
identiﬁed for future development.

7.5.
Children’s questionnaire

The children’s questionnaire utilised the visual smileyometers and sought to gain feedback about
both the software and hardware. To address the software aspect, questions were asked regarding
what it was like to play the games, their appearance and the noises the characters made. Addition-
ally, an open ended question was asked to determine the children’s favourite thing about the game.
To evaluate the hardware aspect of the rehabilitation systems, the children were asked what they
thought about the look of the device, to determine its social acceptability. In order for the children
to feel completely comfortable, the parents were asked to conduct this questionnaire with their
children. This can be considered as child adult interaction, the problems associated with such
interaction are minimised as the adult is someone the child is familiar with. This would not have
been the case if the questionnaire had been administered by a member of the research team.

7.6.
Children’s feedback

How did you ﬁnd playing the computer game? The children’s responses to this question were
all positively weighted, ﬁve ‘brilliant’, two ‘really good’ and two ‘good’. Comments included
‘enjoyed playing the game’ and ‘got a bit boring after a while’.
What did you think of the look of the game? The children’s responses to this question were
againallpositivelyweighted,two‘brilliant’,two‘reallygood’andﬁve‘good’.Commentsincluded
‘graphics were a bit simple and could make it more enjoyable if they are more realistic/comparable
to other computer games’, ‘bright colours and liked the backgrounds’ and ‘good but the games
were too similar, a bit repetitive’. The ﬁrst comment illustrates how utilising the parents to deliver
questions can lead to them answering the questions themselves, a disadvantage of this approach.
What did you think of the way the joystick looked? One child responded ‘brilliant’ with three
and ﬁve responding ‘really good’and ‘good’, respectively. Comments included ‘visually OK, not
too different from a normal joystick’, ‘bit too big, sometimes got in the way’, ‘the bottom was

598

big’, ‘could do with being a bit smaller, more tidy so it didn’t stand out’ and ‘looked a little bit
like a helicopter stick’. These comments conﬁrm the justiﬁcation for developing two devices, one
of which is more suited to conﬁned homes.
What were the noises made by the characters like? Four of the children responded brilliant
with two responding ‘good’. Sounds in the software would appear to have been beneﬁcial in
engagement with the game.
What was your favourite thing about the game?There were several positive comments regarding
the noises involved with the game. Other comments included ‘trying out the joystick and monkey
pictures’, ‘trying to follow the lines’, ‘it has been shown to improve arm function’ and ‘liked the
monkeys on the game’.

8.
Discussion and conclusions

Two rehabilitation devices have been developed that can facilitate home-based therapeutic exer-
cise. The design process emphasised user involvement throughout and used a range of methods
to achieve this. Feedback from parents and children illustrates that the designed technology was
perceived to be of beneﬁt and the process by which opinion was sought was enjoyable.
The mean usage of the rehabilitation devices, determined from the logged data from the devices,
deployed to 18 end users’ homes for a period of 4 weeks was 94 min, whilst the mean usage in
terms of number of times the game was played was 253 times. In the authors’ views, this justiﬁes
the efﬁcacy of such home-based rehabilitation technology.
It was noted from a review of the literature that there is still little guidance on how best to
engage children generally (and children with physical and cognitive impairments, in particular)
in the design process. While a range of methods are available for eliciting various types of user
feedback, there has been no assessment of their suitability beyond the HCI domain and there is a
lack of comparisons to identify which methods are most appropriate at different stages of design.
In this case, the rehabilitation device was essentially a computer input device, and HCI methods
were easily adopted – but how might they have to change if one were assessing other assistive
and medical devices, such as a wheelchair or inhaler?
In this project, peer tutoring was found to be effective for assessing the usability of the system
and its software, but observations were not effective for capturing issues of enjoyment or comfort.
It is difﬁcult to say whether peer tutoring created these problems: there is no reason to assume that
any other method of interaction would avoid the children’s ﬁxed facial expression during play, but
the focus of peer tutoring on teaching each other how the system works may have skewed their
discussion in this direction. Perhaps a method such as co-discovery may result in more discussion
about other aspects of the device?
To get feedback on comfort, enjoyment and aesthetics for this project, conventional interviews
and questionnaires were used. Children had no difﬁculty in using the Smileyometer, which pro-
vided a convenient way of gathering quantitative responses. However, these methods still preserve
the traditional power relationship between adults and children, with the adult asking the questions
and the child having to provide answers. It would be interesting to see whether alternative meth-
ods such as participatory design (asking children to redesign the look of the joystick or the
themes of the games, for example) could provide an alternative approach. At the very least, ideas
and drawings provided by the children might be useful probes for such interviews, allowing the
children a greater sense of ownership in the process.
There is also the question of how best to approach the whole process with children who have
more severe communication impairments. As well as making interviews difﬁcult, this would
render the peer tutoring approach unusable, so there is a need to ﬁnd alternative methods if we
are to avoid excluding children with these impairments from the design process altogether.

599

Finally, there is the issue of how far children need to understand disability and rehabilitation in
order to participate in the design process. In this project, no special steps were taken to educate
the participating children, although all came from classes which included children who had arm
impairments due to CP, so they would have some familiarity with the condition. Whether this
would be sufﬁcient for more involved participatory design methods, such as the use of inter-
generational design teams (Druin 1999), remains to be seen. For this project, the children were
asked to comment on the appearance of the device and how much they enjoyed the games, which
did not require any specialist knowledge.
A related question is how far non-disabled children can be used as proxies for disabled children
in these projects. In this case, there were no noticeable differences between the views of the
disabled and non-disabled children on the four topics of interest (usability, comfort, appearance
and enjoyment). However, there needs to be some caution in generalising from this. While there
is no reason to assume that disabled children will necessarily have a different view on what
constitutes a fun game or a what makes a device look medical, assessing comfort is less obvious.
It may be in this case that because the device was comfortable for children with arm impairments,
it was therefore bound to be comfortable for children without. A less comfortable joystick might
have seen a greater divide in opinion, with non-disabled children reporting it as comfortable, and
children with arm impairments ﬁnding it more difﬁcult.
The authors would suggest that the adoption of a mixed methods approach using different
approaches with small groups of children throughout the design cycle is more likely to provide
a comprehensive range of feedback relating to the design goal. Adoption of a single-user-
engagement strategy can limit the quality and breadth of feedback collected. Further research
is needed to investigate and compare methodologies that engage children in a design process that
efﬁciently elicits answers to the design questions posed.
A PhD research project at the University of Leeds is currently underway to answer some of these
questions and provides a formal comparison of different methods for engaging both disabled and
non-disabledchildreninthedesignofrehabilitationtechnology.Aswellaslookingathoweffective
these methods are and how they can be adapted to include communication-impaired children, the
research will consider how far non-disabled children can act as proxies for disabled children when
commenting on aesthetics of devices and the enjoyment of the games used in this case.