Contextualizing User Centered Design with Agile 
Methods in Ethiopia 

Degif Teka 
IT Doctoral Program, 
Addis Ababa University 
Addis Ababa, Ethiopia 

Yvonne Dittrich 
Systems and Software Section,  
IT University of Copenhagen Copen-
hagen, Denmark 

Mesfin Kifle 
Department of Computer Science,  
Addis Ababa University 
Addis Ababa, Ethiopia 

Abstract—User centered design (UCD) provides principles and 
activities for improving usability. However, traditional UCD 
methods lack considering the context of users in low income, cul-
turally diverse settings and where Information and Communica-
tion Technology (ICT) development is at its infant stage. Software 
development in low and medium income countries like Ethiopia is 
characterized by big difference in education and livelihood. Het-
erogeneous cultures both between different ethnic groups and be-
tween rural and urban contexts is another challenge for Ethiopian 
software development. The paper addresses how to adapt UCD 
methods and agile development to bridge these heterogeneities. To 
this end, a multi-case study was implemented, researching two 
projects in an Ethiopian software company. An action research 
approach has been complemented by a survey and interviews with 
other companies. It has resulted in contextualization of UCD prac-
tices: personas mediated between rural and urban users and de-
velopers. Personas helped also customer representatives as well as 
product owners to understand users and their requirements and 
allowed to test releases against persona requirements before de-
ployment. Personas were updated throughout the project based on 
usability testing and experience from early deployment. Besides 
personas local IT personnel mediated between the rural users and 
software developers. Pairwise usability testing is an example for 
cultural adaptation for discount usability evaluation method that 
has been tried out. Releasing early version to support personnel 
and members of the company who are closer to the intended users 
helped to provide a more adapted version from the start. 

Keywords—User Centered Design (UCD); Scrum; Discount 
usability; Personas; Local IT personnel; Culture; Usability testing; 
Workshops 

I. 
 INTRODUCTION 

Software development in low and medium income countries 
is characterized by big difference in education and livelihood. 
Lack of experience and trained manpower and lack of project 
management skills also characterize the software development 
situation in Ethiopia for example [1]. Heterogeneity of cultures, 
both between different ethnic groups and between rural and ur-
ban contexts, makes software design and development difficult. 

Developing for the rural user puts more responsibilities on 
the software engineers and other stakeholders. Building mobile 
applications for the rural users is also a challenge with respect to 
infrastructures. Besides cultural differences between the rural 
user and urban developers, different languages need to be sup-
ported by some mediations or agents. 

In Ethiopia, lack of awareness on usability, lack of skills and 
lack of usability professionals has been reported in a survey [2]. 
Therefore, there is a need to find possible solutions for integrat-
ing usability and user centered design (UCD) to the development 
processes in terms of tools and practices that could be performed 
by practitioners with only basic knowledge of usability. Soft-
ware developers need to be supported to understand users and 
their requirements. Developers indeed require a means to sup-
port them to clearly understand user needs [3], long chain of user 
representations and the different personnel talking about users 
differently were among the challenges mentioned at the usability 
workshops in the case organization. 

While UCD provide important principles and methods mak-
ing end-users as center of the design process, traditional UCD 
methods are not appropriated to the context of low income and 
culturally diverse settings with complex usability challenges. 

Scrum as agile method is flexible and iterative software de-
velopment method. However, the customer representative may 
not represent real end users and may not clearly know user re-
quirements. 

The paper addresses the question “How to adapt UCD methods, 
usability testing and agile development to bridge these heteroge-
neities?” The article is organized as follows: section II discusses 
related work, section III presents the research method, section 
IV presents research results and section V discusses and con-
cludes the research. 

II. RELATED WORK 

A. User Centered Design 
‘User-centered design’ (UCD) is both a philosophy and va-
riety of methods for design processes in which end-users influ-
ence how a design takes shape. UCD provides principles and ac-
tivities for improving usability and usable product development.  

The international standards for ergonomics of human system 
interaction and human centered design for interactive systems 
[4] standardized UCD and defined it in terms of six principles 
and four activities. The four cyclic activities are depicted in the 
figure 1. Among the six principles is ‘users are involved 
throughout design and development’. It is an important princi-
ple, however the how part on the methods need appropriation of 
tools and techniques for the users who are in different contextual 

978-1-5386-2775-4/17/$31.00 ©2017 IEEE

911

situations than the context from which the existing UCD 
methods originated. 

Fig. 1. The iterative user-centric design process 

While UCD process and its principles are well accepted and 
useful in designing interactive systems, UCD methods do not 
explicitly consider the context of users in low-income and cul-
turally diverse settings and where Information and Communica-
tion Technology (ICT) development is at its infant stage [5]. 
Ethiopia is of no exception. Design needs to consider geo-
graphic, environmental, economic and socio-cultural challenges 
that can affect physical access to Information and Communica-
tion Technologies (ICT). For example, basic infrastructure, such 
as electricity, telecommunications networks, and internet ser-
vices have to be accounted for. Likewise heterogeneity in culture 
and socio-economic situation needs to be accounted for.  

The publicly available methods need to be appropriated and 
adapted to the context and the environment. For example ab-
stract and low-fidelity prototypes that are promoted at UCD de-
sign are problematic for less IT skilled users and, furthermore, 
software engineers lack experience working with it. Likewise, 
usability heuristics developed by Nielsen [6; p. 27] are devel-
oped based on the experience and context with respect to the 
western world. This is confirmed by other articles [7]. In a pre-
vious article [2], we argue that usability evaluation is difficult 
because of lack of ICT expertise by intended users.  

UCD has been integrated with agile methods since both have 
some important common principles. They, however, also differ 
in their philosophical underpinnings and how they addressing 
quality. Next subsection introduces agile methods. 

B. Agile methods 
Agile development practices have been widely accepted and 
adopted in the software industry because of their flexibility and 
frequent delivery. Agile methods define how the development 
should be carried out under agile values and principles [8], to 
address challenges like requirements change. The frequent de-
liveries can support use orientation as they allows for early feed-
back by customers and users. Many agile methods do not explic-
itly distinguish between customers and actual users, and custom-
ers may not understand the need of end users [9, 10]. Close col-
laboration with customers and prototyping open up space for 
combining agile development with UCD techniques for improv-
ing usability. Agile methods lack considering UCD inherently, 
however, they share some of the same aims as usability and 
UCD [11, 12]. 

Scrum is one of the agile methods oriented towards project 
management. Schwaber, one of the founder of Scrum discusses 
that: “Scrum is not a prescriptive process. It doesn’t describe 
what to do in every circumstance. Scrum simply offers a frame-
work and set of practices that keep everything visible” [13]. 
Scrum has been a development method adapted by the case com-
pany since the year 2014. It includes the fast delivery of early 
versions that can serve as working prototypes. The team applies 
unit and integration testing. The employees in the support de-
partment implement user acceptance tests, and, based on the re-
sult, the product is either deployed or differed for the next itera-
tion for improvement and additional features. The Scrum roles 
include the development team, Scrum master (SM) and the prod-
uct owner (PO). The PO is assigned by the management and the 
SM based on her/his domain knowledge to the projects. The 
Scrum ceremonies include: product planning meeting, standup 
meeting, sprint review meeting and sprint retrospectives. Further 
details of the in-house Scrum practice can be found [3].  Figure 
2 shows the in-house Scrum process in the case company. 

  

Fig. 2. The Scrum process in the case organization 

There are several authors that discuss the need of flexible 
ways of addressing user needs to exist in a competitive market. 
A systematic literature study on the success of user involvement 
and participation indicates that the participation of users has de-
monstrable advantages [14]. The case study by Hansson et al. 
[15] shows that flexible development practices can successfully 
facilitate active user involvement. A combination of UCD tech-
niques and agile approaches is possible as has been reported by 
[16].  

Based on research of a Scrum project, Singh [17] stated that 
the involvement of the customer required in agile projects has 
been overloaded with too many responsibilities and oriented to-
wards the technical development. He proposed that having two 
product owners can help the situation: the conventional product 
owner and an extra product owner focusing on usability and user 
experience. The experience report shows that having extra prod-
uct owner improved usability compared with the traditional 
Scrum project. 

912

Doerflinger and Dearden [18] proposed for ICT develop-
ment in developing countries, a close collaboration and cooper-
ation between project stakeholders involving multiple parties. 
The agile approach they proposed combines evolutionary and it-
erative development and the reflective action research of the re-
searchers that generates input and feedback for the design. 

Due to the light-weight nature and their simplicity, discount 
usability engineering has been a subject for integration with ag-
ile methods for enhanced usability [11, 12]. However, these dis-
count methods are based on the experience from the developed 
countries context [7]. 

C. Personas 
Programmers work hard to make their software easy to use, 
however in many cases their frame of reference is themselves 
and as a result, they make it easy for other software engineers 
like them but not the ordinary users [19]. Cooper [19] argues that 
programmers have too much influence over the design of the hu-
man interface and, due to a lack of skills in this area, they do a 
poor job of it. Pruitt and Grudin [20] argue that a good design 
does not come from users, but from designers. This is because 
users do not really know what they want until they get it. Per-
sonas is a useful technique to keep the developers focused on the 
users and avoid self-substitution.  

Personas is one of the tools used in UCD and has been used 
to improve the usability in the agile development [21]. In their 
literature review on usage of personas in agile development Ca-
ballero et al, identified that the exploratory and refinement 
phases are the central phases where personas were applied. Per-
sonas were also used by researchers trying to integrate agile 
methods and UCD [10, 22]. 

D. Cutural context 
Cultural variations have influence on the application and use 
of software products. According to Hofstede [23], Ethiopia is a 
high context country i.e. there is high power distance and hier-
archical relationship in the society and there is boss subordinate 
relationship besides high collectivist society. However, the real-
ity in Ethiopia is more diverse: Ethiopia is the home for more 
than eighty ethnic groups with each their own language. Further, 
rural communities and urban life differs substantially. The cul-
ture concept underpinning this study therefore refers to the con-
cept of negotiated culture by Walsham [24]. Diversity needs to 
be a key focus when developing and using ICTs including soft-
ware products. Walsham’s cultural context [24] can be brought 
to the difference in livelihood and culture between urban soft-
ware developers and rural users and further between cross-cul-
tural systems development teams (for example: the internal team 
and offshore team in the case organization) are likely to confront 
issues of incongruence of values and attitudes towards users. 
One of the impacts of the difference in culture is on usability 
testing using the existing methods for users of different culture. 

E. Usability testing 
Usability testing is a way of testing the usability of a product 
or service by letting representative users use the products while 
being observed. According to Nielsen [25], usability testing is a 
technique used to evaluate a product by testing it on users. This 
can be seen as an irreplaceable usability practice since it gives 
direct input on how real users use the system.  

Discount usability that has been popularized by Jakob Niel-
sen [25] and applied and proposed by other researchers [11, 12], 
rely on simple observation and interpretation than complex lab 
and statistical methods. The three main discount engineering 
methods are prototyping, simplified think-aloud and heuristic 
evaluation [25]. Discount usability method provides testing and 
designing guides when there is a challenge of getting users or 
with minimum resources. Usability testing helps for improving 
usability, checking whether the requirements are met or identi-
fying new requirements. It involves testing for efficiency, effec-
tiveness and satisfaction. Nielsen and Landauer [26] showed that 
it is possible with few users to uncover most of the usability is-
sues. Nielsen’s example is that 5 users will uncover 85% of the 
usability issues [25].  

III. 
RESEARCH METHOD 

Active cooperation among researchers and practitioners is 
considered to be important for successful introduction and inte-
gration of new technology. Technology here means any artifact, 
tool, concept or method. It has been suggested that future re-
search should focus on working from the inside in order to iden-
tify the real challenges and propose for improvement [22]. Prac-
tical solutions for actual challenges could be achieved from 
working inside the organizations with the researchers acting as 
change agents [27]. Collaborated efforts and reflections of both 
practitioners, the researcher and users will help promoting in-
house best practices as practitioners often do not follow formal 
methods: Based on surveys and interviews, Fitzgerald concludes 
that only 6% of all practitioners apply a formally defined method 
[28]. These collaborative efforts need to be mediated by meet-
ings, workshops, frequent feedbacks and reflections. Artifacts 
such as personas, prototypes and other design tools mediates 
practitioners such as developers with users and customer repre-
sentatives. 

Software development is a human activity carried out by 
people; to understand this human behavior a qualitative ap-
proach is required. The research method used is a structured ac-
tion research approach known as Cooperative Method Develop-
ment (CMD). CMD is ethnographically inspired action research 
method developed and later refined through several projects 
[27].  

CMD focuses on shop floor software development practices. 
The approach provides a structured research process, clearly de-
fining three phases of research: understanding current practice, 
deliberate improvement together with the practitioners and im-
plement and evaluate improvements. The CMD approach de-
ploys qualitative methods such as ethnographic studies for un-
derstanding a practice from the practitioners’ perspective. Inter-
views, workshops, observations, document analysis are some of 
the data gathering techniques used as qualitative methods for the 
empirical fieldwork in this research too. However, CMD does 
not prohibit using quantitative methods when desired like statis-
tical or descriptive analysis of data. 

Two projects have been researched in this research. For an-
onymity, they are here called project A (proj. A) and project B 
(proj. B). Proj. A is a rural project, new application and mobile 
based digital supply of the manual crop collection and input and 
seed distribution to the member farmers. Proj. B is an extension 

913

of existing program for collecting bills for public utilities, add-
ing a mobile client. The CMD phase 1 of proj. A (understanding 
the practice) has been detailed in the article [3]. CMD phase 1 of 
proj.A, understanding the software development and usability 
practices and challenges brought important input to the deliber-
ation procedures in the next phase of the research. The analysis 
unfolds the challenges in the development with respect to UCD.  

IV. 
RESEARCH PROCESS AND FINDINGS 

The development has been supported by local IT personnel 
to communicate challenges of real users to the developers. The 
local IT personnel belong to the same culture and talk the same 
language as the rural end users, and are thus able to bridge be-
tween the rural users and the software practitioners at the center 
capital. The different stakeholders taking part in the project are 
shown in figure 3. 

 
Fig. 3: Project A stakeholders and their interactions 

The research process has been supported with the usability 
workshops which led to the decision to support the teams with 
the design of personas and local IT personnel and the discussion 
on how the challenges could be addressed. Here in this paper the 
description is CMD phases 2 & 3 of proj. A besides that of proj. 
B. 

A. Project A: Exploring personas to communicate user needs 
Deliberation meetings and workshops led to the develop-
ment of personas during CMD phase 2 of the cycle. CMD phase 
3, implementation: Based on the concept of pragmatic personas 
[29], 3 personas have been developed iteratively from user pro-
files, observation of users and their tasks in collaboration with 
users, customer representatives and the development team. Dur-
ing the successive agile iterations, the personas have been im-
proved and updated using the data from usability testing and up 
to date feedback from users and user research. A sample persona 
is shown in figure 4. 

The usability practices introduced here were not used in the 
previous projects in the company. UCD practices started as a re-
sult of the cooperation in the PhD research from which this paper 
has been extracted. 

  CMD phase 3: An evaluation meeting with the develop-
ment team was organized including the PO and operational sup-
port to evaluate use of personas. The positive statements in-
cluded ‘personas improved developers understanding of users 
and their needs’, ‘developers and the PO got better way of com-
municating user needs’, ’internal test teams able to use persona 
descriptions to test against personas needs’ ‘rural users have 
been supported by local IT personnel that know their language 

and culture’. On the challenge side, the participants mentioned: 
‘It needs the support of management’, ‘personas need continu-
ous update that has to be done by a dedicated person’, ‘personas 
need to be supported by other UCD methods’ 

Fig. 4: Sample persona. 

The project setup and interaction with the local IT personnel 
enabled understanding the rural context better. Local IT person-
nel bridged the gap between users and developers. The intermit-
tent electricity and mobile network led to the development of 
store and forward mechanism by the software engineers that has 
helped the application users to record data offline and send it 
when they came to the town with better mobile network. The 
evaluation shows that the usability challenges raised by devel-
opers during the workshop and documented in [3] such as ‘prob-
lems in requirement communication’ and ‘long chain of user 
representations’ have been relieved. 

B. Project B: Culturally adapted usability testing 
Proj. B was implemented by the same local team as proj. A 
with further additional offshore team. Therefore CMD phase 1 
confirmed the findings in [3], though the users were situated in 
the capital. In phase 2 of the CMD, it was decided to implement 
personas. In CMD phase 3, personas have been developed using 
user research based on interviews at the users’ work places and 
further enhanced with usability testing methods. Three personas 
have been created and posted at the development room, shared 
to customer representatives and the offshore team. Their usage 
improved the requirements development and user representation 
to the development team and customer representatives in the or-
ganization. Persona usage effects has been evaluated and ana-
lyzed at CMD phase 3. 

On the CMD phase 2 of proj. B, culturally adapted usability 
testing has been explored. Think-aloud protocol as light usabil-
ity method to be carried out by Scrum teams with basic usability 
knowledge has been proposed. However as discussed in the lit-
erature review section (section II), these methods are based on 
equality between users and developers. Based on the cultural 
context, users consider criticizing practitioners as unethical and 
users are not comfortable for voice criticism to developers as 
observed. As a result, in CMD phase 3, grouping and pairing 
users with their colleagues has been implemented to give better 
feedback. The pairs were given set of tasks to carryout using the 
application while asking them to discuss their thoughts and re-
sults. At the same time, observation and intervention was mini-
mized to allow users to freely discuss their criticism and feed-
back 

914

A number of issues became visible that have been addressed 
in the next versions and some parts are deferred for future devel-
opments when there is no funding like for users request for in-
stance, “I prefer to have its laptop version to work from my In-
ternet café so that I can use the broadband Internet service 
available without extra cost and instead of working on the slow 
mobile data network”. Issues that are identified from the test and 
addressed on the next sprint include: A subject (an agent) from 
the pairs described the situation, “on the way I was thinking 
whether we gave it incorrect input. It became late to respond”. 
The error message displayed later is not descriptive either as it 
says “FAILED” without describing it. Figure 5 shows the test 
subjects during the test. There were two pairs each with two 
members and two groups each with three members. The pairing 
has been based on their equivalent ages aiming at active discus-
sion in the pairs. 

 

Fig. 5. Test pairs on Proj. B 

CMD phase 3. The evaluation took place in form of inter-
views with the PO and project manager and then in a workshop 
with the whole team. In the workshop, the team was asked to 
write their views on sticky-notes and posted on board as shown 
in figure 6 for grouping to help for the analysis and for identify-
ing themes. The analysis shows both positive and negative im-
pacts of personas. The evaluation also includes own observation.  

The personas aided project participants to share a perception 
of the users that is built on field data and not on preconceived 
ideas (avoid self-referencing). Practically the observed chal-
lenge of long chain of user representation has been addressed 
using the personas. The positive impacts include: “personas as-
sisted in clearly understanding users and their critical require-
ments”, “Creates common understanding about users among the 
team members”, “Provide clear picture of user needs for design 
decision; Management gets an understanding to take decisions 
like infrastructure requirements”, “New employees easily under-
stood our users and quickly familiarize with the personas”, “to 
create stable system design”, “Personas aided the offshore team 
to understand the users better” and “Personas aided to recruit us-
ers/agents” 

Evaluation of pairwise usability testing shows both ad-
vantages and limitations. There has been a general agreement 
between the team that important feedback surfaced that might 
not be possible to attain using the traditional think-aloud proto-
col in the context. Criticism as cited above would usually not 
been told directly to the technical personnel as it would be con-
sidered unethical.  

 

 
Fig. 6. Post-it notes for persona evaluation: green positive im-
pacts and orange for negative impacts 

The teams reflected however that ‘it requires expert person-
nel to facilitate and perform such tasks with users’, ‘it needs 
management support as we have already specified task’ and ‘us-
ers need to be incentivized to be motivated and involved’. In this 
particular situation, the test has been performed during user 
workshops and training organized by the service provider and 
client organizations. Furthermore, more feedback might be ob-
tained if the facilitator is familiar to the user. Better results could 
also be achieved if the pairs are similar age groups and same 
gender. 

V. 
DISCUSSION 

In this research personas have been continuously updated 
and light weight for the Scrum team. Personas have been used 
by several authors [10, 22, 21] and are able to help bridge the 
heterogeneity between software developers and users in low and 
medium income countries. However, because of the heterogene-
ity and the distance, they have to be developed carefully and 
early, so that they can influence already the requirements formu-
lation (in form of user stories and backlog items).  

Deliberation meetings and workshops resulted in the imple-
mentation of proposed solutions together with the practitioners. 
Personas and local IT personnel effectively mediated between 
the developers and the users. This might also be associated with 
the research by Singh [17] to support the product owner (PO) in 
a Scrum project. Singh used a usability expert. The problem in 
our case is approached with a different setting to support and 
study users using local IT personnel for the obvious reason of 
lack of usability professionals. The deliberation has been backed 
up by the cultural studies [23, 24] and a survey [2]. Having local 
IT personnel in proj. A is also motivated by the difference in 
language and culture between the rural users and urban develop-
ers as discussed in [24]. Personas were not only used locally to 
support needs elicitation, design and testing but also by the off-
shore team to understand the users and their needs. 

Discount usability methods that has been proposed by both 
Kane [11] and Sohaib and Khan [12] has been appropriated to 
local context. Pairwise usability tests adapt the think-aloud usa-
bility testing to the specific cultural context.  

With respect to the research approach, appropriateness of 
workshops has been discussed in recent works like that of Jia et 
al. [30] and found that practitioners are usually using informal 
methods, and next to workshops the most widely used usability 
techniques are interviews and meeting with users. Workshop is 

915

a dynamic approach as it allows customization to different pur-
poses and contexts of a method, tool, ideas and concepts. Work-
shops are deliberated as a method to gain important feedbacks 
and design ideas as the high collectivist culture of Ethiopian so-
ciety [23], is also a means to gain more from workshops. In the 
research process in this study, workshops have been used heav-
ily at the CMD phases. 

VI. 
CONCLUSION 

We started with the research question, “How to adapt UCD 
methods, usability testing and agile development to bridge the 
heterogeneities?” and resulted in using personas and local IT 
personnel to mediate between rural users and urban developers. 
Personas has been adapted to Scrum team to be light and lean 
and continuously updated based on usability testing and experi-
ence from early deployment. User pair testing resulted in identi-
fication of unseen problems. User pair testing helped in mini-
mizing cultural influence and workshops have been observed to 
assist in collaborative design and learning. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

We would like to thank our collaborating company for its 
support and cooperation. Thanks to the development team and 
operational and support personnel for their openness and partic-
ipation.