Development and Feasibility Testing of a Smartphone 
Intervention to Improve Adherence to Antipsychotic Medications

Julie Kreyenbuhl, Pharm.D., Ph.D.1,2, Elizabeth J. Record, B.S.3, Seth Himelhoch, M.D., 
M.P.H.1,2, Melanie Charlotte, M.A.1, Jessica Palmer-Bacon, B.S.1, Lisa B. Dixon, M.D., M.P.H.
4, Deborah R. Medoff, Ph.D.1,2, and Lan Li, M.S.1

1University of Maryland School of Medicine, Department of Psychiatry, Division of Psychiatric 
Services Research, Baltimore MD

2VA Capitol Healthcare Network (VISN 5) Mental Illness Research, Education, and Clinical Center 
(MIRECC), Baltimore MD

3University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore MD

4Center for Practice Innovations, New York State Psychiatric Institute, Department of Psychiatry, 
Columbia University, New York, NY

Abstract

Approximately 60% of individuals with schizophrenia do not take their antipsychotic medications 
as prescribed, and nonadherence is associated with exacerbation of psychotic symptoms, increased 
hospital and emergency room use, and increased healthcare costs. Behavioral-tailoring strategies 
that incorporate medication taking into the daily routine and use environmental supports have 
shown promise as adherence-enhancing interventions. Informed by the Information-Motivation-
Behavioral (IMB) Skills Model and using the iterative process of user-centered design, we 
collaborated with individuals with schizophrenia and psychiatrists to develop an interactive 
smartphone application and web-based clinician interface, MedActive, for improving adherence to 
oral antipsychotic treatment. MedActive facilitates the active involvement of individuals with 
schizophrenia in managing their antipsychotic medication regimen by providing automated 
reminders for medication administration and tailored motivational feedback to encourage 
adherence, and by displaying user-friendly results of daily ecological momentary assessments 
(EMAs) of medication adherence, positive psychotic symptoms, and medication side effects for 
individuals and their psychiatrists. In a 2-week open trial completed by 7 individuals with 
schizophrenia and their psychiatrists, MedActive was determined to be both feasible and 
acceptable, with patient participants responding to 80% of all scheduled EMAs and providing 
positive evaluations of their use of the application. Psychiatrist participants were interested in 
viewing the information provided on the MedActive clinician interface, but cited practical barriers 
to regularly accessing it and integrating into their daily practice.

jkreyenb@psych.umaryland.edu, 410-637-1864 (phone), 410-706-0022 (fax). 
The Authors have declared that there are no conflicts of interest in relation to the subject of this study.

HHS Public Access
Author manuscript

Published in final edited form as:
Clin Schizophr Relat Psychoses. 2019 ; 12(4): 152–167. doi:10.3371/CSRP.KRRE.070816.

Keywords

Schizophrenia; Antipsychotic; Adherence; Mobile; Technology; Smartphone

Introduction

Schizophrenia affects approximately 0.5% of adults worldwide (1) and is among the most 
severe and costly of psychiatric illnesses (2). When used as prescribed, antipsychotic 
medications are effective in reducing positive psychotic symptoms, with the aim of 
improving long-term functional outcomes and enhancing recovery. Despite the potential 
benefits, upwards of 60% of individuals with schizophrenia do not take their antipsychotic 
medications as prescribed (3–4). Commonly cited reasons for nonadherence to antipsychotic 
treatment include substance abuse, poor illness insight, cognitive deficits, lack of social 
support, poor therapeutic alliance, practical problems (i.e., financial, environmental, lack of 
routine), and problematic side effects (4). Partial or complete nonadherence to antipsychotic 
medications is associated with numerous adverse outcomes, including exacerbation of 
psychotic symptoms and increased risk of relapse, impaired functioning, increased suicide 
attempts, increased hospital and emergency room use, and high healthcare costs (5–7).

Studies of antipsychotic adherence-enhancing interventions developed for individuals with 
schizophrenia to date have demonstrated mixed findings, with some strategies indicating 
promise. The overwhelming majority of studies testing psychosocial interventions in which 
psychoeducation or cognitive behaviorally-oriented compliance therapy grounded in 
principles of motivational interviewing were provided alone were ineffective in improving 
adherence (8–11). However, behavioral-tailoring strategies that incorporate medication 
taking into the daily routine and use environmental supports (e.g., reminders, medication 
packaging), self-monitoring, or reinforcement (including monetary) have been shown to 
improve adherence to antipsychotic treatment (12–16). However, many of these 
interventions are logistically complex and difficult to deliver widely, requiring specialized 
therapist training or in-home visits, and may be financially unsustainable.

Mobile technology-based interventions have recently been used for disease management and 
prevention and have been found effective in engaging consumers in treatment, enhancing 
traditional clinical interventions, and improving both intermediate and clinical health 
outcomes (17–21). Several reviews of interventions utilizing mobile phone technology, 
primarily involving text messaging, have shown them to be effective in improving 
medication adherence for a number of non-psychiatric medical conditions (e.g., diabetes, 
asthma, HIV, obesity) (18–19, 21–23). Mobile phone technologies are increasingly being 
used for both the assessment and treatment of serious mental illness as well (24–32). Mobile 
phones, including smartphones, represent an ideal medium to improve medication adherence 
because of their availability and acceptability among individuals with schizophrenia (33), 
and their ability to enhance the ecological validity of mental health assessments and 
treatments as they take place in real time and in individuals’ natural settings (34–35). 
Increasingly, mobile phonetechnologies are being used to improve medication adherence 

Kreyenbuhl et al.
Page 2

among individuals with schizophrenia (24–29), though only one pilot study has employed a 
smartphone application (28–29) to date

The aims of this study were to employ a user-centered design approach (36–37) to develop a 
smartphone intervention, MedActive, designed to improve antipsychotic medication 
adherence in individuals with schizophrenia, and to conduct a short-term open trial to 
determine its preliminary acceptability and feasibility among individuals with schizophrenia 
and psychiatrists.

Methods

Theoretical Framework for the Intervention

The conceptualization of MedActive was informed by the Information-Motivation-
Behavioral (IMB) Skills Model, an empirically supported framework for understanding and 
addressing nonadherence to highly active antiretroviral therapy for HIV (38–39), which 
shares many characteristics with psychiatric medication nonadherence (4). The IMB-Skills 
Model asserts that well-informed and well-motivated patients with adequate skills for 
enacting adherence-related behaviors will exhibit better adherence. In accordance with the 
IMB Skills Model, MedActive provides illness and medication information, increases 
motivation to adhere e.g., through personalized motivational feedback, and imparts the 
behavioral skills required for individuals with schizophrenia to adequately adhere to 
antipsychotic treatment, e.g., through daily medication reminders.

Input from individuals with schizophrenia and their psychiatrists was carefully considered at 
each stage of developing MedActive through the iterative process of user-centered design 
(UCD) (36–37). UCD allows end users of a system to influence how a design takes shape to 
increase the ease with which a system can be learned and used. Five individuals with 
schizophrenia and seven psychiatrists participated in a usability testing protocol that was 
approved by the University of Maryland, Baltimore Institutional Review Board and 
informed consent was obtained from all participants. Throughout the development of 
MedActive, usability testing provided guidance on the specification of the format, 
appearance, and content of the intervention so that information was presented in a user-
friendly and accessible manner to both groups of users. Individuals with schizophrenia 
interviewed all “strongly agreed” or “agreed” that they found the application to be easy to 
use and interesting, and could imagine using the application in their daily life. However, 
some commented that they had difficulty reading the text due to the font size and color, and 
had difficulty comprehending some terms, including “antipsychotic,” “cognitive problems,” 
and “rigidity.” All psychiatrists interviewed stated that they were “very interested” or 
“interested” in viewing summary reports of their patients’ adherence, symptoms, and side 
effects “daily” to “weekly,” and that this information would be “very useful” or “useful,” 
although some did express concerns about how patients’ cognitive impairments and literacy 
levels would interfere with their use of the application. Taking this feedback into 
consideration, several changes to the application were made, including alteration of the text 
size and color, and replacement of various terms to meet the literacy level of the patient 
population.

Kreyenbuhl et al.
Page 3

MedActive Smartphone Application User Interface: Overview

MedActive (Figure 1) consists of an Android-compatible smartphone application that 
reminds individuals to take their antipsychotic medications, stores and tracks information 
about their self-reported medication adherence, positive psychotic symptoms, and 
antipsychotic side effects, and allows them to research topics regarding schizophrenia and 
antipsychotic medications. Table 1 shows how the key features of MedActive map onto the 
components of the IMB Skills Model.

MedActive Smartphone Application User Interface: Medication Reminders

MedActive reminds individuals to take their antipsychotic medication at scheduled times 
throughout the day (Supplemental (S.) Figure 2). Five minutes prior to a scheduled dose of 
medication, MedActive provides a personalized auditory and visual reminder to take that 
dose of medication. Five minutes later, individuals are asked whether they took that dose of 
medication. If individuals respond “yes,” rotating personalized motivational feedback 
messages of their choosing appear. If individuals respond “no,” they are then asked to select 
why they did not take that dose (options include: “It doesn’t help me,” “I don’t need it,” “It’s 
okay to skip it,” “I don’t have it with me,” and “The side effects make me feel bad”) and 
rotating personalized messages of their choice subsequently appear reminding individuals 
why taking their medication is helpful. If individuals respond that they are not taking their 
medication due to side effects, they are given the option to send an automated message to 
their psychiatrist via the clinician interface (see below). Individuals’ responses to these 
ecological momentary assessments (EMAs) of their adherence are displayed within a user-
friendly calendar that appears during the EMA or can be accessed through the homepage at 
any time. If individuals do not respond to the initial EMA, they receive a single additional 
query thirty minutes later. As an incentive to respond to EMAs, participants receive points 
for each survey they respond to, which can be viewed as they accumulate via an icon on the 
homepage.

MedActive Smartphone Application: EMAs of Positive Psychotic Symptoms and 
Antipsychotic Side Effects

In addition to the adherence EMAs, individuals are prompted to respond to once daily 
EMAs regarding their positive psychotic symptoms (S. Figure 3) and antipsychotic 
medication side effects (S. Figure 4) at random times within a timeframe that they specify 
they are available.

The EMA of positive psychotic symptoms queries individuals about 7 positive psychotic 
symptoms, including hallucinations, disorganized thought, paranoia, having a special 
mission or purpose, being able to mind read, thought insertion, and communication with the 
TV or music (35). Similarly, the EMA of medication side effects asks individuals about 9 
common side effects of antipsychotic treatment, including weight gain, difficulty 
concentrating, difficulty falling or staying asleep, daytime sleepiness, restlessness, lack of 
energy, not feeling like oneself, sexual difficulties, and muscle stiffness. Each question in 
both of the EMAs has a simple multiple-choice “yes/no” response, and an affirmative 
response leads to subsequent questions pertaining to the frequency of occurrence or the 
severity of the symptoms or side effects. If individuals report that they are always bothered 

Kreyenbuhl et al.
Page 4

by one or more of the symptoms or side effects, they are given the option of letting their 
psychiatrist know via an automated message displayed on the clinician interface (see below). 
If individuals do not initially respond to a request for an EMA, they are prompted to do so 
thirty minutes later. Individuals receive a “point” as an incentive for completing each EMA.

In addition to these prompted EMAs, individuals can also elect to report symptoms and side 
effects at any time during the day by accessing these surveys via an icon on the MedActive 
homepage. Also via the homepage, individuals can view pictorial representations of their 
reporting of symptoms and side effects over time (S. Figures 2 and 3), as well as a resource 
guide that provides concise descriptions of positive psychotic symptoms (S. Figure 5) and 
antipsychotic medication side effects (S. Figure 6), including brief tips on self-management 
of side effects, as well as tips for talking with their doctor (S. Figure 7).

MedActive Clinician Interface

MedActive also consists of a clinician interface which is a secure website that enables 
psychiatrists to review their patients’ daily antipsychotic medication adherence (S. Figure 8), 
positive psychotic symptoms (S. Figure 9), and antipsychotic side effects at any time (S. 
Figure 10). Alerts appear if individuals report not taking a dose of medication due to side 
effects or if they report always being bothered by a symptom or side effect in the previous 
day. To facilitate communication about medication concerns, psychiatrists could also view 
when their patients send them automated requests indicating their desire to speak with them 
at the next appointment about a specific medication, symptom, or side effect concern.

Open Trial of MedActive

Study Overview—We conducted an open trial in which individuals with schizophrenia 
and psychiatrists used the MedActive application and clinician interface for 2 weeks 
between March and June 2014. Outpatients with a diagnosis of a schizophrenia spectrum 
disorder received an Android smartphone and used the MedActive application for 
approximately 2 weeks, during which time their psychiatrists could monitor their 
antipsychotic medication adherence, positive psychotic symptoms, and side effects on the 
clinician interface. The study protocol was approved by the University of Maryland, 
Baltimore Institutional Review Board and informed consent was obtained from all 
participants.

Setting and Sample—Individuals with schizophrenia and their psychiatrists were 
recruited from 2 outpatient mental health clinics within the University of Maryland Division 
of Community Psychiatry that serve adults in low-income areas of Baltimore. Seven 
psychiatrists were recruited, and referred patients who met inclusion criteria for the study. 
The patients were diagnosed with a schizophrenia spectrum disorder as reported by their 
psychiatrists, between the ages of 18 and 64 years, prescribed and self-administered one or 
more oral antipsychotic medications, English speaking, and able to read English at a 7th 

grade reading level or above (per the Wide Range Achievement Test). Because the primary 
aim of this pilot study was to evaluate the initial feasibility and acceptability of MedActive 
rather than its effects on medication adherence, we did not preferentially enroll individuals 
who had difficulties adhering to antipsychotic treatment. Patient-participants were excluded 

Kreyenbuhl et al.
Page 5

if they had a visual, hearing, voice, or motor impairment that would prevent completion of 
the study procedures or use of a mobile phone. Patient-participants were paid $50 upon 
completion of the trial and return of the smartphone.

Procedures—At the beginning of the study, participants received an Android smartphone 
with the MedActive application uploaded, and completed a brief training session on how to 
operate them. The phone was customized with personalized medication reminders, 
timeframes for completion of symptom and side effect EMAs, and motivational feedback 
messages. The smartphone and accessories were provided free of charge with unlimited data 
and text messaging capabilities and limited call time for the 2-week study period. 
Participants were contacted on days 2 and 7 of the 2-week study period to troubleshoot any 
difficulties with the phone or app. If a participant did not respond to any of the adherence, 
symptom, or side effects EMAs over any 2-day period during the trial, they were contacted 
by research staff. If participants did not respond to any EMAs after 7 days and could not 
otherwise be contacted, they were considered lost to follow-up and the phone was 
deactivated. Participants were expected to return the smartphone and its accessories at the 
follow-up appointment.

Psychiatrist-participants were given access to the clinician interface to monitor their patients 
over the 2-week period in which up to 2 of their patients were using the MedActive 
application. They were not given a minimum frequency with which they should access the 
interface, and responding to requests from patients to discuss symptoms or side effects was 
considered optional, as would be the case in regular clinical practice.

Measures—At baseline, patient-participants completed surveys regarding their 
demographic information and prior use of mobile phones. During the 2-week study period, 
all patient-participant use of the application (i.e., button presses, responses EMAs) and 
psychiatrist-participant use of the clinician interface were continuously uploaded to a secure 
study server. At follow-up, psychiatrist- and patient-participants completed surveys querying 
them about the acceptability and likeability of the application and clinician interface, 
respectively.

The primary outcomes of the open trial were the feasibility and acceptability of the 
application and clinician interface. Medactive was considered “feasible” if 100% of patient- 
participants completed the trial, 100% returned the smartphone in working condition, and 
patient-participants responded to at least 70% of all EMAs. Acceptability was based on 
patient- and psychiatrist-participant ratings of the application and clinician interface.

Results

Participants

Of the 7 psychiatrists enrolled in the study, 6 referred patients to participate. Five of the 6 
psychiatrists referred 1 patient, and 1 psychiatrist referred 2 patients. Of the 9 patients 
recruited for the study, 1 patient declined to participate prior to consent after hearing the 
description of the study and 1 did not return to complete the pre-trial surveys and mobile 
phone training. The remaining 7 individuals were enrolled, and all were African American 

Kreyenbuhl et al.
Page 6

males with a mean age of 47.6 (SD=10.4). Participants had been diagnosed with 
schizophrenia at a mean age of 24.3 (SD=12.3) and had completed an average of 10 (± 2) 
years of schooling. Overall, 57% (n=4) of participants were currently unemployed and all 
were single or never married. Six participants (86%) took their medication once per day, 
while the other participant (14%) took his medication twice per day. Five participants (71%) 
stated that they owned a mobile phone, and of these, 2 (29%) reported owning a smartphone.

Feasibility

All 7 patient-participants completed the approximate 2 week trial (range=14–18 days) and 
returned their phones in working order. Only 1 participant experienced minor technical 
difficulties in operating the phone and received re-training. Overall, participants responded 
to 80% of all EMAs. They responded to 85% of adherence EMAs, 79% of the EMAs of 
positive psychotic symptoms, and 75% of the EMAs of medication side effects. Participants 
reported taking their antipsychotic medication in 100% of the adherence EMAs to which 
they responded. The majority of participants reported experiencing symptoms and side 
effects in response to those EMAs (Table 2). Participants reported experiencing one or more 
symptoms in 62% of the EMAs to which they responded, of which “voices or visions,” 
“confused thinking,” and “thought insertion” were most commonly reported. Participants 
reported experiencing one or more side effects in 82% of the EMAs to which they 
responded, with “low energy” being the most commonly cited. Over half of participants also 
reported experiencing “concentration difficulties,” “concerns about weight,” “not feeling 
like oneself”, “muscle stiffness/trembling”, and “excess sedation” at least once during the 
trial.

With regard to psychiatrists’ use of the clinician interface, 4/6 psychiatrists (67%) used the 
website at least one time during the 2 week trial, logging in an average of 3 (±3) times. 
Three of the 4 clinicians (75%) who logged in viewed information on their patients’ 
medication adherence (an average of 5 (±4) times per patient), positive symptoms (9 (±10) 
times per patient), and antipsychotic side effects (9 (±10) times patient). This corresponded 
to 4/7 patients (57%) having their psychiatrists view information on their adherence and 
antipsychotic side effects, and 3/7 patients (43%) having their clinicians view information on 
their positive symptoms during the 2 weeks.

Acceptability

As shown in Table 3, the majority of patient-participants found MedActive easy to use, 
reporting they had no difficulties understanding and responding to the questions presented 
within the application and operating the smartphone. The majority also agreed that their 
experience using MedActive was pleasant yet challenging, but not stressful, and did not 
interfere negatively with daily activities. Four participants (57%) “strongly agreed” or 
“agreed” that they needed technical support. All patient-participants “strongly agreed” or 
“agreed” that they liked that their psychiatrists could view their information in real time, that 
MedActive was interesting and easy to use, and that the application helped them to 
remember to take their medication. Six participants (86%) “strongly agreed” or “agreed” 
that MedActive helped them talk to their psychiatrist about their medication.

Kreyenbuhl et al.
Page 7

Five of the 6 psychiatrist-participants (83%) stated that they were “interested” in continuing 
to be able to view summary reports of their patients’ adherence, symptom, and side effect 
information on a secure website. Psychiatrists indicated that they would use the interface 
frequently outside of the study, with 1 (17%) stating he/she would access the interface every 
day, 1 (17%) 2–3 times weekly, 3 (50%) once weekly, and 1 (17%) less than once weekly. 
Three psychiatrists (50%) stated that they were “successful” in implementing the interface 
into their practice, that it was “helpful” to log onto the interface to view patients’ adherence, 
symptom, and side effect information, and that it was “not burdensome” to log on to the 
interface. Among the open-ended feedback that the psychiatrists provided, two stated that 
integrating the interface information into a patient’s medical records would be helpful, and 
two suggested providing alerts when new information became available in the interface.

Discussion

In this report, we describe a novel Smartphone-based intervention, MedActive, designed to 
increase adherence to antipsychotic treatment in individuals with schizophrenia. Consistent 
with the Information-Motivation-Behavioral (IMB) Skills Model (38–39), MedActive is 
expected to improve medication adherence by conveying medication-taking knowledge and 
heuristics, by employing personal and social motivators for adherence, and by imparting 
behavioral skills for sustaining medication self-administration e.g., through automated 
reminders. While MedActive shares some features common to other mobile technology 
interventions for this population, including inquiries about medication adherence (24–29) 
and EMAs of positive psychotic symptoms (28–29), MedActive also possesses several 
unique attributes. For example, whereas most of these interventions have largely relied on 
text messaging (24–27) and included medication adherence among one of several 
intervention domains (25–29), MedActive is a smartphone application that has medication 
adherence as its exclusive focus. MedActive incorporates personalized reminders to take 
medications at the specific times they are prescribed, and includes assessment of reasons for 
nonadherence coupled with provision of motivational feedback personally tailored to an 
individual’s self-identified reasons for taking medication. In addition to EMAs of adherence 
and positive psychotic symptoms, MedActive uniquely captures in-the-moment information 
on common antipsychotic side effects and provides user-friendly tips for self-management. 
In addition, MedActive provides longitudinal summaries of EMAs of adherence, psychiatric 
symptoms, and side effects in user-friendly displays for both patients and clinicians, in an 
effort to facilitate shared decision-making to overcome barriers to adherence.

The present study demonstrated that an antipsychotic adherence-enhancing smartphone 
application is feasible among individuals with schizophrenia, with 100% of participants 
completing the study and returning the smartphone in working condition, and participants 
responding to 80% of all EMAs of adherence, symptoms and side effects. Further, these 
individuals found the MedActive application to be acceptable, with everyone endorsing that 
MedActive was easy to use and helpful in remembering to take their medication, and the 
majority agreeing that MedActive helped them talk to their psychiatrist about their 
medication. It should be noted that only two participants owned their own smartphones prior 
to the study. Because several individuals found using MedActive to be “challenging” and felt 
in need of technical support, it is important that initial training and ongoing technical 

Kreyenbuhl et al.
Page 8

assistance be made available for some individuals with serious mental illness who may not 
be familiar with or have reservations about using newer technologies such as smartphones. 
Overall, our findings are consistent with past studies examining mobile phone interventions 
in this population, contributing to the growing body of literature demonstrating that 
technologies, including personal digital assistants (31), text messaging (24–27), and 
smartphone applications (28–29) are acceptable and feasible resources by which to address 
medication adherence difficulties in individuals with serious mental illness.

In this study, 85% of patient-participants self-endorsed high rates of adherence at baseline 
and this continued throughout the study, with participants self-reporting taking their 
antipsychotic medication in 100% of adherence EMAs to which they responded. This level 
of adherence is significantly higher than the poor adherence commonly cited in this 
population (3–4). This is not necessarily surprising as we did not enroll individuals based 
upon their medication adherence status and subjective assessments of non-adherence are 
known to be unreliable (40–41). Future studies evaluating the effectiveness of MedActive 
and similar adherence-enhancing interventions should enroll individuals with known 
adherence difficulties (4) and should employ more objective measures of medication 
adherence (e.g., unannounced pill counts (15–16), pharmacy refill records (13, 15), 
electronic pill caps (16, 40)) along with self-reports (41).

Despite such high rates of self-reported adherence, a significant proportion of individuals 
nevertheless reported experiencing positive psychotic symptoms during the 2-week study 
period, endorsing them in over 60% of EMAs, of which “voices or visions”, “confused 
thinking”, and “thought insertion” were the most commonly cited. An even greater 
proportion of participants experienced one or more antipsychotic side effects, having 
endorsed them in over 80% of EMAs, of which “concentration difficulties,” “concerns about 
weight” and “low energy” were mentioned most frequently. While a participating 
psychiatrist noted that at least one of her patients was responding to the EMAs as though 
they were being asked if they had ‘ever’ experienced the symptom or side effect rather than 
reporting over the past day, this was likely not the case for all participants. This suggests that 
many individuals with schizophrenia are frequently experiencing multiple psychotic 
symptoms and antipsychotic side effects that could be interfering with their daily lives, 
which could be brought to the attention of clinicians through the use of a tool like 
MedActive.

With regard to psychiatrists’ reactions to MedActive, the findings were more varied, with the 
interface being used by approximately 70% of psychiatrists who logged in an average of 3 
times during the 2-week study period. While the majority of psychiatrists noted being 
interested in continuing to view summary reports of their patients’ adherence, symptom, and 
side effect information, only half considered themselves to be “successful” in implementing 
the interface into their regular practice. This is not necessarily surprising given the time 
pressures that psychiatrists face treating often complex patients in 15–20 minute visits, and 
not typically having access to clinical information available to them in real-time. More work 
is needed to understand how to better enable service systems and providers to integrate real-
time patient information into existing workflows in order to facilitate measurement-based 
care (42). Suggestions provided by psychiatrists in our study included integrating 

Kreyenbuhl et al.
Page 9

MedActive into the existing electronic medical record system and providing alerts when new 
patient information becomes available.

Limitations of this study include its small sample size and limited demographic mix, short 
duration, and lack of a comparison group. While appropriate for feasibility testing, these 
shortcomings precluded any investigation of the impact of MedActive on its intended 
targets, including improved antipsychotic adherence and enhanced shared decision-making, 
as well as more distal outcomes including improved psychotic symptoms and reduced 
psychiatric hospitalizations. Despite these limitations, the results of this study provide the 
foundation for future testing of innovative smartphone interventions that incorporate 
principles of behavioral tailoring as a promising strategy for improving adherence to 
antipsychotic treatment in individuals with serious mental illness.