Technology and Health Care 22 (2014) 77–90
77
DOI 10.3233/THC-130775
IOS Press

Health care satisfaction among foreign
residents in Taiwan – An assessment and
improvement

Ajit Kumara, Sanjeev Maskarab and I-Jen Chianga,c,∗

aGraduate Institute of Biomedical Informatics, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan
bOvens and King, Community Health Services, Wangaratta, Australia
cInstitute of Biomedical Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan

Received 27 October 2013
Accepted 19 December, 2013

Abstract.
BACKGROUND: In 2012, almost half-million foreigners (2.3% of the total population) from 160 countries were estimated to
live in Taiwan. In 2010, approximately eighty-seven percent of the population expressed high satisfaction in the national health
care system of Taiwan. However, satisfaction level among foreign residents towards the Taiwanese health care system has not
been clearly documented in the literature.
OBJECTIVE: In this study, we assessed satisfaction level among foreign residents for receiving healthcare facility in Tai-
wanese hospital. In addition, the study came out with some potential solutions to improve health care received by them.
METHODS: Human-Centered Design (HCD) approach was deployed, which included three phases: observation, pattern recog-
nition, and ideation and delivery. Each phase involved various steps. Techniques, such as ethnography, interview, discussion,
and survey were used in accomplishing various steps within each phase. Four participants and two facilitators from Taiwan took
part in the study.
RESULTS: The study revealed various stories, insights, and themes about the health care received by the foreigners in Taiwan.
In addition, some potential solutions and immediate available opportunities were recommended to improve their health care.
CONCLUSIONS: The results provided a deeper understanding into the satisfaction level among foreign residents in Taiwan.
For instance, this study pointed out the need to improve English proﬁciency of hospital’s administrative staffs because a lack
of English language proﬁciencies was found to be a major barrier in delivering quality health care to foreign residents. There-
fore, adoption of various training modalities, such as English training using mobile device based games, role-play, and hospital’s
workﬂow depiction using English posters were recommended.

Keywords: Human-centered design, health care, satisfaction, Taiwan

∗Corresponding author: I-Jen Chiang, Graduate Institute of Biomedical Informatics, Taipei Medical University, 250, Wux-
ing Street, Taipei 11031, Taiwan. Tel.: +886 2 27361661 Ext. 3343; Fax: +886 2 27392914; E-mail: ijchiang@ntu.edu.tw /

0928-7329/14/$27.50 c⃝2014 – IOS Press and the authors. All rights reserved

78

1. Introduction

Taiwan offers a mandatory health insurance system for its citizens called National Health Insurance
(NHI). The NHI is one of the highly praised health care systems in Asia. It is always rated with high
satisfaction by its consumers and has shown continuous improvement in health care outcomes [1–3]. The
NHI program was founded in 1995 to streamline the Taiwanese health care system [1]. The population
of Taiwan was estimated to be 23 million in 2011 [1,4]. Ninety-nine percent of Taiwanese residents are
covered under the NHI program [4]. The NHI is such a robust system that foreign residents in Taiwan,
who have lived continuously for four months, are also covered under this program. The life expectancy
of Taiwanese people was 79.16 years (75.98 years for males, 82.65 years for females) in 2011 [5]. Some
of the main achievements of the NHI were equal access to a comprehensive range of health services,
state-of-art hospital infrastructure, fully qualiﬁed doctors, low premium and copayment, lower health
care expenditures, and almost zero waiting time for patients [6–8].
Because of the above achievements, the NHI is the most-favored social policy in Taiwan. It has been
enjoying high public satisfaction rate from 68% in 2001 to 87% in 2010 [6,9]. However, an important
question remains unanswered whether ‘foreign residents in Taiwan’ are enjoying the satisfaction level on
par with local people. In 2012, almost half-million (476, 472) foreigners (2.3% of the total population)
from 160 countries, excluding mainland China, was estimated to live in Taiwan [10]. Furthermore, the
population of foreign residents in Taiwan has been continuously increasing in recent years [11,12]. The
NHI provides the same health care beneﬁts to all foreigners, what they provide to the Taiwanese people.
Therefore, ideally, we would expect that even the foreigners have the same level of satisfaction with the
NHI. However, our literature search could not ﬁnd sufﬁcient evidence to support the above assumption.
Besides the non-clarity about the foreigners’ satisfaction level, we found another interesting fact that
Taiwan did not perform that well in medical tourism industry despite having state-of-art hospital in-
frastructure and highly skilled doctors [13]. Medical tourism is a global phenomenon, wherein patients
travel from the developed nations to overseas (especially Asian countries) for non-emergency invasive
surgeries [14,15]. Health care has become expensive in the developed nations, which force their citizens
to resort to cheaper health care destinations. This has provided one hundred billion-dollar opportunity for
Asian countries, including Thailand, Malaysia, India, Singapore, Taiwan, and China [16–20]. However,
to date, the share of Taiwan in medical tourism is quite less, compared to other countries. To promote
medical tourism, Taiwanese government established Taiwan Medical Tourism Development Association
(TMTDA) in 2007 [21]. Taiwan witnessed an inﬂux of only eleven thousand ﬁve-hundred foreign pa-
tients in 2010, thirty-nine thousand in 2011, and one-hundred thousand in 2012. However, this ﬁgure is
much less compared with competing countries like Singapore (around one million in 2010), Thailand
(around 1.4 million in 2010), India (around 1.1 million in 2010), and Malaysia (around 0.519 million
in 2010) [22]. Currently, Taiwan is recognized as the ﬁrst destination of choice for Chinese patients
because China and Taiwan have the similar culture and language [23]. However, Taiwan was not much
successful in attracting patients from other developed nations.
Thus, we found that the satisfaction levels towards the Taiwanese health care system were not sufﬁ-
ciently clear from both perspectives – ‘foreign residents in Taiwan,’ as well as ‘medical tourist.’ We felt
the need for some empirical studies to ﬁgure out (1) whether foreign residents in Taiwan were satisﬁed
like Taiwanese citizens, and (2) why Taiwan underperformed in the medical tourism area despite having
an excellent health care system in place. Therefore, we conducted a study to assess the foreign residents’
satisfaction with Taiwanese health care and ﬁnd possible ways of its improvement.

79

Table 1
Summary of timeline, phases, steps and techniques used

Timeline
Phases
Steps
Techniques
Day 1–Day 22
Observation
Direct observation, story telling
Ethnography, interview, discussion
Day 23–Day 25
Pattern identiﬁcation
Deriving insights from stories, ﬁnding
themes from the insights, ﬁnding poten-
tial solutions, ﬁnding candidate oppor-
tunity

Discussion, voting, consensus

Day 26–Day 90
Ideation and delivery
Finding opportunity from candidate op-
portunities, proposing candidate proto-
types, ﬁnding prototype from candidate
prototypes

Voting, discussion, consensus, sur-
vey using a questionnaire

2. Methods

2.1. Framework

We carried out the literature search to identify different approaches and techniques previously em-
ployed for assessing patients’ satisfaction for various healthcare systems. The literature search revealed
that patients’ satisfaction for the products and services was usually evaluated using questionnaire based
surveys, analytic hierarchy process, focus-group discussions, and interviews [24–26]. The feedback re-
ceived from these evaluations were used to improve the products and services [24]. However, we argued
that the foreigners might have pre-formed perception about the health care that should be delivered to
them. Therefore, it would be better that we apply an inductive approach (ground up approach) on foreign-
ers by understanding their initial health care needs [27,28]. Recently, Human-Centered Design (HCD)
has been widely used in various domains for inductively exploring consumers’ needs, preferences, and
behavior; and then developing products and services, which ﬁt their need [26,28–34]. Moreover, the
HCD not only considers the individual’s speciﬁc design requirements, but also ensures tasks, functions,
information, and the environment of the products and services [28,35–37]. We believe that the HCD
might be deployed to get a better insight into the patients’ (here foreigners) satisfaction level and their
preferences for various healthcare needs, such as treatment options, degree of involvement in decision-
making, preferred ways for health care delivery, as well as the understanding about the products and
services that might be developed [27,38]. Therefore, we decided to deploy the HCD using the IDEO
toolkit [39,40]. This toolkit is freely available at the IDEO company website, which provides a con-
ceptual framework to design innovative solutions for some of the human problems [40]. As shown in
Fig. 1, the IDEO toolkit typically involves three phases: (1) observation; (2) pattern identiﬁcation; and
(3) ideation and delivery. These phases include various steps and techniques depending on human prob-
lems. In the initial phases of the HCD approach, our thinking diverges in ﬁnding various solutions to
a given human problem; and in the later phases, we converge the various solutions and focus on the
best-chosen innovative solution.

2.2. Application

Satisfaction with Taiwanese health care and possible ways for its improvement with regard to foreign
residents was considered as a human problem. Four participants and two facilitators from Taiwan partic-
ipated in this study. Table 1 shows the summary of the timeline, phases, steps, and techniques that were
employed in carrying out this study.

80

Fig. 1. Study framework.

2.2.1. Observation phase
The problem (satisfaction with Taiwanese health care and possible ways for its improvement with
respect to foreign residents) was assigned to four participants through email. The participants were
asked to observe and interview one or more foreigners each in their neighborhood, workplace, or any
other convenient place. The participants were given a period of three-week for direct observation. They
observed and interviewed one foreigner each. One participant interviewed his interviewee thrice, one
twice, and the other two only once at their convenience. After the three-week observation period, the
participants had face-to-face meetings at a common location in Taiwan. On Day 22, they shared their
stories with each other. The highlights of their stories are summarized as below:
– Story 1: The ﬁrst participant observed an Indian man, Mr. A, living in his neighborhood, who was
a researcher. Mr. A had been living in Taiwan for the last three years along with his wife and a ﬁve-
year-old daughter. He needed to visit a neighboring hospital several times because he was suffering
from cervical spondylosis. For his same problem, earlier he used to visit a few small clinics; how-
ever, he often found it difﬁcult to communicate with the doctors over there. Therefore, he decided to
go to a bigger hospital despite the fact that the care he received at those hospitals was more expen-
sive for him. He was satisﬁed with the facilities and services offered to him at the bigger hospital.
Nevertheless, he often found difﬁculties in communicating with administrative staffs at the hospi-
tal because his Chinese proﬁciency was not that good. To bridge the communication gap between
him and the hospital’s administrative staffs, he often had to use his friend as an interpreter, who
knew Chinese and English. He was comfortable in communicating with the doctors at the hospitals
than the clinics; however, his Indian accent was a barrier for the doctors to understand his health
problem fully. He used to explain about his health condition either by writing or by using sign lan-
guages (gestures, postures, and facial expressions). However, over the time, after ﬁve to six visits to
a particular hospital, he observed an appreciable improvement in the hospital’s services, including

81

Table 2
Insights

Insights

1. Information in English
2. English speaking people
3. Multilingual service
4. Privacy
5. Standard health care
6. Diagnosis and treatment
7. Patient instruction
8. Hospital website
9. Nurses’ services
10. Information availability to patient’s caretaker
11. Hospital information
12. Policies of National Health Insurance, Taiwan
13. Cultural awareness
14. Nonverbal communication awareness
15. Chinese language awareness

their English communication skills. For instance, at the medicine dispatch center, the pharmacists
started providing drug administration related instructions, such as time, route, dose, frequency, us-
ing template stamps on envelopes that contained the medicines. While availing medical services
in Taiwanese hospitals, he encountered some cultural shock too. He was surprised to see that the
medicines, such as capsules and tablets, were usually dispensed to the patients, including him, in
unsealed envelopes without mentioning the expiry dates of the medicines.
– Story 2: The second participant interviewed his friend Mr. B from the USA, who was working
in a Taiwanese company for the last ﬁve years. Mr. B complained about the difﬁculties faced in
communicating with Taiwanese hospital staffs. Mr. B further explained that, in the beginning, he
used to go along with a bilingual native friend. For the smooth consultation at the hospital, his friend
always assisted him while communicating with the doctors and hospital administrative staffs by
acting as an interpreter. Because of his friend’s involvement, he had no choice but to share his health-
related conﬁdential matter with him. Fortunately, he did not mind sharing the health care details with
his friend. He had an impression that the Taiwanese doctors did not understand allopathic medicine
that well and tended to overprescribe the medications. He shared a bitter experience of spending
ten days in the hospital (six days in a general hospital and four days in quarantine), while he was
suffering from an acute infection. The infection could not be identiﬁed even after undergoing all
possible and available tests. Because of which, since then, he has been highly reluctant to enter the
Taiwanese health care system. He felt that the doctors and nurses often did not spend enough time
with the patients to explain their health care problems. However, he appreciated online registration
facilities offered by some of the Taiwanese hospitals. In one hospital, he found multilingual charts
with pictures and a bilingual (Chinese and English) liaison ofﬁcer for patients, which he thought to
be a very useful concept for foreigners like him.
– Story 3: The third participant shared a story of a British woman, Mrs. C, who was her co-worker
at a kindergarten. Mrs. C lived along with her husband in Taiwan for the last seven years. She
had a very little understanding of the native language. She felt that it was virtually impossible to
deal with the hospital’s administrative staffs without speaking their native languages. She shared
two of her unpleasant experiences. First, her husband had a knee surgery in Taipei (capital city
of Taiwan). Her husband was taken into the operating room of the hospital. She was made to wait
outside the operating room anxiously for a long time without receiving any communication from the

82

operating staffs about the well-being of her husband’s knee surgery. As she used to live on her own
in Taiwan without any family support, she experienced difﬁculties in dealing with her husband’s
day to day care needs in the hospital. She expressed that the services provided to her husband were
not enough and of a high standard. For instance, she mentioned that, in the UK, the nurses in the
hospitals helped with the patient’s day-to-day care needs like brushing, toileting, bathing, and so on;
and she expected the same level of care in the Taiwanese hospital. She had some other unpleasant
experiences while she was suffering from back injuries. She consulted a doctor at a nearby hospital.
She was quite surprised that the doctor prescribed her some muscle relaxants and painkillers without
spending enough time with her. In her opinion, the doctor should have at least done an X-Ray to get
a proper diagnosis. To date, she had been suffering from the same back pain, and now planning to
visit another hospital. However, she had no idea where to go and whom she should consult. Despite
these bitter experiences, she appreciated health care insurance of Taiwan, which allowed her to visit
any health care facility of her choice without any hassle.
– Story 4: The fourth participant shared a story of a soccer-mate, Mr. D, from Nigeria. Mr. D had been
studying in Taiwan for the last three years. He had a high opinion of hospital care in Taiwan. He
did appreciate the extensive coverage of the NHI services after becoming covered under the NHI
program of Taiwan. However, he was not happy with the fact that a foreign student had to wait for
a minimum period of 4-months, to be enrolled in the NHI program. He shared a bitter experience
due to this 4-months waiting period. He needed to undergo a minor surgery on one of his ﬁngers.
During the waiting period, he needed to pay the entire hospital bill out of his pocket, which he
found to be very expensive. While availing the health care services, he observed that the people at
the information desk in the hospitals lacked English proﬁciency. In addition, he found some cultural
differences that sometimes caused more confusion for him. For example, he was used to the British
date format, whereas Taiwanese used the American format. Once, he got a different appointment
date (07/06 is 6 July in American format) from the requested one (07/06 is 7 June in British format).
Sometimes, he used to take a Taiwanese friend along with him to help and better understand the
process at the hospital. He felt that the doctors and nurses were very polite and courteous. Besides,
he was quite impressed by the emergency care delivered in the Taiwanese hospital. On one occasion,
he witnessed a case of severe burn, wherein a man was rescued and saved due to highly efﬁcient and
proactive emergency medical system in place. He opined that it would have been nearly impossible
to save a similar case in his native country.

2.2.2. Pattern identiﬁcation phase
On Day 23, 24, and 25, the participants discussed the three steps involved in pattern identiﬁcation
phase. They derived ﬁfteen insights and seventeen questions from these insights, as presented in Tables 2
and 3 respectively, in the Result section. These insights were primarily identiﬁed based on what solutions
can be offered to improve health care services to foreigners, whereas the questions from the insights were
derived based on how solutions can be delivered to foreigners. The participants classiﬁed seventeen
questions into four themes, as shown in Table 3, in the Result section. Afterwards, they identiﬁed two
key themes – communication and health services – by voting, discussion, and mutual consensus, as
shown in Table 4, in the Result section.

2.2.3. Ideation and delivery phase
On Day 26, two key themes – communication and health services – were considered for the ideation
of potential solutions. Table 5 shows the potential solutions for the two key themes. Afterwards, two

83

Table 3
Themes
Questions based on insights
Themes
1. How might we provide information to foreigners in English language?
Communication
2. How might we facilitate English-speaking people to foreigners in the hospital?
Communication
3. How might we provide multilingual services to foreigners?
Communication
4. How might we ensure the privacy of foreigners?
Health services
5. How might we provide standard health care across various services, such as clinics, small and
big hospitals?
Health services

6. How might we provide adequate diagnoses before commencing treatment?
Health services
7. How might we provide instruction to foreigners about their health condition and treatment?
Communication
8. How might we provide information through hospitals’ website?
Communication
9. How might we provide proper nursing services to foreigners?
Health services
10. How might we provide information to foreign patient’s caretaker?
Communication
11. How might we provide hospitals’ information in foreigners’ in their area of residence?
Communication
12. How might we improve health care policy for foreigners?
Government policies
13. How might we provide Taiwanese cultural awareness to foreigners, including its impact on the
health care system?
Culture

14. How might we provide doctor’s advance appointment through phone, fax, or website for for-
eigners?
Health services

15. How might we provide better National Health Insurance policy to foreign students?
Government policies
16. How might we provide some basic Chinese language awareness to foreigners?
Communication
17. How might we provide common nonverbal (symbol, gesture, posture, and so forth) skills to
foreigners?
Communication

Table 4
Themes and their rank
Themes
Rank
1. Communication
1st

2. Health services
2nd

3. Government policies
3rd

4. Culture
4th

solutions were identiﬁed (one for each key theme) through voting, discussion, and consensus, called
‘candidate opportunities,’ as shown in Table 5. At this juncture, the participants were puzzled over two
issues pertaining to the two candidate opportunities: (1) cadre of employees (out of doctors, nurses, and
administrative staffs) needing improvement in their English language proﬁciency, (2) cadre of employees
(out of doctors, nurses, and administrative staffs) needing improvement in delivering health services to
foreigners. We found a deadlock situation among the HCD participants. Therefore, to overcome this
situation, we decided to conduct a small online questionnaire based survey and suspended the HCD
team discussion for two months (Day 27 to Day 86).
A small questionnaire was designed based on the two issues raised as above. The questionnaire con-
tained mainly closed-ended questions. The questionnaire was validated by eight experts, which included
two doctors, a nurse, a hospital administrator, an applied linguistics professor, a health informatics pro-
fessor, a Taiwanese student, and an international student. Except the international student, all other
experts were from Taiwan. The experts recommended a few amendments in the questionnaire, including
adding one additional question. As we were gathering data from foreigners, the health informatics expert
had some concerns that we might not get a true picture if the respondents happened to live in Taiwan for
a long time and were proﬁcient in Chinese language. Therefore, an extra question was added to assess
whether a foreigner was using English language while availing health services in the Taiwanese hospi-
tals. One question was re-worded for its clarity based upon the recommendation of the linguistics ex-

84

Table 5
Potential solutions through brainstorming and opportunity identiﬁcation through voting and mutual consensus

Themes
Potential solutions
Candidate opportunities
Communication
1. Multilingual charts with pictures
Improving English proﬁciency of doctors, nurses,
2. Multilingual staffs recruitment
and administrative staffs
3. Improving English proﬁciency of doctors,
nurses, and administrative staffs
4. Multilingual hospital locations information
using advertisement hoardings
Health services
1. Online services
Improving services provided by doctors, nurses,
2. Online registration facility
and administrative staffs
3. Improving services provided by doctors,
nurses and administrative staffs

Table 6
Questionnaire1

Questions
Response
1. Profession
2. Nationality∗

3. How long have you been in Taiwan?∗

4. Have you ever visited the hospital during your stay
⃝Yes
If your answer is NO, please skip Question 5–11
in Taiwan?∗
⃝No

5. Was the English main language to communicate
⃝Yes
If your answer is NO, please skip Question 6–11
with doctors, nurses, and administrative staff when
you visited any hospital in Taiwan?∗
⃝No

6. I am satisﬁed with the services of the doctor (s).∗
Strongly
Disagree
Undecided
Agree
Strongly
Disagree
Agree
⃝
⃝
⃝
⃝
⃝
7. I am satisﬁed with the services of the nurse (s).∗
Strongly
Disagree
Undecided
Agree
Strongly
Disagree
Agree
⃝
⃝
⃝
⃝
⃝
8. I am satisﬁed with the services of administrative
Strongly
Disagree
Undecided
Agree
Strongly
staffs (front-desk and medicine dispatch center em-
Disagree
Agree
ployees, volunteer, and so forth).∗
⃝
⃝
⃝
⃝
⃝
9. I am satisﬁed with the English proﬁciency of the
Strongly
Disagree
Undecided
Agree
Strongly
doctor (s).∗
Disagree
Agree
⃝
⃝
⃝
⃝
⃝
10. I am satisﬁed with the English proﬁciency of the
Strongly
Disagree
Undecided
Agree
Strongly
nurse (s).∗
Disagree
Agree
⃝
⃝
⃝
⃝
⃝
11. I am satisﬁed with the English proﬁciency of ad-
Strongly
Disagree
Undecided
Agree
Strongly
ministrative staffs (front-desk and medicine dis-
Disagree
Agree
patch center employees, volunteers, and so forth).∗
⃝
⃝
⃝
⃝
⃝

1∗required.

pert. A mandatory question regarding respondents’ profession was made optional based on two experts’
(hospital administrator and doctor) recommendation as some respondents might not feel comfortable in
revealing their profession. The questionnaire for its content validity was sent to eight experts after incor-
porating their recommendations. Each expert independently rated the relevance of each question using a
4-point Likert scale (1 = not relevant, 2 = somewhat relevant, 3 = relevant, 4 = very relevant). Content
Validity Index (CVI) was used to evaluate the validity of each question. All the questions were found
to be valid with CVIs ranging from 0.87 (7/8) to 0.100 (8/8). The readability of the questionnaire was

85

Table 7
Summary of Questions 1–3 (Number = 108)

Questions
Summary of responses
1.
Profession
Company employees, researchers, teachers, and students
2.
Nationality
Slovakian (2), Mongolian (7), Nepalese (3), Haitian (2), Hungarian (1), Indone-
sian (4), Ukrainian (2), Colombian (2), Swazi (2), Ethiopian (1), Ecuadorian (2),
Thai (9), Kenyan (2), Pakistani (3), Belizean (2), Bangladeshi (3), Jordanian (2),
Malawian (2), Indian (4), Kyrgyz (2), Honduran (2), Malaysian (4), Nigerian (4),
Gambian (3), Vietnamese (3), Korean (5), Russian (3), British (7), American (10),
Canadian (2), Austrian (2), St. Lucian (1), Swedish (1), Australian (1), French (3)
3.
How long have you
been in Taiwan?
Minimum = 4 months; Years; Maximum = 38 Years; Average = 3.1 Years; Stan-
dard Deviation = 5.6 Years

calculated using word processing tools. We obtained Flesh-Kincaid Grade Level = 9.6, which meant that
even a student of 9–10 grade would have no difﬁculty in understanding the questionnaire. The validated
questionnaire is shown in Table 6.
The purpose of Questions 1–3 was to ensure that respondents were foreigners, wherein Question 1
was optional. Question 4 was a ﬁlter question (yes/no) ensuring that we get responses only from those
foreigners, who had prior experience of visiting Taiwanese hospitals. In case, the answer was ‘no,’ the
respondents were not required to answer any further question. Question 5 was another ﬁlter question
(yes/no) ensuring that we get responses from only those foreigners, who used to communicate in English
while availing Taiwanese hospitals’ services. Again, in case, the answer was ‘no,’ respondents were not
required to respond any further question. Question 6–11 were required for those, who responded ‘yes’
to both, Question 4 and 5, and these questions were designed to assess the perception of foreigners with
respect to employees in Taiwanese hospitals.
A pilot testing was conducted for the above questionnaire. A convenient sample using a snowball
sampling technique was used for the pilot testing. We received twenty-nine responses. The Cronbach
alpha for two constructs – health services (Questions 7–9) and communication skills (Questions 10–
12) were 0.748 and 0.778 respectively [41]. The pilot testing showed an adequate reliability; hence no
further modiﬁcations were made to the questionnaire (Table 6).
Foreigners were considered as the population for this study. In 2012, almost half-million foreigners
(476,472) from 160 countries were estimated to live in Taiwan. We selected a community portal, which
had 24,534 members (5.14% of total foreigners). This community portal has been active since 1999.
A total of 24,554 topics and 1,206,816 messages were posted and discussed on this community portal
over a span of 13 years from 1999 to 2012. We checked the proﬁles of portal members. The portal had
members from different countries. The members were scattered and resided in different parts of Taiwan.
After an online registration and with the approval of the community portal moderator, we got access
to post messages for the portal’s members. A request to ﬁll the online questionnaire was posted on the
community portal. The response to the questionnaire was purely voluntary. The request message also
included a web link to the questionnaire. The request message clearly described the central theme of
the research. In addition, the respondents were reassured about the conﬁdentiality of the data and their
use for academic purposes only. We did not collect any personal information of respondents to ensure
full anonymity in the questionnaire survey. The survey was conducted for a period of four weeks – from
Mid-January to Mid-February 2013.
One hundred sixty-six responses were received. However, ﬁfty-eight responses were discarded be-
cause eight responses were incomplete, eleven respondents never visited any Taiwanese hospital (ﬁlter
Question 4), and thirty-nine respondents did not use English as a medium of communication while visit-
ing the hospitals (ﬁlter Question 5). Finally, we were left with only one hundred eight responses. Table 7

86

Table 8
Satisfaction response of those respondents who had visited the hospital (N = 108)

Stakeholders
Satisfaction
Strongly disagree
Disagree
Undecided
Agree
Strongly agree
Agree + strongly
(%)
(%)
(%)
(%)
(%)
(%)
Agree (%)
Doctor
Service
0
11
8
64
17
81
English
2.8
5.6
11
75
5.6
81
Nurse
Service
2.8
5.6
14
56
22
78
English
11
11
28
47
2.8
50
Administrative
Service
0
14
22
58
5.6
64
staff
English
6
36
19
39
0
39

in the Result section shows the summary (Question 1–3) about one hundred eight response respondents.
Table 8 in the Results section shows the satisfaction responses (Questions 6–11) arranged from three
stakeholders’ perspectives – doctors, nurses, and administrative staffs. Furthermore, the combined fre-
quencies (‘agree’ or ‘strongly agree’) were calculated as shown in the last column of Table 8. We found
that the health services offered were found to be satisfactory at all the three levels – Doctors (81%),
nurses (78%), and administrative staffs (64%). In terms of English proﬁciency, only doctors’ English
proﬁciency was found to be satisfactory (81%), whereas satisfaction rate for nurses and administrative
staffs were quite low (50% and 39% respectively).
After the completion of the questionnaire based survey, we resumed the HCD team discussion on Day
87. The survey results were explained to the HCD participants. Under the purview of results and the HCD
team discussion, the participants agreed on one opportunity – the improvement of English skills among
the administrative staffs’, as shown in Table 9, in the Results section. On Day 88 to 90, participants
conducted a brainstorming session to ﬁnd out candidate’s prototypes for the identiﬁed opportunity, and
then one prototype for its execution, as shown in Table 9.

3. Results

We obtained various stories, insights, themes, potential solutions, and immediate available opportuni-
ties. Tables 2–5 and 7–9 show the result obtained from pattern identiﬁcation, and ideation and delivery
respectively.

4. Discussion

In this study, we assessed foreigners’ satisfaction towards the Taiwanese health care system in Taiwan,
and tried to ﬁnd some possible ways for its betterment. The HCD approach was deployed to accomplish
the study. The key outcomes from the study are discussed as below:
First, this study provided insights, themes, potential solutions, opportunities, and scope of health care
improvement about foreign residents in Taiwan (Tables 2–5 and 7–9). These results indicated high satis-
faction levels with health services; however, it was felt that there was a room for substantial improvement
in English proﬁciency of the administrative staffs, followed by the nurses, and then the doctors. Some of
the previous studies also mentioned about the lack of English language proﬁciencies among hospital’s
employees [13]. However, these studies failed to indicate clearly ‘who’ lacked the language proﬁciency
out of doctors, nurses, and administrative staffs [42]. The doubt naturally goes to the doctors and nurses
as they are frontiers of any health care system [42]. However, the survey results of this study clearly in-
dicated that the administrative staffs needed a signiﬁcant improvement in English language proﬁciency

87

Table 9
Opportunity, candidate prototypes and prototype identiﬁed based on the survey and discussion

Candidate opportunities
Opportunity
Candidate prototypes
Prototype
1. Improving English
proﬁciency of doctors,
nurses, and administra-
tive staffs

Improving English pro-
ﬁciency of administra-
tive staffs

– English training using mobile device
based games
– English language training using role
play

Training of minimum
English vocabulary
using mobile device
based games
2. Improving services
provided by doctors,
nurses, and administra-
tive staffs

– Depiction of hospital’s workﬂow us-
ing posters in English language
– Minimum English vocabulary devel-
opment to teach hospital’s adminis-
trative staffs
– Template stamp for commonly used
words
– Development of frequently asked
questions
– Availability of translation device

compared with the doctors and nurses (Table 8). In addition, the HCD participants justiﬁed the result
that the doctors and nurses in Taiwan might not be very proﬁcient in English; however, they would have
acquired at least some working knowledge of English due to their prolonged involvement with medi-
cal studies, and the recent thrust of the Taiwanese government to improve English proﬁciency among
professionals [43]. Thus, in the purview of survey results, including their own opinion, the participants
identiﬁed English language training for the hospital’s administrative staff as an opportunity for the ‘pro-
totype development’ and ‘further research’ (Table 9).
Second, in order to improve English proﬁciency of the administrative staffs, the participants pro-
posed various candidate prototypes, such as English training using mobile device based games, role-
play, hospital’s workﬂow depiction using posters in English, minimum English vocabulary development
for hospital’s administrative staffs, template stamp for the commonly used words in medical settings,
and development of the frequently asked questions in medical settings (Table 9). Out of the proposed
candidate prototypes, the participants supported ‘minimum English vocabulary training using mobile
device based games’ for its implementation [44–46].
Third, we deployed the HCD in this study, which was a systematic approach, involving various phases,
steps, and techniques. This approach was found to be effective not only in revealing the foreigner’s
satisfaction with the health care system of Taiwan, but also in suggesting the areas of improvement,
potential solutions, and prototype product development. The lessons learned from the HCD application
might be employed in addressing some of the other human problems.

4.1. Limitations and future studies

This study had a few limitations, which opens up the scope for future studies and research. First,
the HCD approach needs analysis (divergence of ideas) and design (convergence of ideas) from three
perspectives – desirability, feasibility, and viability; and the convergence of these three perspectives
provides a direction to ﬁnd an innovative solution [40]. However, our focus mainly remained from the
desirability perspective [40]. Technical feasibility and ﬁnancial viability are required to be explored
further. Second, this study was carried out until the identiﬁcation of a prototype that might improve
English proﬁciency among the hospital’s administrative staffs. However, the making of the prototype
and its testing were not executed. In future studies, we would like to build prototypes and test them

88

in real-world settings. Third, the HCD participants argued that most administrative staffs in Taiwanese
hospitals are relatively young and technologically savvy, especially the mobile technology; therefore,
some games could be availed on mobile devices for English learning [47,48]. We think that an empirical
study is needed to verify the argument of the HCD participants. Fourth, the study recommended the
training of minimum English vocabulary to hospital’s administrative staffs. We require conducting a
study to identify the minimum English vocabulary set for the hospital’s administrative staffs in healthcare
settings of Taiwan. Fifth, in the beginning, in the Introduction section of this paper, we have the argument
that Taiwan is not performing that well in medical tourism industry. As the subjects of this study were
foreign resident in Taiwan, the results of this study do not truly provide enough insight into why Taiwan
is not performing that well in the medical tourism. Therefore, a study, involving medical tourists, needs
to be carried out for the better understanding of the under-performance of Taiwan in the medical tourism
industry.

5. Conclusions

This study provided a deeper insight into foreigners’ satisfaction with respect to the health care sys-
tem in Taiwan, including its further scope of improvement. The lack of English proﬁciency among
administrative staffs of Taiwanese hospitals was found to be a major barrier in delivering quality care to
foreigners in Taiwan. Therefore, our study recommended various measures to improve English language
proﬁciency of hospital’s administrative staffs and suggested training of minimum English vocabulary
using mobile device enabled games. The HCD approach was deployed to accomplish this study, which
was found to be highly effective. The key learning points from the HCD deployment might be used in
addressing some of the other human problems.