ORIGINAL ARTICLE

User-centered design and enhancement of an electronic personal
health record to support survivors of pediatric cancers

Jordan Gilleland Marchak1,2
& Brooke Cherven1,2 & Rebecca Williamson Lewis1 & Paula Edwards3 &
Lillian R. Meacham1,2 & Michael Palgon3 & Cam Escoffery4 & Ann C. Mertens1,2

Received: 22 August 2019 /Accepted: 20 November 2019
# Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature 2019

Abstract
Purpose The objective of this article is to demonstrate how user-centered design theory and methods can be employed to develop
and iteratively improve technologies to support survivors of childhood cancer.
Methods Focus groups and structured interviews with young adult survivors of pediatric cancer (N = 3), parents (N = 11), and
healthcare providers (N = 14) were conducted to understand their needs as potential users and the contexts in which they would
use an electronic personal health record (PHR) for survivors, Cancer SurvivorLinkTM (https://cancersurvivorlink.org/). Usability
evaluations were conducted to assess the functionality of the PHR using think aloud protocol with survivors/parents (N = 4) and
focus groups with providers (N = 12).
Results Major themes identified through the needs assessment guided design of the PHR, including (1) education about the
lifelong healthcare needs of pediatric cancer survivors (“Learn”), (2) secure electronic storage for healthcare documents to direct
long-term follow-up care (“Store”), and (3) communication functionality to allow sharing of health documents with healthcare
providers (“Share”). Usability evaluations identified challenges with the PHR design, which informed site enhancements to
improve PHR usefulness and ease of use including a registration wizard and healthcare provider directory.
Conclusions User-centered design methods informed iterative enhancements to an untethered, patient-controlled PHR to address
usability barriers and meet the self-identified needs of survivors of childhood cancer and their providers.

Keywords Personal health record . Cancer survivor . Survivorship care plan . Needs assessment . User-centered design

Introduction

The overall 10-year survival rate for children and adolescents
diagnosed with cancer now exceeds 80% [1]. Although cured
of their primary cancer, 80% of survivors of childhood cancer
will experience a health problem related to their previous

treatment by age 45 [2]. Given the high rates of morbidity, it
is recommended that survivors of childhood cancer receive
ongoing, specialized screening for early detection and inter-
vention of late effects [3]. Survivors often engage with a vari-
ety of providers to meet their healthcare needs, including pri-
mary care providers and subspecialists. Healthcare providers
outside the pediatric oncology setting are often unfamiliar and
uncomfortable with the long-term health needs of childhood
cancer survivors [4–6]. Survivors may be unaware of or strug-
gle to communicate their health history and future needs [7–9]
and/or doubt healthcare providers’ ability to meet their unique
health needs [6]. Survivors have identified a critical need for an
easily accessible and portable survivorship care plan (SCP) to
direct lifelong follow-up care [10–14]. Personal health records
(PHRs) may be a useful tool for meeting both patient and
provider informational needs while also supporting survivors’
health self-management and confidence in care.
There has been a proliferation of PHRs over the last several
years aimed at increasing patient-centered care through

* Jordan Gilleland Marchak

1
Aflac Cancer and Blood Disorders Center, Children’s Healthcare of
Atlanta, Atlanta, GA, USA

2
Department of Pediatrics, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA

3
HIMformatics, LLC, Atlanta, GA, USA

4
Rollins School of Public Health, Emory University, Atlanta, GA,
USA

https://doi.org/10.1007/s00520-019-05199-w

/ Published online: 18 December 2019

Supportive Care in Cancer (2020) 28:3905–3914

engagement of patients with their health records and
healthcare systems [15, 16]. PHRs can be patient portals teth-
ered to institutions’ electronic medical records, generally used
to aid in communication and management of care at a single
institution, or untethered and institution-independent,
allowing for patients to control and manage their health doc-
uments. PHRs can improve care, especially for patients with
chronic health conditions and those who see multiple
healthcare providers [17, 18]. The complexities of care for
pediatric cancer survivors and the number of provider and/or
institution transitions they typically experience across their
lifespan make them good candidates for use of an untethered
PHR to help guide lifelong long-term follow-up care for can-
cer across healthcare settings.
The empirically supported technology acceptance model
(TAM) has been widely utilized to study individuals’ engage-
ment with technology [19–24] and theorizes that potential
users’ uptake of new technology is affected by two central
beliefs, perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use [19,
21, 22, 24]. Perceived usefulness is the belief that using a
particular system will provide benefits via use, while per-
ceived ease of use refers to beliefs about the extent to which
using a new technology will be user friendly and free of effort
[22, 23]. By employing user-centered design (UCD) methods
during development and iterative enhancements of PHRs, de-
velopers and researchers can maximize the perceived useful-
ness and ease of use of patient-centered technologies to pro-
mote uptake and utilization [25, 26]. The UCD approach fo-
cuses on early, active, and ongoing input from users to inform
iterative development of technologies [27–30]. Among the
childhood cancer survivor population, key “users” needed to
inform the design of PHRs include adult survivors of child-
hood cancer, parents of childhood cancer survivors who con-
trol the health records of their minor children, and healthcare
providers caring for pediatric and/or adult survivors of child-
hood cancer.
The objective of this article is to demonstrate how TAM
theory and UCD methods can be employed to specify require-
ments for and iteratively improve the design of technologies to
support survivors of childhood cancer. By seeking to under-
stand the self-identified needs of survivor stakeholders and con-
structing systems designed to fulfil those unique requirements,
we can help promote self-management, communication, and
self-advocacy for survivor-focused care. Following completion
of a comprehensive stakeholder needs assessment, our study
team developed and evaluated an untethered web-based PHR,
Cancer SurvivorLink™(www.cancersurvivorlink.org), along
with digital evidence-based education and resources specific
to pediatric cancer survivors, their parents, and their providers,
to improve lifelong care for survivors of childhood cancer. We
present data from focus groups with users that guided the de-
velopment of and enhancements to our PHR system, as well as
data from usability evaluations to identify errors within the

system to inform site improvements and remove barriers to
adoption and use.

Methods

UCD methods were utilized to inform the initial PHR design
(needs assessment) and iterative enhancements (usability eval-
uations) to the PHR. Table 1 provides an overview of the UCD
methods used at each stage for each of the stakeholders.
Figure 1 illustrates the system development timeline and out-
lines the stage in the implementation process in which each
method was used. Our needs assessment was conducted over a
2-year period in conjunction with PHR Design, Build, and
Testing. The PHR was then implemented in two phases:
Version 1.0 Provider Portal (year 3; launched September
2009) provides a virtual library of educational material and
links to reputable informational resources for providers.
Version 2.0 Patient & Family Portal (year 4; launched
September 2010) provides patient and family education, links
to resources, and a PHR with secure data storing and sharing
functionality. Version 2.0 PHR leveraged SQL Server AES-
256 encryption to securely store patient data in the database,
and Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) to securely transmit patient
data between the web server and the web browser. Version 2.0
also included enhancements to the Provider portal by adding
features to support data sharing, allowing patients to share
their SurvivorLink PHR with the providers of their choice.
Following the launch of the Provider and Patient and Family
portals, iterative enhancements have been performed on an
ongoing basis to Evaluate and Enhance the system in re-
sponse to usability evaluations (years 5–10).

Needs assessment

Input from stakeholders was solicited through interviews and
focus groups to understand the needs of potential users as well
as the contexts in which they would use a PHR to enable
ongoing care of pediatric cancer survivors. Researchers with
expertise in qualitative analysis (BOC and PE) reviewed tran-
scripts and/or audio recordings and engaged in memoing to
inform site development and revisions in real time. Data col-
lection was discontinued once the research team believed data
saturation had been achieved (e.g., development questions
were answered with no new information was being obtained
from stakeholders). Transcripts and field notes were re-
analyzed using inductive thematic analysis methods for the
purposes of the current publication. Members of the research
team (BOC and JGM) read transcripts and field notes, devel-
oped open codes, and generated additional memos.
Subthemes and themes related to system requirements were
reviewed, defined, named, and discussed amongst the re-
search team.

3906

Patient and parent focus groups Parents of pediatric cancer
survivors and young adult survivors (aged 18–21 years) were
recruited to share their thoughts on the needs and requirements
of an electronic PHR. Recruitment of actively engaged parents
and young survivors took place through two pediatric cancer
survivor clinics and local community organizations serving
children and adolescents with cancer. The convenience sam-
ple of participants resulted in two parent focus groups (N = 11)
and one young adult focus group (N = 2); a third young adult
completed a structured interview. The focus groups lasted
60 min and were conducted by a health informatics engineer
(PE) and an epidemiologist with expertise in qualitative data
collection (AM). Focus groups and structured interview were
audio-recorded, transcribed, and followed a semi-structured
outline of questions designed to elicit feedback from partici-
pants. Transcripts from parents and young adults were used to
guide the development of the Patient & Family Portal.

Provider structured interviews To incorporate the perspective
of healthcare providers on the development of SurvivorLink,
we conducted structured interviews with 14 physicians includ-
ing pediatricians, primary care providers (PCPs), and subspe-
cialists [4]. Interviews were conducted via telephone using a
structured interview guide consisting of 12 multiple choice

and open-ended questions. Interviews were conducted by a
health informatics engineer (PE). Detailed field notes were
taken during each interview and summarized to guide devel-
opment of the Provider Portal.

Usability evaluations

Think aloud protocol Following the launch of the Patient &
Family Portal, usability evaluations were conducted to solicit
feedback on the site and assess user workflow using a Think
Aloud protocol [31, 32]. In these evaluations, participants
were directed to complete a set of six predetermined tasks to
store healthcare data in the PHR (Register for SurvivorLink
account, Confirm registration via email verification, Set up
Health Record within SurvivorLink) and share health infor-
mation (Select Survivor Clinic, Submit Medical Record
Release, Share Health Record) via the PHR. Per the “Think
Aloud” protocol, the participants verbally shared their thought
processes while exploring each section of the website and
completing the six tasks. Given that three to four participants
typically maximize costs-to-benefits in usability testing [33],
we recruited N = 4 participants from a pediatric cancer survi-
vor clinic to complete “Think Aloud” protocols. Two young
adult survivors and two parents of child survivors who were

Needs 
Assessment

Design / 
Build / 
Tesng

V1.0 
Provider 
Portal

V2.0
Paent/ Family 
Portal

Evaluate & 
Enhance

• Focus Groups
• Structured 
Interviews

• Usability 
Evaluaons
• Focus Group
• Asynchronous 
Focus Group

Inial go-live
Educaon 
Material 
(providers only)

Paent/Family go-live
PHR + Educaon 
Material

Stage

UCD Method

Milestone
Iterave Enhancements
•Registraon wizard (Year 6)
•Provider directory (Year 8)
•Backend enhancements (Year 9)
•Clinic Portal (Year 10)

Years 1 & 2
Year 3
Year 4
Years 5-10
Fig. 1 User-centered design
methods used by stage of system
development

Table 1
User-centered design methods used by stakeholder group

Needs assessment (initial design)
Stakeholder group
Participants
N
Method
Survivors
Young adult survivors
3
1 focus group; 1 structured interview
In person
Parents
Parents of child and young adult survivors
11
2 focus groups
In person
Healthcare providers
Primary care providers and specialists
14
Structured Interviews
Via phone
Usability evaluations (after go-live)

Stakeholder group
Participants
N
Method
Survivors
Young adult survivors
2
Usability evaluation (Think-Aloud)
In person
Parents
Parents of child survivors
2
Usability evaluation (Think-Aloud)
In person
Healthcare Providers
Family medicine, primary care, and
internal medicine physicians; advanced
practice providers & nurses

6
Focus group
Phone conference call
6
Asynchronous focus group
Web-based longitudinal
asynchronous blog

3907

new to the SurvivorLink website completed evaluations with a
health informatics engineer (PE) in a private room in the clin-
ic. The interviewer recorded written notes of all comments
made by users and any observed problems with system func-
tionality and ease of use to inform site improvements.

College health provider focus groups When survivors are ag-
ing out of the pediatric system (typically between ages 18 and
25), many go to college where they see a college health pro-
vider to meet their primary care needs. In 2012, the
SurvivorLink team established a network of university
healthcare providers from six universities [34] to serve as pro-
vider stakeholders for young adult primary care. In order to
facilitate collaborative design with these stakeholders span-
ning a wide geographical distance, we conducted a 1-h
phone-based focus group followed by a 3-month asynchro-
nous, online focus group where weekly questions about
SurvivorLink features/content were posted. A research nurse
(BOC) and a physician researcher (LRM) moderated the focus
groups to gather provider input on potential site enhancements
to increase the perceived usefulness and ease of use of
SurvivorLink (e.g., “What are some of the barriers to using
SurvivorLink at your site?”, “What new features and functions
would make SurvivorLink more useful to adult providers?”).
A total of seven PCPs and family practice providers who were
familiar with SurvivorLink and engaged with the young adult
survivor population participated in our focus groups either by
phone (n = 6 from 4 universities) and/or online (n = 6 from 5
universities). Detailed notes of the focus group were taken and
the online group responses were summarized for major
themes and site enhancement suggestions.

Results

Needs assessment: stakeholder focus groups
and structured interviews

Survivors, parents, and providers identified several needs for
functionality and educational components necessary for
SurvivorLink to be useful. Although no participants had prior
experience with a PHR, the idea of a secure website where
they could store and share key health documents appealed to
all groups: “I think that [website] would give her more ammu-
nition to be an advocate for herself because she would have
something to take with her and show them. So absolutely I
think it would be a great resource” (parent). Specific require-
ments for the SurvivorLink system identified in the needs
assessment focus groups and structured interviews included
(1) educational needs for learning about the lifelong
healthcare recommended for survivors of childhood cancer
(learn), (2) secure storage needs for electronically compiling
SCPs and other healthcare records to direct and document

long-term follow-up care (store), and (3) communication
needs to allow survivors to share health documents with pri-
mary and specialty healthcare providers (share). These major
themes, “learn,” “store,” and “share,” were adopted as over-
arching missions and functions for SurvivorLink. Within these
themes, subthemes emerged from the different participant
groups (Table 2).

Learn. Both patients and parents identified the need for
education about survivorship from a trustworthy source.
Providers valued educational resources for the website
that could easily be verified as being from credible
sources. Multiple PCPs and non-oncology specialists
discussed the challenge of staying up to date with pediat-
ric cancer therapy and its impact on long-term health.
Many voiced needs for brief, well-organized, educational
information to inform patient care in a fast-paced clinical
setting. Given stakeholders’ expressed needs for trusted
sources of information, we developed ‘Quick Facts’ in-
formation sheets for providers to provide a quick over-
view and references for clinical topics, as well as a
Resources pages for all users with links to credible infor-
mation on survivorship, childhood cancer, support & ad-
vocacy, and survivor care.
Store. When asked about privacy and security, parents
voiced stronger concerns and hesitations than young
adults. Parents worried more about storing health records
online and cited apprehensions about insurance compa-
nies or other entities accessing their child’s health records
and potential negative ramifications from a privacy
breach. Interestingly, some parents suggested receiving
an emailed copy of their child’s record or storage on
electronic disk, without hesitation about the security of
email or physical storage/viewing of electronic files from
disk or email. The young adults did voice some concerns
about security, but overall appeared more comfortable
with the idea of storing health information online, provid-
ed it was confidential, secure, and they could control who
could view their records.
Share. Young adults discussed the benefits of their pro-
viders having access to health records, especially in an
emergency situation. Providers frequently stressed the
importance of information sharing with oncologists and
survivor specialists. A common topic of discussion
among parents and providers was the importance of the
availability of survivorship care plans to guide surveil-
lance for late effects of therapy. Providers were enthusi-
astic about having access to patient records to ensure
quality survivor healthcare, while parents were eager to
have a resource that would allow their survivors to share
these records with providers outside of oncology to pro-
mote individualized, risk-based surveillance for late ef-
fects of treatment after leaving the pediatric oncology

3908

care setting. To address privacy and security concerns,
user control of who can see or add to survivors’ online
health records became a core guiding principle for design
of the sharing functionality. We also included an access
log so that users can see who viewed and downloaded
information (and when) from their online charts.

Usability evaluation: barriers to use and site
enhancements

During the Think Aloud usability evaluations, all participants
indicated they perceived value in the concept of a PHR.
However, participants encountered several barriers while
attempting to complete the six tasks required for secure health
document storing and health record sharing on the
SurvivorLink website (Table 3). All four participants were
able to register initially for a SurvivorLink account without
assistance (task 1), but two of the four users required
prompting to login to their email to verify their account (task
2) prior to proceeding. Following completion of email verifi-
cation, two out of four users were unsure of next steps to log in
and create their health record (task 3) and required guidance
by the interviewer. Three out of four users were able to find
and select the clinic on where the survivor receives care (task
4) without help. Two out of four users completed the electron-
ic medical record release to allow their clinics to upload doc-
ument on their behalf (task 5), while only one user shared their
record with a medical provider without help (task 6). No user
was able to complete all six tasks without assistance.
Based on the barriers to task completion identified in the
evaluations, several key enhancements to improve the
website’s usability were made. A summary of the patient iden-
tified barriers and recommendations from the usability evalu-
ations and subsequent site enhancements to improve per-
ceived ease of use and perceived usefulness are listed in
Table 4. One key enhancement to improve usability included
the development of a health record “wizard,” as well as a new
streamlined registration process. We created a “wizard” to
streamline and assist users in setting up their personal chart
and sharing it with their Survivor Clinic and other Providers
(tasks 3–6: Set up Health Record within SurvivorLink, Select
Survivor Clinic where patient receives care, Submit Medical
Record Release to allow clinic to upload health documents on

Table 2
Subthemes from stakeholder needs assessment

Young adult survivors of pediatric cancer
LEARN: need for education to promote cancer health literacy
• “There [are] lots of terms that people don’t recognize and
understand. When I was 18, I couldn’t differentiate if leukemia and
cancer were two different things.”
• “They told me I had Hodgkin’s disease or leukemia, and I was like,
‘What is Hodgkin’s disease?’, that’s not cancer.”
SHARE: need to control access to health information
• “I think I would like [to send providers] an invitation [to view health
records]… that would be my way of giving them the information to
look at all of my information. Or maybe even check what
information they can have access to. You know, access to this and
this, but not this.”
• “I would not mind [my parents having access] because everybody is
so involved. Everyone knows whether I really want them to or not.
So now it doesn’t matter.”
• “To me this stuff is more personal…like my mom asked me a bunch
of questions and I felt like keeping a lot to myself.”
Parents of pediatric cancer survivors
LEARN: need for quality health information
• “I think of a credible database or website or something that parents and
children and patients can go to for all of this information… [we]
basically searched the web, hoping that the information we find is legit
and will help us out but we have no way to know whether it is or not.”
STORE: need to address privacy concerns in using PHR
• “It’s the security issues that make you scared because if somebody
can use it against you they will use it against your future or your
insurance and stuff like that.”
• “You can email [health records] to me or give me a CD that would be
fine but I don’t want it stored on a site.”
• “I guess they follow the same regulation and policies as the banking
industry follows in terms of security encryption and all that stuff. I
just think that the health of our children is more personal. You know
money is important, but our children’s value against money is
definitely more.”
SHARE: need resource to support patients’ access to individualized
survivor healthcare
• “What our child need is to teach the [other] doctors, not necessarily
teach, but hand the resource, take it with them and say here’s my
background, I need you to understand this about me.”
• “So our children could tell [other doctors] that here’s what you
should be going for to help me with my care.”
Healthcare providers
LEARN: need for late-effects information
• “Patients ask about these things and we don’t know it. We don’t
know the long-term effects of chemo and want to be able to address
the questions they ask.”
• “[Need] a ready reference that combines the disease process itself
with the after effects of the treatment…need to know what to be
concerned about beyond what you have to worry about for someone
without their history.”
STORE: need for access to individualized survivor health care plans
• “[I] need to know what treatment the patient had and the risks
associated with that treatment. Every patient is so individualized it is
hard to give general information and have it be useful in the moment
of seeing a patient.”
• “After a patient leaves treatment, is there a protocol of what should
be done? How can we do surveillance on this patient—what should
[I] order?”
• “We need to be able to verify just beyond what the family is telling
us. Need to be able to determine what the follow-up should be.”

Table 2 (continued)

SHARE: need to share information between providers
• “Rural doctors/patients don’t have the same resources…They need
help facilitating communication between the rural PCP and
specialist/ED providers who are often located far away.”
• “The bigger the distance between the community docs and hospitals,
the less communication occurs—so things like [PHRs] are big.”

3909

patient’s behalf, Share Health Record with selected medical
providers). Following implementation of the registration wiz-
ard, health document uploading and storage increased by 24%
among PHR users [35].
The college health provider focus groups’ feedback fo-
cused on improving the perceived ease of use and usefulness
from the provider perspective. These suggestions along with
others outlined in Table 4 were integrated into the website.
Two of these updates focused on improving the perceived
usefulness of SurvivorLink included provider upload func-
tionality and development of a provider directory. Providers
emphasized the importance of the PHR being dynamic and
including up-to-date critical health information for individual
survivors. Since not all providers participate in health infor-
mation exchanges (HIE), this means automatically loading
important data from provider EHRs was not available at this
time. Thus, they suggested that any provider whom a survivor
grants access to their chart should be able to upload a health
document to the survivor’s health record. Thus, this feature
was added. Providers highlighted that survivors face chal-
lenges finding primary and specialty providers who are famil-
iar with survivorship. To address this, they suggested adding a
provider directory on the website that could be used by both
survivors and by providers looking to refer their survivor pa-
tients. Therefore, we added a directory of registered providers
to the website which is searchable by provider specialty, loca-
tion, and/or adult versus pediatric practices..
Feedback from providers, patients, and parents highlights
an important design trade-off in PHRs: usability vs. privacy/
security [36]. The following suggestions offered by stake-
holders would likely increase users’ efficiency and/or satisfac-
tion with the PHR, but were not made as they would also
introduce critical security threats and liabilities to the
SurvivorLink system. For example, healthcare providers
voiced a desire to be able to search for a patient to request
access rather than wait for a patient to invite them to view
records. However, this search function is not possible under
current HIPAA privacy regulations, which require consent for
disclosure of protected health information (PHI). It would also
conflict with SurvivorLink’s guiding principle to ensure

survivors’ control over who have access to their information.
Additionally, young adult survivor and parent users expressed
frustration at needing to verify their email address following
registration, but before creating their health records. While
removing email verification would have streamlined the initial
log-on process for users, it is fundamental to electronic infor-
mation security. Lastly, providers requested that the share fea-
ture enables survivors to share their health record with entire
clinics instead of only individual, registered providers. This
would support the scenario where a nurse or other clinic staff
needed to look at information in the PHR prior to a patient
visit. While HIPAA presents challenges to implementing this
feature, we are currently developing a HIPAA-compliant clin-
ical portal (Fig. 1, year 10) for secure data exchange with
entire clinics and exploring options for HIE-enabled sharing.
In order to share health information with an entire clinic via
SurvivorLink, a survivor will have to request and provide
HIPAA-compliant consent to share with the clinic and the
clinic will have to have executed HIPAA-compliant business
associate agreements (BAA) with SurvivorLink. We are also
investigating options to connect SurvivorLink to existing local
HIE so that information sharing with the clinic could be ac-
complished with patient permission based on the data sharing
agreements and mechanisms of the HIE.

Discussion

SurvivorLink is the only patient-controlled PHR designed
specifically to enable young adult survivors of childhood can-
cer and parents of survivors < 18 years of age to store their
SCP and other important health documents and share these
health documents with their various healthcare providers, re-
gardless of where they practice. The work described here dem-
onstrates how UCD methods can be iteratively employed to
incorporate the user’s voice in the development and enhance-
ment of a PHR in order to improve its usability and utility, thus
removing barriers to adoption. Our initial assessments of
adoption among potential users showed a 23.7% (N = 148/
624) uptake of SurvivorLink among survivors or parent

Table 3
Tasks completed during Think Aloud usability evaluations

Tasks to be completed within SurvivorLink
Users completed task without assistance (yes or no)

User 1, young adult
User 2, parent
User 3, parent
User 4, young adult

1. Register for SurvivorLink account
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
2. Confirm registration via email verification
Yes
No
Yes
No
3. Set up Health Record within SurvivorLink
No
Yes
Yes
No
4. Select clinic where patient receives care
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
5. Submit Medical Record Release
No
Yes
Yes
No
6. Share Health Record with a medical provider
No
No
No
Yes

3910

proxies who attended survivor clinic at our institution during
an 18-month observational study period [37]. While many
tethered institutional and managed care-driven patient portals
exist, SurvivorLink remains unique as an untethered, patient-
controlled system designed with the specific needs of survi-
vors of childhood cancer and the providers who care for them
in mind.
For patients to adopt and use a PHR, they must see the
value and benefit it provides to them. Many pediatric cancer
survivors receive care from a variety of providers and subspe-
cialists who manage their health information within
institution-specific health record systems. Similar to an ex-
ploratory study of PHRs conducted by Sharp et al. [38], par-
ents and survivors participating in our needs assessment
expressed the need for a PHR that would store their health
information across institutions. This would help them manage
and communicate their complex health histories and needs to

their providers who often operate in different institutions (on
different EHRs and tethered PHRs). Continuous survivor care
across the lifespan often necessitates transitions, from pediat-
ric to adult-centered, from cancer center care back to primary
care, and/or at times of survivors’ relocation to a new geo-
graphical area [39–41]. Previous work indicates the usefulness
of SurvivorLink during these transitions in care [37]. Having
on-demand access to their health information via a PHR al-
lows survivors to provide their comprehensive health history
to any healthcare provider and advocate for quality lifelong
survivor care.
Previous studies have found that patient feedback on
perceived ease of use is not only feasible to obtain but also
often feasible to implement within the given technological
infrastructure [42, 43]. With respect to SurvivorLink’s ini-
tial ease of use, the usability evaluations conducted identi-
fied several disjointed steps that were required to create a

Table 4
Identified barriers and recommendations from PHR usability evaluations for site enhancements

Stakeholder group
Identified barrier/recommendation
Site enhancement

Survivor/parent
Think Aloud
evaluations

Increasing perceived ease of use
Users initially failed to create a password meeting the
security requirements.
Password requirements provided during registration (e.g., requires x
characters…)
Users were distracted by survey imbedded within
registration process and failed to complete registration
without assistance.

Survey was taken out of registration and new users are emailed a
link to complete the survey 1 week after registration.

Users inconsistently completed required steps to create a
health record upon initial login.
Health record wizard automatically starts upon first login to the site,
and any other time when a user creates a health record.
Users commented on the wordiness of the website and
indicated instructions included too much text.
Site was visually redesigned to orient users. Text was streamlined
sitewide and enhanced with pictures/icons to demonstrate
intended functionality.
Users expressed desire for “learn,” “store,” “share” text on
the homepage link to those functions.
Links added to navigate to sections of the site to assist users in
accessing educational resources and health record functionality.
Increasing perceived usefulness
Users suggested notification be provided when survivorship
care plan (SCP) is uploaded from clinic.
Email notification sent to health record manager and any provider
with whom they have shared when any new document is
uploaded.
College healthcare
provider focus
groups

Increasing perceived ease of use
Providers proposed search feature to search for registered
SurvivorLink users.
Unable to implement due to privacy protection and the patient
–centeredness of website (i.e. survivors chose with whom to share
their PHR)
Providers requested allowing a survivor to share health
record with an entire clinic instead of individual provider.
Currently developing and exploring options for HIPAA compliant
data exchange with entire clinics.
Providers requested a way to classify and sort uploaded
documents.
Added categories to classify type of health document uploaded.
Added sort functionality to sort on document type, date of service,
and date of upload.
Increasing perceived usefulness
Providers requested to be able to upload documents to
patients’ health records.
Implemented Provider Upload capability granted by the health
record manager.
Providers suggested additional educational material focused
on the unique needs of adolescent and young adults.
New education material integrated into the website focused on
young adult survivors.
Providers recommended creation of a directory of providers
for easy referrals.
Created the Provider Directory where each provider registered on
SurvivorLink can be searched. Allows for upload of picture and
details about clinic. This feature is available without login.

3911

health record following registration. Subsequent redesign
and implementation of the health record wizard on
SurvivorLink to address this issue were directly related to
improving successful use of the PHR among survivors and
parents, with users being almost four times as likely to
store and upload a health document after the launch of
the wizard (OR = 3.9, 95%CI 1.9–8.3) [35]. As technology
evolves quickly, successful PHR design must be an itera-
tive process that elicits and responds to patient and provid-
er feedback using UCD methods to evaluate and improve
ease of use over time.

Limitations and future directions

The goal of our system development process was to in-
form design and enhancements specific to our site. As
such, there are limitations to the study which may impact
the generalizability of the findings beyond our PHR sys-
tem. Interviews and focus groups were conducted by the
research team to solicit open-ended opinions from a con-
venient sample of survivor stakeholders, and it is possible
participants’ affinity for the institution that developed
SurvivorLink may have positively biased participant re-
sponses. Limited demographic information was collected;
however, many participants self-reported their diagnoses
during focus group discussions which included leukemia,
lymphoma, sarcomas, and brain tumors. Thus, we felt
confident our stakeholder sample was sufficient to capture
the variability of the cancer experience as it relates to
diagnosis. Our analyses of our qualitative data were con-
ducted manually using both transcripts and field notes,
and we did not seek calculate intercoder reliability as we
were not seeking to apply our needs assessment findings
beyond the development of our PHR. Additionally, our
needs assessment and usability evaluations were conduct-
ed with stakeholders in the geographical area served by
our institution in the southeast United States, and these
groups may not be representative of all potential users.
With these limitations, there may be concerns about the
utilization of SurvivorLink beyond the current institution.
However, there are currently over 1350 registered users on
SurvivorLink and there have been visitors to the site from
all 50 states and 119 countries.
Given this strong interest, a research study is currently un-
derway to disseminate SurvivorLink to other pediatric cancer
centers nationally to learn about clinical adoption and imple-
mentation of the tool and assess its effects on patient activa-
tion, self-efficacy, and return for follow-up survivor care
visits. Process evaluation from the national sample of partici-
pations can yield more feedback for tailored changes to
SurvivorLink. Other future directions include working with
local healthcare systems and HIEs to examine the feasibility
and usefulness of automating transfer of survivor health

information from providers’ EHRs into SurvivorLink to re-
duce the effort by both providers and patients to load infor-
mation and increase the completeness of information provided
via SurvivorLink.

Conclusion

This study demonstrates that UCD methods are important
tools to evaluate and enhance PHRs to meet evolving needs
and ensure their usefulness and ease of use over time. While
young adult survivors, parents of child survivors, and pro-
viders’ perspectives differed slightly in their needs, all groups
informed the core missions and functions of SurvivorLink:
Learn, Store, Share. Based on the input from these stakeholder
groups, SurvivorLink was designed to support survivors in
owning and sharing their health information with providers
at any healthcare system. Through SurvivorLink, survivors
have the ability to create and self-manage a dynamic longitu-
dinal health record to use throughout their lifetime. As tech-
nology advances, there will be a need for continued iterative
evaluation and evolution of this website in order to continue to
meet the dynamic needs of the growing childhood cancer
survivor population.

Funding information Research reported in this publication was support-
ed by the National Cancer Institute of the National Institutes of Health
(R01CA218389), Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (R18
HS017831-01), Lance Armstrong Foundation, and CURE Childhood
Cancer, Inc.

Compliance with ethical standards

The authors declare that they have no conflict of
interest.

Research involving human participants
The research conducted to
develop and evaluate Cancer SurvivorLinkTM was evaluated by
Emory University’s institutional review board (IRB) and determined
to be exempt from IRB review. Emory University’s IRB granted a
HIPAA authorization waiver to cover the identification and contact
of eligible participants for the needs assessment and usability
evaluations.

Disclaimer
The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and
does not necessarily represent the official views of any of the funding
agencies.