Procuring a Usable System Using Unemployed Personas 

Erik Markensten 
Interaction and Presentation Laboratory 

Royal Institute of Technology 

100 44 Stockholm, Sweden 

Henrik Artman 
Interaction and Presentation Laboratory 

Royal Institute of Technology 

100 44 Stockholm, Sweden 

ABSTRACT 
This case study examines a procurement project where the 
Swedish National Labor Market Administration (AMV) 
hired usability consultants in order to redesign their website 
for employment exchange. The user centered design 
process was part of a larger project to define how the 
website could be reorganized to better support new 
organizational goals. The project was managed by a 
procurement 
group 
that 
had 
already 
defined 
the 
organizational requirements for the website. They hired the 
usability consultants to learn about user requirements and to 
specify an information architecture and design. The 
usability company suggested a process with a user research 
phase and an iterative design phase. The primary 
deliverables would be personas and an evaluated prototype. 
The results demonstrate how the user centered design 
process can effectively be used by active procuring 
organizations as a bridge between abstract organizational 
requirements and concrete systems requirements. Tools 
such as personas and prototypes helped the procurers to 
understand and prioritize among requirements, as well as to 
communicate their work to the organization. These tools 
will be used in the continued work to specify and develop 
the system.  

Author Keywords 
Procure, 
Acquire, 
Procurement, 
Procurer, 
Usability, 
Interaction Architect, Personas, Requirements, Integration, 
Design, Business.  

ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.2 Information Interfaces and Presentation: User 
Interfaces – theory and methods, user-centred design. K.6.1 
Management of Computing and Information Systems: 
Project and People Management – life cycle, strategic 
information systems planning, systems analysis and design, 
systems development. K.6.3 Management of Computing 

and Information Systems: Software Management – software 
development, software process, software selection. D.2.9 
Software Engineering: Management – life cycle, software 
process models. 

INTRODUCTION 
One central problem that HCI practitioners face is that they 
are seldom allowed to do their job properly. Late 
involvement and lack of influence on the requirements 
specifications are more rule than exception [11]. The origin 
of the problem is twofold.  

On the one hand suppliers, who have been the main 
proponents of usability as well as employers of usability 
practitioners, have failed to incorporate the Usage-Centred 
Design (UCD) process into their development. In spite of 
the growing interest in usability in the industry few success 
stories have been reported [5,9]. On the other hand, 
procuring organisations seldom require UCD activities to 
the extent they should, or could.  

One reason that suppliers have taken the initiative when it 
comes to usability issues is because the UCD activities are 
often understood as being a part of the systems 
development process, rather than an aspect of defining the 
organizational activities and operational goals. This is 
especially evident when examining the literature on HCI 
and systems design. 

In this paper we want to argue that it is more fruitful to 
view UCD as part of an organizational development 
process. Whether it is a business to consumer, business to 
business or an internal system that is procured the aim is to 
realise some organizational goals. But as pointed out by 
Balic, Berndtsson, Ottersten, and Aldman [2] an interactive 
system can never realise such goals by itself - someone has 
got to use it: 

“What often seems to be forgotten is that the generated business 
value corresponds to the level of usage (number of users who 
actually use the product) and the product’s quality-in-use 
(effectiveness, efficiency and user satisfaction when the product is 
used). In other words, business value is generated through 
product usage.” 

 

Thus, whether it is a consumer that purchases something at 
a website or an employee who registers a transaction the 
actual 
usage 
is 
central 
in 
realising 
the 
desired 
organizational goals. Consequently, understanding usage 

 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies 
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 

NordiCHI '04, October 23-27, 2004 Tampere, Finland 
Copyright 2004 ACM 1-58113-857-1/04/10... $5.00 

13

should be a central task in procuring any interactive system. 
In order to be able to specify what to procure a procurer 
needs to understand the requirements of both the current 
and the future usage of the system being procured. This, as 
it happens, is exactly what UCD is about.  

We propose that procurers would benefit from becoming 
more active when it comes to usability issues, and that the 
UCD process is well suited to bridge organizational goals 
and systems requirements. To regard usability as an 
attribute of organizational activities rather than as an 
attribute of human-computer interaction, is making 
usability and interaction design a much more general and 
desirable aspect for many organisations since it is the 
operational goals that should be fulfilled efficiently rather 
than the interaction with the computer. 

In this paper we present a case study where the Swedish 
National Labor Market Administration (AMV) hired a 
usability firm to perform the UCD process in order to help 
the organization specify the requirements for a new 
website. 

The Procurement Competence Research Project 
For almost three decades usability and UCD have been 
researched and shown to have great merits for systems 
design. Yet, many usability professionals, at least in 
Sweden, feel that they have to preach its value in order to 
take place in the design process [11]. All too often their 
work is constrained. The UCD community has partly got 
itself to blame for this failure. The preaching of usability 
with its own processes, competence groups and vocabulary 
has strengthened the separation of HCI. Some (e.g. [4]) 
have therefore said that our field is mature enough to 
dismiss the usability as a term – stop talking about it and 
just do it.  

Since 2001 we have researched on how procurers of system 
design think and reason about usability and UCD. We have 
found that most organisations value usability and think it is 
of high importance. Some organisations think it is so 
important that they do the usability activities on their own 
[17], others require it in the general requirement 
specification [19]. In the former situation the organisation is 
doing the best they can to make the systems design usable – 
usability becomes defined by the competence of the 
procurer organisation. In the latter case the procurer seldom 
specify it concretely enough in the contract. Consequently, 
usability becomes defined by the developing organisation 
and their willingness to do usability work. Procurer and 
supplier process negotiations is a third form of organisation 
of usability design, where the degrees of usability are 
defined ad hoc and on the fly by the procurer and the 
supplier [1].  

In this study we examine a fourth form of organisation of 
UCD where the procurer organisation contracted a third 
party to perform the UCD activities and to make the 
requirements concrete through an evaluated prototype. The 

general aim of our project is to examine what usability and 
interaction design can accomplish in these very early stages 
of systems design, and further dig into how procurer 
organisations reason about usability. We also investigate 
how personas can be used as a tool for procuring 
organisations to reach consensus and merge organizational 
and usage goals.  

Personas 
Personas [7,8] is a method/tool that has become 
increasingly popular among usability practitioners. A 
Persona is a character representing a group of users with 
similar usage patterns and goals. It is based on thorough 
research of actual usage. The tool is used to understand and 
focus on user requirements and to communicate these 
requirements among different stakeholders in a project.  

Personas as a methodology has not been thoroughly 
researched. In addition it has been rejected by some since it 
replaces some actual user participation [10]. Others argue 
that this is its strength since actual user involvement in the 
design work can be perceived as a hinder rather than a help 
[7,8,10,13]. This may be particularly true when designing 
systems for large audiences, such as an internet services.  

Personas is usually described as a mediating tool between 
usability practitioners and developers. In this study we are 
especially interested in examining how a procurer 
experienced the use of personas and, as a consequence, how 
they understood the merits of interaction design in relation 
to the overall goal of procuring a large implementation 
project.  

METHOD 
The case study was conducted as a participatory 
observation field study where the first author participated as 
a usability consultant from the usability company 
throughout the user research and design phase of the overall 
project. Therefore, this phase is described mainly based on 
the first author’s experiences of participating in the project. 
This is complemented with reflections of the process by 
other project members, both before and after this phase. 
The interviews were conducted both with the project leader 
from the usability company and with members of the 
procurement project group (hereafter called PPG). The 
interviews were conducted by both authors in a project 
room at the interviewee’s workplace. The second author 
was lead interviewer. All interviews were recorded.  

We 
have 
analysed 
the 
project 
as 
it 
uncovered 
chronologically. We have triangulated the observations 
with documentation and with opinions and reflections from 
the interviews.  

RESULTS 
This case study describes a pre study that was conducted to 
gather requirements for a new version of the Swedish 
National Labor Market Administration’s website. The goal 
of the pre study was to gather information for making a 

14

management decision of whether to invest in a new website. 
In large the project consisted of three phases, as described 
in Figure 1. 

The first author participated as a usability consultant during 
the gathering of user requirements. Before that the agency 
had gathered organizational requirements and they 
continued to prepare the decision material and anchor the 
results in the agency after the user research and design 
phase was finished.  

 

Figure 1. The project as it was planned in relation to the 
previous and following internal activities.  

Project Background 
The Swedish National Labor Market Administration 
(AMV) is a very important government agency in Sweden. 
It’s role is to monitor the employment market and decrease 
unemployment. When Internet became widespread in the 
late nineties the agency was one of the first to use the new 
medium to offer services to the citizens. The website has 
since grown with more services and information. Although 
successful, it has with time become difficult to use. One 
reason is that the organic growth of the site has created an 
information structure that is not developed from a usage 
perspective. One of the procurers conclude that: 

“We have not been able to design with the users interest in mind 
but everyone sees to their department and their own interests” 

Figure 2. The website as it is presented today  

There are three major user groups of the website: 
employers, unemployed and various users that seek 
information about the work of the agency. Since they all 

have to share the same top navigation much important 
information has today been pushed downwards in the 
structure, which make services and information difficult to 
find. Furthermore the website is in general heavy on 
information which also adds to the difficulties. Figure 2 
gives a snapshot of the current website. It has six main 
sections that are directed to different user groups. 

The agency’s mission is to match employers and 
unemployed. This has traditionally been handled by 
assistants in the local offices around the country. The 
website has, until now, mostly been seen as separate from 
the local offices, and it has been managed and developed by 
a specific department within the organisation with much 
authority of its own. During the last year, with up to 
700.000 visitors every month, the management wanted to 
create a new organisation in which the website would have 
a more central role. In the new organisation the website 
would be the main channel for the matching process and 
employers and unemployed would handle the process 
themselves. A new call centre and the local offices would 
mainly deal with those that need more support and that can 
not get by on their own. In this way it was envisioned that 
the organisation’s resources could be used more effectively.  

To accomplish this, the general director ordered a pre study 
to define the business and user requirements for a new 
version of the website. This project had been initiated once 
before but had crashed due to internal disagreements: 

“There had been a project like this earlier to define a new 
information structure for the website but it collapsed since there 
were internal disagreements and conflicts about which perspective 
one should use and how the user groups looked like and so on.”  

The new project leader employed two major strategies to 
succeed with the project. One was to make the website a 
management issue rather than a department issue. Hence 
the project group was put together to represent all major 
departments and was organised in direct contact with the 
management. The first months of the project were spent 
gathering 
organizational 
requirements 
from 
various 
documents and statements from the Director General. This 
work resulted in some central summarizing directives. 
Since these were based on speeches by the Director General 
and general documents they were quite abstract, such as: 

“The tools on the website shall above all be an effective support 
for the visitors’ own matching activities”, “The website shall 
communicate our mission and clarify our assignment” and “The 
website shall be developed from a usage perspective and adapt to 
the citizens and companies needs and conditions.”  

The second strategy was to “disarm” the question of the 
users’ perspective. There had not been any research done 
about the users’ needs in the previous project. This had 
been one reason for its crash since everyone had claimed 
that they knew what the users actually needed, as a support 
for their own ideas.  

User Requirements & prototype design 

User 
interviews 

Organizational 
requirements 

 
Anchoring 
process 

 
The first 
iteration 

The 
second 
iteration

15

“Everyone claimed to have the user’s perspective and I claimed 
that no one could have it. The only way to get it was to work very 
systematically with the users” 

Hence, when the PPG had nailed down the business 
requirements as detailed as they could they decided to 
conduct a study with the users to define the user 
requirements. They explained this to the usability 
consultants that they had a framework agreement with and 
they had got to respond with a proposal of how they would 
like to run the project. After a selection process the PPG 
chose a small usability firm, mainly because of their 
methodology: 

“What was attractive was that it was not this kind of “we are the 
experts on the user’s opinions” but a methodological base to 
stand on that was very clear.”  

The usability company provided two consultants, one 
responsible project leader and the first author, as assisting 
consultant. We suggested a process with contextual 
interviews to create personas and scenarios, followed by an 
iterative design and evaluation phase to create a prototype. 
Since the scope of the project was to define a new 
information structure the interviews would not be used so 
much to gather new functional requirements as to 
understand current usage and the segmentation of the user 
population. An abstract representation of the work process 
is provided in Figure 1.  

The project group had worked for five months nailing down 
the organizational requirements and their time was running 
out. They planned to prepare and anchor the results of the 
project in the organisation through a review process before 
the end of the year. Therefore the UCD process could not 
take more than eight weeks. At the same time they wanted 
two iterations and a thorough interview phase. Hence, the 
schedule for the UCD process was very tight. However, the 
project was important and prestigious for the usability 
company and it was judged that we would be able to deliver 
on time by working with two consultants on top speed.  

User Requirements and Prototype Design – a Usability 
Consultant’s Perspective 
The user research and design project was initiated with a 
workshop in which the PPG presented what they had done 
so far in gathering the business requirements. All relevant 
documents were also handed over to the usability company. 
Apart from going through the organizational requirements a 
persona hypothesis [8] was formulated. Several contextual 
interviews [3] were planned for each user group in the 
hypothesis. The hypothesis was based on the agency’s 
existing information and knowledge about the segmentation 
of the users of the website.  

We provided the project group with a list of the planned 
interviews and asked them to participate in as many as 
possible to gain a first hand insight into the results, as well 
as of the process. The members of the PPG were very 
engaged and interested and one of them participated on 
almost all of the 21 interviews that were conducted. In 

order to not interfere too much with the actual interviews 
only one member of the PPG was allowed to attend on each 
interview session. When the interviews were completed we 
analysed them qualitatively and transformed the data into 
personas covering the different user groups, their goals and 
needs. Although the scope was on an information 
architecture level the needs analysis resulted in several 
usage scenarios for the new website with new functionality 
to support the discovered and as yet unmet needs.  

This was all completed in about nine days, Even though this 
was evidently a very fast tempo we felt that we were in 
control of the work. Although they were active and 
engaged, the members of the PPG, on the other hand, only 
participated occasionally in the hands-on work, such as on 
an interview or in a design session and then got the results 
presented to them in a weekly workshop. Thus, they did not 
get the same insight into the details of the results as we got. 
Although this was not discussed it seemed to make them 
uncomfortable. In the following interviews one of them 
comments this as: 

“Things happened very fast. And I don’t think we were prepared 
on that. (…) So we felt that we were maybe not really involved in 
all the details of the work, which we may have wanted to be. But at 
the same time we had decided to follow this time plan to be able to 
do all the things we needed to gather the user requirements. But 
when you look back at it we should have spent more time in the 
project and been more involved.”  

When the personas were discussed the PPG noticed that 
two categories of users seemed to be missing. The selection 
of respondents had not included these user groups. 
Therefore, one of the members of the PPG complemented 
the personas with two more, based on discussions with 
assistants in the local offices. 

After the personas were completed and presented for the 
PPG we moved on to work with the design and the 
information architecture of the first prototype. Card-sorting 
exercises were planned with the two most important user 
groups, but only one could be performed. Again, only one 
member of the PPG was allowed to attend in order not to 
disturb the exercise, but the information architecture was 
worked through with the whole group in a workshop shortly 
after this. Alongside with the information architecture we 
created a first draft prototype. A graphical designer added a 
first idea of form and visual design to it. The prototype and 
the fundamental design ideas were presented and discussed 
with the PPG. Since the members had varying experiences 
of working with design the discussion was not always 
smooth and concepts such as navigation levels had got to be 
explained.  

After the workshop the prototype was made “testable” by 
making it possible to interact with it. While the prototype 
was evaluated with users and by experts on accessibility the 
graphical designer conducted a mood board workshop with 
the PPG to uncover their ideas about the visual design. 
Hence, when we presented the results of the evaluations to 

16

the project group the visual designer could start working on 
the visual design that would be used in the second iteration. 

Altogether, the general directives of organizational 
requirements, the personas and user requirements, the 
results from the usability and accessibility evaluations, and 
a new form provided the basis for a second high fidelity 
design. However, a few days into the second iteration the 
procurement project leader called us to announce that the 
project needed to make a halt. The PPG had not been able 
to follow and understand all the decisions that had been 
taken during the design process. Therefore they were also 
not sure about the connection between their abstract 
organizational goals and the now concrete design. We were 
assigned to lead a series of full-day workshops with the 
PPG to backtrack what had been done and work through 
both the organizational and user requirements again.  

After three intense workshops spread out over about eight 
days most questions had been answered and the PPG felt 
much more comfortable with the work that had been done. 
We updated the prototype with all the design decisions that 
had been taken during this period and a second round of 
usability test was planned. In the meantime the graphical 
designer negotiated with the PPG about the requirements 
for the final form. As in the first iteration the prototype was 
also sent for evaluation by experts on accessibility. There 
had been many changes in the design, both concerning 
interaction and form issues since the first iteration, and the 
usability evaluations indicated some areas that needed 
reconsideration. This was discussed in a final workshop 
with the PPG. Design decisions were agreed upon and the 
final changes were made to the prototype.  

Figure 3. The design of the final prototype. 

In the new design (Figure 3) each primary persona gets 
their own version, or mode, of the website. This means that 
the whole top navigation can be used for each target group 
which gives better overview and a more shallow 
information architecture. The design is also more action-
oriented than before and more coherent in the sense that 
related parts are now integrated rather than spread out in the 
structure.  

Our last responsibility was to write the final project report 
that described the work process, the personas and basic 
ideas about the final design. This was handed over together 
with the prototype and the final graphical design. Although 
this was the end of our involvement the PPG had much 
remaining work. They had to continue and intensify the 
work of anchoring the results of the whole project in the 
organisation, mainly through a thorough predefined process 
in which the prototype would be sent out for review to 
various departments.  

The halt – an Analysis 
From a UCD perspective the project had progressed 
smoothly. In spite of a tough time plan we were on time. 
Therefore, the halt came as a surprise to us since time had 
been absolute top priority and a halt would inevitably cause 
a delay. But suddenly the priorities had changed. Instead of 
time understanding became essential. When the project was 
discussed in retrospect the PPG leader gave two major 
reasons for the halt: 

“The usability company had delivered entirely accordingly to the 
expectations but the project group did not have full insight and 
understanding (…) of the results, which made them feel uncertain. 
And then they would not be able to perform the extremely 
important work to become ambassadors. So I was forced to halt 
the project so they would be able to understand the results that 
had been produced by the usability company.  

We identified the organizational requirements first and they did 
not reach the same level of concretization as the users’ 
requirements. (…) And the usability company was in charge of 
developing the prototype and we got to review it in this kind of 
dialogue…. but then… the usability company got to strong 
somehow. The usability company was much more professional in 
some way – they had their methodology and they knew where to 
go and so forth. But we, who sat with the organizational 
requirements, in which the usability company did not have any 
competence, we were not as good at steering, so to speak.”  

We were aware that the PPG was unsure about how the 
abstract organizational requirements should be translated 
into the design and had asked them shortly after the user 
interviews to try to detail their requirements to be able to 
discuss them in relation to the design. This was not done, 
however, and in order to be able to deliver on time we felt 
that we had to move on. Furthermore, since we had read the 
report from their previous work and had designed the 
prototype based on user requirements, but in the overall 
framework of the organizational goals, we were less 
worried. Of course, there were still questions that were 
unanswered and even some contradictions in the documents 
on organizational requirements, but we expected these to be 
resolved during the second iteration.  

In retrospect it becomes clear that the halt was necessary 
not only for the PPG to understand the user requirements, 
but also to specify and secure the organizational 
requirements. The PPG had not been able to detail these to 
the level that the user requirements were specified. Since 
these were also “owned” primarily by the usability 

17

consultants the PPG experienced that the user requirements 
grew “too strong”. Considering that the previous attempt to 
specify the requirements had failed the motivation to 
actually understand was very high. However, lacking a 
thorough understanding of the user requirements and with 
diffuse and contradicting organizational requirements it is 
not easy to participate in an argumentation about design 
decisions, especially in the fast pace that the project was 
moving. 

The halt is interesting from a research point of view since it 
manifests the importance of working with a dual 
perspective of business and user requirements, as discussed 
later on. It is, however, important to emphasize that it was a 
completely internal project decision and the members of the 
PPG did not consider it as a big thing in the following 
interviews but merely as a response to a too tight time plan.  

Understanding Through Cooperation 
When asked how they would plan the next project based on 
these experiences the PPG members agree that they were 
satisfied with the overall process of identifying the 
organizational requirements first and then the user 
requirements, and the decision to involve usability 
competence: 

 “I don’t believe in this type of methodology where you take in 
users and let them design their own system. I believe in the 
meeting (…) between those that are (…) specialists on designing 
systems and the new technologies etc., and the users’ needs. It is 
in this meeting that you get the absolutely best solutions.”  

If they would change anything the most recurrent comment 
is rather that they themselves should have been more 
involved in the project from the start, and spent time on 
their own with the requirements, without the usability 
company. Even though they would let an outside company 
be responsible for the UCD process they comment that they 
should have participated more in the activities and that all 
work should have been done in their offices, instead of 
having the usability consultants work in their own office.  

“Looking back we should have planned to be more involved in the 
project.” 

Although we who were responsible for the design felt that 
we had captured the essential organizational requirements 
in the prototype the PPG needed to work through the design 
decisions themselves to gain the same understanding.  

“It might not have been that different [had we not had the halt] – 
but it was mostly a feeling that you got time to think through a lot 
of issues (…) Things were more clear to me [after the halt]. I 
could take a discussion with others better than when it was 
highway all the time.”  

Thus, although the design did not change drastically during 
the halt it was needed in order to get the PPG up to speed in 
the design discussions. Nevertheless, the project, although 
following the project plan with respect to the activities with 
the users, turned out to be a different project than expected 
from the PPG’s perspective (Figure 4).  

Anchoring the Results in the Organisation 
Since the end of the design project the PPG has continued 
to anchor their results in the organisation. The prototype 
was sent out for review to different departments with an 
opportunity to comment on the results. The responses were 
summarized and the PPG decided to make several changes 
in the prototype based on the comments. Since this process 
both required the project group to continue to work with the 
requirements and also explain it to others in presentations it 
further increased their feeling of confidence: 

“Now we have done this and we stand up for it – we know it. I 
believe this is very important for the credibility – that it’s not only 
something that a consultant has said since it’s much easier then to 
say “well that’s only a consultant who’s done it. We’ll change 
it”.”  

Although many comments were handed over in the review 
process the PPG agree that the results in general have been 
very well received. Both the final result and the structured 
work process they used to reach it were appreciated. The 
management has now made a decision that the prototype 
represents the vision of the future website and has decided 
to continue to specify a cost and resource estimate for a 
development of the new website based on the prototype.  

 

Figure 4. The process as it actually turned out with a continuous 
dialogue between organizational and user requirements 

Organizational and User Requirements 
The PPG comment in the interviews that the UCD process, 
with the halt, helped them to better understand their own 
organizational requirements, apart from specifying the user 
requirements. Although the original organizational goals 
were not changed their understanding of them and the 
requirements did: 

“The organizational requirements have become more concrete 
(…). The policy documents are written on a fairly high level of 
abstraction. It’s easier now to run in the staircase of abstractions 
(…) I can go from a detailed level, for example a database table. I 
can take this with me and run up to the policy document.”  

By working in a structured way with both organizational 
and user requirements they seem to have built a very solid 
platform from which to continue the procurement project. 
In particular the halt and their own work with the material 
after the design phase seem to have helped them to 
understand how user and organizational requirements are 
interrelated and represented in the design. Here is a 

User Requirements & prototype design 

User 
interviews 

 
The first 
iteration 

 

Anchoring 

process 
Organizational 

requirements 

The 
halt 

The 
second 
iteration

18

concrete example of how the personas and the design work 
aided in this integration and prioritization of the 
requirements:  

One organizational requirement was that the website should 
communicate what the agency do and how well they do it. 
From a usage perspective this was in line with the goals of 
the information seeking persona (i.e. journalists and 
researchers) since a large part of their job is about writing 
about the employment market. However, the employer and 
unemployed personas did not share this interest. Their 
primary goal was to find employers or a new job. This was 
also in line with the main organizational goal of the website 
– to support the matching process between unemployed and 
employers. Therefore we decided to emphasize information 
about the agency in the website for information seekers but 
minimize it in the website for other personas. The 
organizational requirement of informing about the agency 
could not come in conflict with their primary goals of 
matchmaking, which in turn would realize the overall 
organizational goals.  

One of the members of the PPG also describe how they 
now present the personas and the organizational goals 
together through an integrated concept where it becomes 
clear how different personas will use their services 
differently and in different channels in order to realize the 
organizational goals.  

The members of the PPG agree that this project was 
successful in that it followed a structured method from 
abstract 
organizational 
goals 
to 
detailed 
systems 
requirements, and that it took both organizational and user 
requirements under consideration and integrated the two. If 
possible, they would use the same work model again if they 
got involved in a similar project, also because they do not 
have any method or process for this today. 

Working With Personas 
The PPG got interested in the tool personas already when 
the usability company presented it in their project proposal.  

“One thing that caught our interest was to work with personas 
(…) to get something more concrete to work from”  

The fascination with the tool grew during and even after the 
project as it proved its effectiveness. For example, although 
the results of the interviews were much in line with the 
persona hypothesis there were also some important 
differences. One such deviance was that the hypothesis 
divided users based on the agency’s internal categorisation 
of short-time unemployed and long time unemployed users. 
In the analysis, however, it turned out that a categorisation 
based on how long a person had searched for a job, rather 
than how long he had been unemployed, was more 
interesting. But the greatest strength of personas was not as 
an analysis tool but rather as design tool and as a way of 
communicating requirements: 

“Its not only that it becomes very concrete and tangible when you 
work, like a really good tool when we should design the prototype. 

We talked about them as friends in the project group. How will 
Linda handle this? And then everyone knew. Linda was a whole 
concept that stand for a lot of things instead of having to recount 
all the details. So it becomes a very, very smooth tool to work 
with.”  

More interestingly the use of personas did not end with the 
end of the design project but they have lived on during the 
internal preparations for a development decision:  

“The second thing that struck me was what an enormous response 
we have had on these personas when we have been out in the 
organization talking about the project. Suddenly it has become 
tangible even for people who do not have a clue about web 
development. “Right, the users.” And the users are not a grey 
mass but they want different things!” 

The PPG even report that they have found new uses for the 
personas in many other projects and completely other 
settings, such as in education. For example, when 
discussing with the assistants in the local offices who shall 
teach unemployed to use the website the personas have 
helped them understand how different users may need 
different services and may use the website differently.  

“Suddenly our website gets differentiated in relation to the 
users… that is really incredible.”  

DISCUSSION 
As pointed out in the introduction business goals can 
seldom become realised through technology alone. The 
technology has got to be used by someone for the goals to 
be fulfilled. Therefore an analysis of current usage and a 
prediction of future usage through prototypes and 
evaluations is a crucial step to take in any development 
project to come to grip with what kind of system and 
services that are suitable. By performing these activities 
already in the procurement project we anticipated several 
benefits. Mistakes and questions can be solved at an early 
stage at a low cost. The procurement itself can become 
more concrete which facilitates communication with 
suppliers [17]. Most importantly though, from a UCD 
perspective, usability issues can be integrated, or embodied, 
into the request for proposal without the need to actually 
speak about usability.  

These benefits were experienced by the PPG in the current 
case study. The usability process became a bridge between 
the PPG’s original abstract business goals and the more 
concrete systems requirements. Judging by the comments of 
the PPG and our earlier experiences [e.g. 1,17] it would 
have been more difficult to go directly from the abstract 
documents to a detailed systems requirements specification. 
Furthermore, if the UCD process had not been incorporated 
already in the procurement usability activities would still 
have had to be done later in the development phase. An 
integration of the two would most likely have been more 
complicated at that stage since there would be a contract 
based on abstract business requirements regulating what 
should be done. In this case study the PPG instead let the 
user and business requirements grow in parallel towards a 

19

final design, solving contradictions between requirements 
as they came along.  

The idea that the usability process should be used to bridge 
organizational goals and systems requirements in the 
procurement presupposes a separation between “external” 
and “internal” design [16, p. 94]: 

“Software development informed by recent work in design 
methodology should aim at separating external design from 
internal design and construction. (…) This has implications for 
how we view the designer’s role, as well as for the structure and 
management of software development projects. A problem which 
remains to be addressed is how to deal with constructional aspects 
affecting the use of the final product. Response time, reliability, 
maintenance, etc., all affect the users’ experience of the product 
(see Gould, 1988, for a discussion). Yet they cannot be adequately 
addressed in the design work since they are determined by the 
final construction. A tentative answer is that the designer - much 
like the architect - is responsible for coordinating the construction 
work in such a way that it satisfies the design vision to the greatest 
extent possible.” 

As Löwgren points out the backside of a separation of 
internal and external qualities is that those that are 
determined by the final construction cannot be specified 
alongside other external qualities. It is therefore tempting to 
argue against such a separation and propose that one and 
the same supplier can have both usability and technical 
competence and both design and implement a usable 
system. We would certainly like this to be the case, but in 
reality it is does not seem to work. As mentioned in the 
introduction suppliers in contract development fail over and 
over again to integrate UCD activities in their development 
processes. Furthermore, even though we may one day see 
suppliers that have succeeded with this integration, we 
believe that usability activities will often be involved too 
late if they come after a contract for the technical 
development is in place.  

The Interaction Architect 
Other case studies that we have done [1,17] highlight that it 
is not enough to only perform the UCD activities in the 
procurement process, but the procurer must also possess 
UCD competence to do it (the same point is raised by 
Scown [18] but he argues that the procurers should actually 
learn HCI). This does not necessarily mean that all 
procurers of interactive systems should employ usability 
practitioners. A strategy that was used by the agency in this 
case was instead to hire competence temporarily. Since 
usability played a key role in this case study it is interesting 
to analyze this strategy further. We will refer to the role that 
the usability professionals had as the Interaction Architect. 

The idea of the Interaction Architect, using the metaphor of 
the construction architect, is to provide UCD competence 
when needed, without having any interest in also 
implementing the specified system [17]. The comparison of 
the usability professional to the construction architect is 
quite common in the UCD literature (e.g. [6, 14,16, 20]). 
For example, Kapor [15, p. 4] write: 

“Architects, not construction engineers, are the professionals who 
have overall responsibility for creating buildings. Architecture 
and engineering are, as disciplines, peers to each other, but in the 
actual process of designing and implementing the building, the 
engineers take direction from the architect. When you go to design 
a house you talk to an architect first, not an engineer. Why is this? 
Because the criteria for what makes a good building fall 
substantially outside the domain of what engineering deals with.”  

As emphasized by Kapor you don’t go to an architect when 
you have already built the shell of the building, or when the 
construction is nearly finished. Neither do you involve an 
architect after you have chosen what to build in detail, and 
who should build it. Rather, you use the competence of the 
architect to understand what it is you need, and to define 
this in a format that is understandable by contractors.  

Consequently, we want to use the metaphor of the architect 
to stress the point in time in which this role is involved. The 
responsibility of the Interaction Architect is to secure issues 
of quality in use before a contract with a technical supplier 
is signed, as well as to monitor the progress during the 
systems development. The results from this case study, as 
well as another that we have performed, are very promising. 
The UCD process was valued by the procurers. The results 
from the work of the Interaction Architect – a design, 
grounded in usage and business goals, will be used as a 
high level requirement specification by the procurers in the 
continued specification and development work. Whether or 
not this will result in a usable system is, however, too early 
to say since neither development project has started yet. 
However, the results have in this case persuaded the 
management to use it as a vision which they will try to 
reach.  

We believe that we will se more of this, or similar, roles in 
the future. Perhaps a scenario as described by Winograd 
[20, p. 11]: 

“As software design continues to mature, perhaps we will see a 
similar evolution: from the individual artisan-programmer (far 
from an extinct species today); to a master architect builder, as 
described by Fredrick Brooks (1995); to a commercial 
environment that includes software architectural firms that vie for 
awards for originality and elegance of their designs, but that are 
not responsible for construction (implementation).” 

Or maybe we will even find, in a not to distant future, a 
situation where usage requirements are fully taken into 
account not only in the procurement stage, but also all 
along the development and implementation stages.  

Integrating User and Business Requirements 
The results of the case study indicate that viewing the 
usability activities primarily as a process of organizational 
development or procurement, rather than as part of a 
systems development, facilitates an integration of the UCD 
activities. The procurement organisation saw these steps as 
necessary to be able to specify what they needed. Usability 
professionals often have to beg to get involved early in the 
process, and then “early” is often defined as the start of the 
supplier’s 
engagement. 
In 
this 
case 
the 
usability 

20

professionals were involved even before that and their 
results were appreciated by the organisation and have been 
used extensively.  

However, it is clear that the successful integration of 
usability did not come automatically by involving usability 
professionals. Rather, it demanded a lot of work and effort 
from the procurement project group (PPG). In retrospect the 
participants seem very pleased that they paused the project 
since they got a chance not only to listen to the results being 
presented but also to work their way through the proposals 
themselves. This suggests that when planning a project with 
an Interaction Architect, regardless of whether he/she is 
hired or employed by the procurer, it is also necessary to 
include time for working through and re-evaluating the 
business requirements, and to link these to the needs of the 
users. One method for this integrated approach is suggested 
by Balic et al [2]. We are not sure, however, that the work 
needs to be that formalised. It might be enough to establish 
this two-edged focus early on in the project, to plan it 
accordingly and, most importantly, to have time not only 
for practical activities but also for reflection. One difference 
could, for example, be to not only plan evaluations with 
presumptive users, but also with the procurers.  

Apart from the benefit of including the organizational 
requirements more explicitly, the time for reflection also 
gives the procurers possibilities to get more familiar with 
the results, which is necessary if they will use them by 
themselves later on. There exists today no established 
method or process for procurers to manage their work, but a 
method inspired by UCD seems to be a promising 
candidate. In this case study the UCD process was 
appreciated and effective for the procurers as a method of 
transforming their abstract goals into detailed requirements, 
through involving users and designing for them.  

Hence, although the UCD process was originally intended 
to understand the user requirements it also helped the PPG 
to understand and deal with their own organizational 
requirements. With a prototype available it became easier to 
become concrete regarding the organizational requirements, 
or to notice that they were not yet embodied in the 
prototype.  

The Active Procurer 
Holmlid [12] emphasises “the active procurer”. This case 
study confirms that a successful procurement and 
involvement of usability requires an active procurer. The 
members of the procurement project group were active in 
many ways: 

• 
They worked intensively together to specify the 
organization’s goals and requirements for the new 
website 

• 
They were involved in the UCD process in order 
to really understand the results 

• 
They worked closely to the organization during the 
requirements phase to continuously communicate 
and gain approval for their work 

• 
They planned a thorough review and approval 
process after their work with the prototype was 
completed, in order to anchor their results in the 
organisation 

Although the involvement of an Interaction Architect and 
the UCD activities were successful in themselves the result 
of the whole project would most likely not have been as 
successful if the procurer had not worked actively and taken 
responsibility from the very start. Even though the 
requirements did not change drastically during the halt the 
PPG got an opportunity to work with the material 
themselves, which they had not had before. This, together 
with their continued work with the requirements after the 
design project, increased their credibility in their internal 
anchoring process. 

Thus, although the UCD process helped the PPG to detail 
and evaluate organizational and user requirements this was 
merely one piece in the overall process. An equally 
important piece was their engagement in the project, as well 
as a thorough planning for internal marketing and 
anchoring.  

Personas & Prototypes  
One of the worst fears of the PPG was that they would not 
have an adequate understanding of the results since they 
had outsourced the UCD process. The usability company 
introduced a new work process and possessed design and 
analytical skills that the PPG did not have. In retrospect the 
fears were unfounded. As mentioned before the PPG’s 
engagement in the process is identified as one reason for 
their ability to embrace the results. Another reason is 
probably the tools that were chosen.  

Both the personas and the prototype have been used 
extensively by the PPG after the design project ended. They 
have even made changes in the prototype by themselves. 
The choice of these concrete and communicative tools for 
the deliverables was likely important for this to happen. 
Had the usability company instead delivered a large report 
and a requirement specification in UML the PPG would 
likely not have used them as much and the process of 
anchoring the results would have been more difficult.  

Both the prototype and the personas were appreciated by 
the PPG for their communicative power and simplicity. The 
personas represent the users and communicate their goals. 
The prototype represents the system and communicates the 
requirements. Both of these tools are non-technical and 
easy to use in presentations and discussions.  

On the other hand, their power and simplicity may also be a 
danger since they may start to live a life of their own and be 
used in areas and for argumentations that they were not 
designed for. Although this is a pleasant problem compared 

21

to not having any focus on the users at all it is one which a 
procurer-oriented perspective on usability must deal with.  

CONCLUSIONS 
This case study emphasises that the user centred design 
process, which is commonly perceived as a systems 
development issue, may as well be used in organizational 
development 
or 
systems 
procurement. 
Procuring 
organisations today lack methods or processes to transform 
their often abstract organizational requirements to a systems 
specification for procurement. This case study demonstrates 
how the usability activities may be used in this phase to 
bridge organizational and systems requirements through an 
emphasis on usage. The result of such a process is a 
requirement 
specification 
that 
is 
based 
on 
both 
organizational and user goals and that can be used to 
procure a systems development project.  

Furthermore, the case study highlights how tools such as 
personas and prototypes can aid not only in the design 
process, but can also be used by procurers with no formal 
training in usability in their endeavour to communicate and 
anchor the results of their work. The results indicate that 
success factors include having access to competence in 
UCD and an active procurer who is engaged and want to 
participate in and understand the work of specifying the 
requirements in order to become confident and secure in 
one’s own abilities to know what to procure.