Supporting self-management in Bipolar Disorder: mixed-methods knowledge

translation study

AUTHOR(S)

Erin E Michalak, Emma Morton, Steven J Barnes, Rachelle Hole, Greg Murray, CREST.BD, Michael Berk

PUBLICATION DATE

01-04-2019

HANDLE

10536/DRO/DU:30122497

Downloaded from Deakin University’s Figshare repository

Deakin University CRICOS Provider Code: 00113B

Original Paper

Supporting Self-Management in Bipolar Disorder: Mixed-Methods
Knowledge Translation Study

Erin E Michalak1, PhD; Emma Morton2, PhD; Steven J Barnes3, PhD; Rachelle Hole4, PhD; CREST.BD; Greg Murray2,
PhD

1Department of Psychiatry, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada
2Centre for Mental Health, Swinburne University of Technology, Melbourne, Australia
3Department of Psychology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada
4School of Social Work, University of British Columbia, Okanagan, BC, Canada

Erin E Michalak, PhD
Department of Psychiatry
University of British Columbia
420-5950 University Boulevard
Vancouver, BC, V6T 1Z3
Canada
Phone: 1 604 827 3393
Fax: 1 604 822 7792

Abstract

Background: Self-management is increasingly recognized as an important method through which individuals with bipolar
disorder (BD) may cope with symptoms and improve quality of life. Digital health technologies have strong potential as a method
to support the application of evidence-informed self-management strategies in BD. Little is known, however, about how to most
effectively maximize user engagement with digital platforms.
Objective: The aims of this study were (1) to create an innovative Web-based Bipolar Wellness Centre, (2) to conduct a
mixed-methods (ie, quantitative and qualitative) evaluation to assess the impact of different sorts of engagement (ie, knowledge
translation [KT]), and (3) to support engagement with the self-management information in the Bipolar Wellness Centre.
Methods: The project was implemented in 2 phases. In phase 1, community-based participatory research and user-centered
design methods were used to develop a website (Bipolar Wellness Centre) housing evidence-informed tools and strategies for
self-management of BD. In phase 2, a mixed-methods evaluation was conducted to explore the potential impact of 4 KT strategies
(Web-based webinars, Web-based videos, Web-based one-to-one Living Library peer support, and in-person workshops).
Quantitative assessments occurred at 2 time points—preintervention and 3 weeks postintervention. Purposive sampling was used
to recruit a subsample of participants for the qualitative interviews, ensuring each KT modality was represented, and interviews
occurred approximately 3 weeks postintervention.
Results: A total of 94 participants were included in the quantitative analysis. Responses to evaluative questions about engagement
were broadly positive. When averaged across the 4 KT strategies, significant improvements were observed on the Bipolar Recovery
Questionnaire (F1,77=5.887; P=.02) and Quality of Life in Bipolar Disorder (F1,77=8.212; P=.005). Nonsignificant improvements
in positive affect and negative affect were also observed. The sole difference that emerged between KT strategies related to the
Chronic Disease Self-Efficacy measure, which decreased after participation in the webinar and video arms but increased after
the Living Library and workshop arms. A subsample of 43 participants was included in the qualitative analyses, with the majority
of participants describing positive experiences with the 4 KT strategies; peer contact was emphasized as a benefit across all
strategies. Infrequent negative experiences were reported in relation to the webinar and video strategies, and included technical
difficulties, the academic tone of webinars, and feeling unable to relate to the actor in the videos.
Conclusions: This study adds incremental evidence to a growing literature that suggests digital health technologies can provide
effective support for self-management for people with BD. The finding that KT strategies could differentially impact chronic
disease self-efficacy (hypothesized as being a product of differences in degree of peer contact) warrants further exploration.
Implications of the findings for the development of evidence-informed apps for BD are discussed in this paper.

JMIR Ment Health 2019 | vol. 6 | iss. 4 | e13493 | p.1

(JMIR Ment Health 2019;6(4):e13493)   doi:10.2196/13493

KEYWORDS

bipolar disorder; eHealth; self-management; knowledge translation; community-based participatory research; mHealth

Introduction

Background

The tremendous impact of mental disorders—for the people
who live with them, their families, and society—is well
established. Mental health conditions account for 14% of the
global burden of diseases worldwide and 37% of all healthy life
years lost from chronic diseases [1]. Millions of people
worldwide are suffering and losing quality of life (QoL) due to
mental disorders, and many will lose their lives. Bipolar disorder
(BD)—a mood disorder characterized by pronounced variability
in mood, activity, and energy levels [2]—contributes
significantly to this global burden of disease. Robust
epidemiological studies indicate a 1% to 2% lifetime prevalence
for BD [3], and it is estimated that 6% to 10% of people with
this condition will die by suicide [4]. However, these “misery
statistics” [5] do not tell the whole story; people with BD can
and do experience good health and QoL [6-8].

Effective support for self-management—“the plans and/or
routines that a person with BD uses to promote health and QoL”
[9]—is viewed as 1 important route to optimizing outcomes in
BD. Our Collaborative Research Team to study psychosocial
issues in Bipolar Disorder (CREST.BD) has spent the past
decade 
incrementally 
advancing 
the 
literature 
on
self-management and BD. Outputs have included qualitative
explorations of self-management application in BD [7,8,10], a
Delphi Consensus Consultation project [9], and a review of
electronic 
health/mobile 
health 
(mHealth) 
apps 
for
self-management of the condition [11]. These findings
complement a solid international literature speaking to the
importance of self-management in terms of impacting health
and QoL in people with BD and recommendations for supported
self-management in international BD clinical treatment
guidelines (eg, [12]). However, as recently noted, “means to
support these self-management interventions...are critically
needed” [13].

Digital health technologies offer clear potential as 1 route to
support the application of evidence-informed self-management
strategies in BD, and there is no doubt that people with the
condition are seeking health information on the Web. An
international survey of 1222 people with a diagnosis of BD from
17 countries reported that 81% of respondents described
themselves as internet users; 78% of this sample sought
Web-based information related to their diagnosis [14,15]. The
most commonly cited reasons for internet searching were to
seek more information on the symptoms of BD, prescription
drug information, the general course of illness, coping strategies,
and medication side effects. Notably, 67% of respondents said
that seeking Web-based information helped them to cope with
their BD “sometimes or frequently.” Respondents were more
likely to report a positive impact of Web-based information on
their ability to cope if they were “always able to find what they
were looking for” [14]. Our own research into information

seeking on the Web in youth with BD has indicated that what
youth “are looking for” is credible, safe, and stigma-free
Web-based information about their condition [16]. However,
there are prevailing concerns about the quality and accuracy of
health information on the Web [17,18].

Taken together, the key messages from emerging research in
the BD digital technology arena are 2-fold. First, it is clear that
people with BD are looking for Web-based information and
support to optimally manage their condition. Accordingly, BD
research and clinical communities need to rise to the challenge
of providing high-quality, evidence-informed Web-based
information and resources to meet this need. Second, we need
to advance our understanding of how to best maximize user
engagement with the Web-based tools we produce. This
mixed-methods study was designed to address these needs by
assessing the impact of a range of digital and face-to-face
engagement (ie, knowledge translation [KT]) strategies on user
engagement and health-related outcomes in Canadians with BD
developed for a Bipolar Wellness Centre website.

This Study

The aim of this project was to advance understanding of KT
strategies in BD. To this end, we investigate 4 distinct strategies
for encouraging engagement with a Web-based BD resource.
The strategies were all face-valid methods for engaging people
with lived experience with health information but differed in
terms of resource intensiveness and accessibility. The 4
strategies were Web-based webinars, Web-based videos,
Web-based one-to-one Living Library peer support, and
in-person workshops. The Web resource to which these KT
strategies related (the Bipolar Wellness Centre) was a newly
developed website structured around our group’s approach to
the domains of QoL in BD. Funding from the Canadian
government in the form of a 2-year Canadian Institutes of Health
Research (CIHR) “Knowledge to Action” grant supported the
development of the central website and the accompanying
mixed-methods investigation of how different KT strategies
impacted engagement with the content held within it. The
research project is positioned as the initial phase of a longer-term
developmental program of research to advance understanding
of the potential utility of digital health technologies for
supporting self-management in people with BD.

Methods

Overview

The project was conducted under the auspices of CREST.BD
[19], a Canadian-based network dedicated to collaborative
research and KT in BD. CREST.BD specializes in
community-based participatory research (CBPR), where
researchers and knowledge users (in this case, people with BD
and BD health care providers) work hand-in-hand [20]. Informed
by a decade of research and integrated KT, CREST.BD has

JMIR Ment Health 2019 | vol. 6 | iss. 4 | e13493 | p.2

developed a specific model of CBPR for BD [21] and dedicated
Web and social media platforms [22].

The project was implemented across 2 study phases over a
2-year period. In the first phase, we applied the principles of
integrated KT, CBPR, and user-centered design to develop a
website (the Bipolar Wellness Centre, described below) to house
evidence and tools on self-management strategies for BD. In
the second phase, we conducted a mixed-methods (quantitative
and qualitative) evaluation of the impact of 4 bespoke
(Web-based or in-person) KT strategies designed to foster
engagement with the content housed within the Bipolar Wellness
Centre. The primary aims of the quantitative study component
were to assess whether the 4 KT strategies (1) represented
effective engagement strategies and (2) impacted health-related
outcomes in study participants with BD. The aim of the
qualitative study component were to explore whether the 4 KT
strategies represented effective engagement strategies.
Participants in the study self-selected 1 of the 4 KT strategies
in which to participate.

Development of the Bipolar Wellness Centre

During the first phase of the study, we developed, within an
integrated KT and CBPR framework, our signature website,
CREST.BD “Bipolar Wellness Centre” [23]. The primary goal
of the Bipolar Wellness Centre is to support self-management
in people with BD and empower them to manage and improve
their health and QoL. Structurally, the website’s design emulates
our theoretical understanding of QoL in BD, developed on the
basis of our longstanding program of research exploring the
QoL construct in BD (eg, [6,24]). Self-management categories
were presented according to the 14 domains of QoL measured
by our Quality of Life in Bipolar Disorder (QoL.BD) scale [25]
and its Web-based counterpart, the QoL Tool [26], which
assesses the cardinal life areas impacted by BD (eg, mood, sleep,
physical health, and cognition), more concrete life areas (eg,
finances, home, work, education, and leisure), and some which
are more psychosocially orientated (relationships, self-esteem,
spirituality, identity, and independence).

In keeping with the principles of CBPR, we fused the expertise
of academic researchers, people with BD, and health care
providers to cocreate the content in the Bipolar Wellness Centre.
First, we conducted 3 consultation events in partnership with
the Mood Disorders Association of Ontario (MDAO) in the
Canadian cities of Toronto, Bowmanville, and Guelph, to
develop the “look and feel” of the website. These consultations
with people with BD resulted in the selection of an overarching
nautical metaphor (effective self-management of BD has been
likened to “to a ship that’s always righting itself” [7]).
Identification of the research evidence and tools for the Bipolar
Wellness Centre was a thoroughgoing process. To determine
the content for each of the 14 self-management areas, we first
appointed a CREST.BD lead and then conducted academic and
grey literature reviews. Draft section content was created,
revised by a plain language writer, and then reviewed by the

CREST.BD Community Advisory Group. Our early design
consultations also prioritized accessibility of website content
for people with BD who were struggling with symptoms or
cognition problems. The research evidence was, therefore,
presented in succinct text form and audio version and augmented
by brief “key messages” and ways to “take action.” Also
provided are key scientific references and carefully curated (and
annually updated) area-specific resources and tools (eg,
evidence-informed tools to support the application of
self-management strategies for sleep).

The official launch of the Bipolar Wellness Centre (see Figure
1) occurred on World Bipolar Day (March 30, 2015). The project
to evaluate the impact of the 4 KT strategies (ie, webinars,
videos, Living Library, and workshops, described in full below)
was conducted throughout 2015. After the evaluation of the KT
strategies was complete, the webinars and the videos (but not
the Living Library nor workshop strategies) were made publicly
available through the website (funding parameters did not permit
implementation or longer-term sustainability of the Living
Library or workshop strategies).

Development of and Evaluation Methods for the
Bipolar Wellness Centre Knowledge Translation
Strategies

During the second phase of the study, we developed (again
within an integrated KT and CBPR framework) and evaluated
4 bespoke Bipolar Wellness Centre KT strategies (see Figure
2).

Web-Based Webinars

A total of 14 webinars [27] (see Figure 3) were produced, 1
corresponding to each self-management area; each webinar was
delivered by a CREST.BD member with internationally
recognized expertise in the focal self-management area. Overall,
12 of the webinar presenters were academics (one of whom,
coauthor SJB, also has BD) and 2 presenters provided lived
experience of BD. Webinars were 15 to 20 min in length (not
including questions and answers [Q&A]) and each followed a
structured delivery format, covering (1) education about the
specific self-management area (eg, the importance of sleep as
a self-management strategy and its relation to QoL, as
summarized in the text section relating to sleep and BD on the
Bipolar Wellness Centre); (2) some key messages from the
current research evidence in that area (eg, as provided in the
text and literature on the Bipolar Wellness Centre); and (3) how
to take action (eg, recommendations for tools to support
self-management strategies for sleep, as housed on the Bipolar
Wellness Centre). The webinars (split screen of video of
presenter and PowerPoint slides) were prerecorded to ensure
audio quality and delivery fidelity. The actual webinars were,
however, delivered “live” (ie, the prerecorded webinar with a
live Q&A with the presenter) to research participants. Following
evaluation, a recording of the webinar and Q&A was made
publicly available through the website.

JMIR Ment Health 2019 | vol. 6 | iss. 4 | e13493 | p.3

Figure 1. Bipolar Wellness Centre.

Figure 2. Overview of knowledge translation strategies. CREST.BD: Collaborative Research Team to study psychosocial issues in Bipolar Disorder;
KT: knowledge translation.

JMIR Ment Health 2019 | vol. 6 | iss. 4 | e13493 | p.4

Figure 3. Webinars.

Web-Based Videos

Overall, 6 videos [28] (see Figure 4) were developed in
collaboration (with the production company As You Like It) in
the areas of mood, sleep, relationships, physical health, finances,
and home life. Videos were 2 to 4 min in length and all featured
CREST.BD member Victoria Maxwell, an actor and mental
health educator who lives well with BD. Video content
(development of which was informed by the self-management
area content on the Bipolar Wellness Centre) was similarly
structured across the 6 videos, with the actor or narrator
introducing the key self-management area, followed by
pragmatic examples of self-management behaviors in everyday
life (eg, how to apply the principles of good sleep hygiene).

Web-Based Living Library

The Living Library KT strategy (Figure 5) consisted of a single
45-min session between the research participant and a Living
Library “expert” (ie, 1 of 5 experienced peer-researchers living
well with BD who had undergone thorough training in Bipolar

Wellness Centre content and navigation) via a secure Web-based
telehealth 
system 
(Medeo). 
Sessions 
were 
relatively
unstructured, but the Living Library experts were instructed to
explore the research participant’s priorities for self-management
focus and to navigate the participant through the germane
content areas and tools in the Bipolar Wellness Centre (with
the exception of the videos and webinars, which were not, at
that time, made available via the website).

In-Person Workshops

A structured 2.5-hour in-person group workshop (Figure 6) was
developed focused on 2 self-management domains (mood and
sleep, cardinal BD self-management areas). Workshops were
codelivered by 3 CREST.BD team members (coauthors EEM
and GM and Victoria Maxwell) and provided structured delivery
of didactic, role-play, and small group work. They were
delivered 3 times in the Canadian cities of Ottawa, Kingston,
and Toronto (sample size at each workshop was 6, 10, and 16,
respectively) in partnership with MDAO.

JMIR Ment Health 2019 | vol. 6 | iss. 4 | e13493 | p.5

Figure 4. Videos.

Recruitment

To be eligible, participants were required to be (1) aged 19 years
or above, (2) able to communicate in English, (3) able to provide
informed consent, (4) a resident of Canada, and (5) have a
self-reported diagnosis of BD (Type I, II, or not otherwise
specified). Participants were recruited via diverse methods
including CREST.BD face-to-face (eg, outreach at community
events and conferences), Web-based (eg, news releases on the
CREST.BD 
website 
and 
blog), 
and 
social 
media
communications (eg, CREST.BD Facebook and Twitter
accounts), and notices were sent to those individuals with BD
who had been recruited for previous studies for whom we had
ethical permission to contact. Participants were free to self-select
which of the 4 KT strategies they wanted to engage with.
Participants were remunerated with a Can $10 gift certificate
to recognize their time in the webinar or video (quantitative)
arms, Can $20 for participation in the workshop or Living
Library (quantitative) arms, and an additional Can $20 for
participation in the qualitative arm.

Quantitative Methods, Statistical Analysis, and
Assessment Scales

Ethics approval for the study was granted by the University of
British Columbia’s Behavior Research Ethics Board. All
participants received written information on the study and gave
written informed consent. Participants consenting to the

quantitative arm of the study were given the option of consenting
to be re-contacted for a qualitative interview.

Quantitative assessments of the experience and impact of the
KT strategies were conducted in 2 ways. First, we investigated
the subjective experience of participating in the KT strategy
immediately upon completion of contact (“immediate posttest”).
Participants rated each of the 4 statements related to a particular
KT strategy (ie, “learned something new,” “applicable to me,”
“met my expectations,” and “would recommend to others with
BD”) on a Likert scale from Strongly Agree (1) to Strongly
Disagree (5). Second, we investigated the short-term impact of
the KT strategy by comparing 3-week follow-up ratings (Time
2) with baseline scores (preintervention, in the week before
engagement with the KT strategy [Time 1]). Only a 3-week
assessment time frame was feasible for this exploratory project.
Quantitative assessment of the impact of the KT strategies on
health outcomes utilized 4 scales, assessing QoL (via the 56-item
QoL.BD, a condition-specific QoL scale, which is sensitive to
change in clinical state over 7-10 days [25]); recovery (via the
36-item Bipolar Recovery Questionnaire (BRQ) [29]); mood
(via the Positive and Negative Affect Schedule [PANAS], a
self-report questionnaire that consists of two 10-item scales to
measure both positive affect (PA) and negative affect (NA)
[30]); and Chronic Disease Self-Efficacy (SECD, via the 5-item
“Manage Disease in General” subscale of Stanford’s Chronic
Disease Self-Efficacy Scales [31,32]). Quantitative data were
analyzed using the Statistical Package for the Social Science
(software) version 24.

JMIR Ment Health 2019 | vol. 6 | iss. 4 | e13493 | p.6

Figure 5. Living Library.

Figure 6. Workshops.

JMIR Ment Health 2019 | vol. 6 | iss. 4 | e13493 | p.7

By necessity, the data collection approach differed slightly by
the KT arm. In the webinar arm, research participants
self-selected a single webinar to participate in based on their
own interests; webinars were scheduled at a rate of
approximately 3 per week from April to May 2015. A week
before the webinar, research participants were sent a unique
link to the Time 1 assessments. After participating in the webinar
and Q&A, they were sent a link to the immediate posttest
questions, and 3 weeks after that, another link to the Time 2
assessments. In the video arm, the videos were embedded
directly into the Qualtrics system; participants conducted the
Time 1 assessments, viewed the video, immediately conducted
the immediate posttest questions, and were sent a link to the
Time 3 assessments 3 weeks later. In the Living Library arm,
participants were sent a link to the Time 1 a week before their
scheduled Living Library session, sent a link to the immediate
posttest questions on completion of the session, and then a link
to the Time 2 assessments 3 weeks later. Finally, for the
workshops, delivered in May to June 2015, the Time 1 and 2
assessments were administered via Qualtrics, but the immediate
posttest questions were completed by paper and pencil at the
end of the workshop.

Qualitative Methods and Data Analysis

Purposeful criterion sampling [33] was used to ensure the
breadth of KT modalities was represented. Consenting
participants were contacted via email approximately 2 weeks
after participating in the KT strategy to schedule a telephone
interview; interviews occurred approximately 3 to 4 weeks
following participation in the KT strategy. A total of 43
interviews were conducted by coauthor EM. Interviews ranged
from 20 to 70 min in length (mean 39.4, SD 11.2). A
semistructured interview schedule was developed with 3 main
sets of open-ended questions. The first set of questions asked
participants about their engagement with the information shared
in the KT session. The second set of questions explored any
attempts to implement self-management strategies. Finally,
participants were asked about their QoL, including any changes
to their QoL following exposure. Probes and reflective listening
were used to elicit depth in participant responses. The interviews
were digitally recorded and transcribed verbatim by EM (24/43,
56%) or research assistants (checked by EM for accuracy; 19/43,
44%).

Thematic analysis [34] of participants’ perceptions and
responses to the content and delivery of the self-management
information in the KT strategy occurred. Themes describing
participants’ experiences of engaging with a KT strategy are
discussed in detail elsewhere [10]. For the purposes of this paper,
a secondary analysis was conducted that focused on information
that would add to or clarify understanding of the quantitative
study results. Step 3 of Braun and Clarke’s [34] analytic process
informed the analysis producing descriptive, literal categories
of the data. Examples of positive and negative experiences
relating to the KT modalities were identified. Data were assigned
brief descriptive codes in the qualitative data management
software NVivo [35]. Codes were examined, and overarching
categories were identified. The content of categories was

reviewed for coherency, and transcripts were revisited as the
themes were developed to ensure all relevant data were
adequately described. The essence of the most important
categories in relation to understanding quantitative data was
then described in a report with illustrative transcript extracts.
To reduce the risk of bias and to address analytic validity,
authors EEM and RH reviewed both the descriptive accounts
of themes and transcripts for coherency and validity of
interpretation, with disagreements resolved via consensus.

Results

Participants

A total of 94 participants were included in the quantitative
analyses, with a modal age range of 45 to 54 years and the
majority (n=53, 56%) identifying as female. The most frequently
reported diagnosis was BD Type I (46/94, 49%), followed by
BD-II (31/94, 33%). In the 43 participants in the qualitative
analyses, modal age range was 45 to 54 years; n=30 (70%)
participants were female, with n=24 (56%) reporting BD Type
I and 16 (37%) reporting BD Type II.

Quantitative Results

We first analyzed the immediate postintervention data to explore
participants’ perceptions of the different types of KT strategies.
Data were analyzed using a one-sample t test comparing the
difference between the mean response and the neutral rating of
3. As shown in Table 1, participants were very positive about
all KT strategies with modal response of Agree or Strongly
Agree in each case and responses significantly better than neutral
for 15 of the 16 cells.

To understand the impact of participation in the 4 KT strategies
over time, we first conducted a multivariate repeated-measures
(pretest to follow-up on each of BRQ, QoL.BD, PA, NA, and
SECD) analysis of variance with KT strategy (ie, webinar, video,
Living Library, and workshop) as the between-subjects variable.
The analysis revealed a main effect of Time: when averaged
across the 4 strategies, participation led to improvements across
the 5 outcomes (upper 5 rows of Table 2). Posthoc analyses
found nonsignificant improvements in PA and NA and
significant improvement as measured on the BRQ (P=.02) and
QoL.BD (P=.005). Chronic Disease Self-Efficacy as measured
by SECD was the outlier, with a small (nonsignificant) decrease
when averaged across the 4 strategies.

Second, we looked at the 5 outcome variables separately, via a
Time × Strategy interaction (bottom 5 rows of Table 2). For
BRQ, QoL.BD, PA, and NA, there was no difference between
the KT strategies in terms of their ability to improve outcomes
(ie, there was no significant Time X Strategy effect for these 4
variables). Interestingly, the data showed that for SECD, there
was a significant Time ×Strategy effect (P=.01; the sole outcome
that showed a negative average impact across strategies). Figure
7 shows that SECD declined in the 2 conditions that were more
technology-dependent (webinar and video), but actually
improved in the 2 conditions that had more peer or interpersonal
contact (Living Library and workshop).

JMIR Ment Health 2019 | vol. 6 | iss. 4 | e13493 | p.8

Table 1. Ratings of satisfaction with 4 knowledge translation strategies (1=Strongly Agree and 5=Strongly Disagree). Data in the table are mean (mode)
responses. Superscripted letters refer to the significance of one-sample t test comparing mean with neutral response (ie, rating of 3).

Recommend to others with
bipolar disorder, mean (SD)
Expectations, mean (SD)
Applicable, mean (SD)
Something new, mean (SD)
Strategy

1.77 (1)b
2.55 (1)
1.77 (1)b
2.41 (2)a
Webinar (n=22)

1.65 (2)b
2.50 (2)c
1.85 (2)b
2.35 (2)a
Video (n=26)

1.56 (2)b
1.81 (2)b
1.34(2)b
1.78 (2)b
Workshop (n=32)

1.43 (1)b
2.21 (1)c
1.86 (1)b
1.93 (2)b
Living Library (n=14)

1.62 (1)b
2.23 (2)b
1.66 (1)b
2.11 (2)b
Combined (n=94)

aP<.005.
bP<.001 (survives Bonferroni adjustment for 16 comparisons).
aP<.05.

Table 2. Results of multivariate analysis of variance, testing change in 5 outcome measures between pretest and follow-up (upper 5 rows are main
effect of time and lower 5 rows are the interaction between time and knowledge translation strategy).

P value
F (df)
Mean square
Analysis and measure

Time

.02
5.887 (1,77)
205.053
Bipolar Recovery Questionnaire

.005
8.212 (1,77)
1.252
Quality of Life in Bipolar Disorder (scale)

.17
1.889 (1,77)
0.457
Positive Affecta

.08
3.059 (1,77)
1.236
Negative Affecta

.60
0.283 (1,77)
0.490
Chronic Disease Self-Efficacy

Time X Strategy

.58
0.667 (3,77)
23.241
Bipolar Recovery Questionnaire

.12
1.982 (3,77)
0.302
Quality of Life in Bipolar Disorder (scale)

.77
.376 (3,77)
0.091
Positive Affecta

.40
0.999 (3,77)
0.404
Negative Affecta

.02
3.652 (3,77)
6.339
Chronic Disease Self-Efficacy

aA measure from the PANAS scale.

Qualitative Results

Participant descriptions of both positive and negative
experiences specifically associated with the webinar, video,
Living Library, and workshop arms are summarized in Tables
3-6, respectively. Positive aspects of the various KT strategies
emphasized by participants included the interactive nature of
the webinars and the depth of information provided, and the
brevity and visual accessibility of the videos. Across the KT
modalities, peer contact was consistently emphasized as a
helpful or appreciated aspect, but descriptions of how peer

contact was experienced varied by modality. Participants in the
workshop arm emphasized appreciating the opportunity to learn
from others managing the same condition and reducing
self-stigma though normalization of shared experiences. The
Living Library was described as a helpful place to share
experiences with an expert who could understand and relate to
them, and some participants described being inspired by having
access to somebody who lived well with BD. Participants in the
video arm often felt able to relate to the actor or narrator, which
helped them better understand their own experiences as well as
identify the personal relevance of strategies.

JMIR Ment Health 2019 | vol. 6 | iss. 4 | e13493 | p.9

Figure 7. Pretest to follow-up change in chronic disease self-efficacy by strategy (difference in slopes P=.01).

Table 3. Qualitative findings: positive and negative experiences of webinars.

Quote
Category description

Positive experiences

“I also really liked that they had a question and answer period at the end.” [F, BD-II, 25-34]
Interactive (n=7)

“I find them very informative, and I personally like webinars.” [F, BD-I, 55-64]
Depth of information (n=5)

“I saw the people on the right, the people who had signed in, and the comments. So it just said,
‘Well, you’re in good company, and you can do this, and you’re doing things right,’ kind of.” [F,
BD-I, 55-64]

Peer presence as normalizing or providing
community (n=3)

Negative experiences

“What kind of triggered me at the beginning was a lot of what I call MBA type language...I find
that really, really frustrating, because the emphasis on quality indicators and efficacy and all this
kind of stuff, really is never about the person.” [M, BD-NOS, 45-54]

Overly academic or clinical (n=4)

“Well for one thing I entered the webinar rather late because I was having some system problems,
so I had to contact the webinar organisers and get everything sorted out. So I might not have learned
as much as I could have.” [F, BD-I, 55-64]

Technical difficulties (n=1)

JMIR Ment Health 2019 | vol. 6 | iss. 4 | e13493 | p.10

Table 4. Qualitative findings: positive and negative experiences of videos.

Quote
Category description

Positive experiences

“It’s not overwhelming, it’s not like reading a thousand page book, the videos are short and sweet
and I think that’s good.” [M, BD-I, 55-64]
Succinct (n=3)

“Watching somebody do things...that’s how I learn, and I found the video is really helpful in that...It
gave me a sort of visual concept of what it’s about.” [F, BD-I, 55-64]
Visualizing self-management (n=3)

“Just seeing how that video was, like first of all, how her life was with her depression or how she
was feeling, her mood, how things were cluttering her world, I recognize that that’s what happens
to me, but to know it, to actually see it was helpful.” [F, BD-II, 45-54]

Relatability of the narrator (n=5)

Negative experiences

“I didn’t’ connect with the video as much as I would have liked to, because I felt like a bit of a
personal failure because it wasn’t that easy for me, it was so much harder.” [F, BD-II, 45-54}
Difficulty identifying with a person living
well with bipolar disorder (n=4)

“I found that the videos were very short and not very, from a user’s point of view, not that informa-
tive.” [M, BD-I, 35-44]
Amount of information (n=2)

Table 5. Qualitative findings: positive and negative experiences of Living Library.

Quote
Category description

Positive experiences

“One of strongest points of our talk was finding out that [the Living Library expert] was also bipolar.
And that’s what I’ve been searching for, is to talk to others that live it, and not just read about it in
a book, because even then, when I read some of the books, it doesn’t quite fit what I’ve experienced
and maybe I’m looking for others like me” [F, BD-I, 45-54]

Living Library expert understands my expe-
riences (n=2)

“Knowing that people go through the same stuff and probably manage the condition better. So just
knowing that helped. ” [M, BD-I, 25-34]
Being inspired by the Living Library expert
(n=4)

Negative experience

“I learned absolutely nothing...She didn’t understand the program herself, she couldn’t help me get
into some of the stuff.” [F, BD-I, 55-64]
Lack of information provided by the Living
Library expert (n=1)

Table 6. Qualitative findings: positive and negative experiences of workshops.

Quote
Category description

Positive experiences

“I found that was also helpful, sharing with other people, you know suggestions about things that
have helped them and so on.” [M, BD-II, 35-44]
Learning what works for others with bipolar
disorder (n=5)

“I felt when I was there that I didn’t stand out. It was just kinda like everybody was there and every-
body has their own little struggles.” [F, BD-I, 35-44]
Normalizing difficulties (n=4)

Negative experience

“I would have preferred if the workshops had been a bit earlier, especially because we ended up
going later. I found that hard, you know, we’re talking about sleep - we’re talking about going to
bed at the regular, you know, for setting up the pattern. And I ended up going to bed late that night.
So that was, that was a bit frustrating, to be talking about setting up a regular sleep time and then,
set back, from doing that, rolling my sleep schedule off.” [F, BD-I, 35-44]

Scheduling (n=1)

Reports of negative experiences of KT modalities were
infrequent, particularly in participant descriptions of the
workshop and Living Library arms (2 participants across both
these arms described unique negative experiences). As such,
description of negative experiences in this section focuses on
the webinar and video arms, where a small number of
participants described feeling disengaged or discouraged by the
interventions. Overall, 4 participants in the webinar arm
described the academic style of information delivery in the
webinar as off-putting and 1 reported technical difficulties.

Some participants found it difficult to relate to the depiction of
a woman living well with BD in the videos, resulting in a sense
of discouragement or frustration. Although the length of the
videos was described by some participants as a positive, others
found that their brevity limited the amount of useful information
conveyed. Finally, of note, a preference for in-person services
was described by some participants across both the webinar and
video arms.

JMIR Ment Health 2019 | vol. 6 | iss. 4 | e13493 | p.11

Discussion

Overview

The potential for digital technologies to produce a transformative
impact in the mental health arena is profound. Research is
burgeoning in this space, driven in part by recognition of the
remarkable rate at which society is adopting technology into
their everyday lives, the pressures on health care systems for
services to be delivered flexibly in a patient-centered manner,
and acknowledgment of the empowerment that digital
technologies can bring to patients by enabling them to make
choices about when and how they access care [36].
Technology-supported self-management holds significant
potential to improve the health and QoL of people facing mental
health challenges and represents 1 avenue to reduce the
substantial health care costs associated with chronic illnesses
[37]. 
However, 
the 
production 
of 
evidence-based
self-management support technologies is time and resource
intensive and requires sustained maintenance; the identification
of effective approaches to optimize user engagement with them
is therefore paramount. This mixed-methods study explored the
impact of 4 KT strategies on user engagement and health-related
outcomes in people with BD.

Principal Findings

Quantitatively, at a broad level, participants evaluated all 4 KT
strategies positively. When the KT strategies were examined
collectively, we observed a nonsignificant trend toward
increased PA and decreased NA following exposure to the KT
strategies and significant improvements in perceived recovery
and QoL. A modest nonsignificant decrease in perceived
self-efficacy to manage chronic illness was observed after
exposure. Exploration of the impact of the KT strategies
individually indicated that all 4 KT strategies positively
impacted perceived recovery, QoL, and both PA and NA.
Chronic disease self-efficacy was observed to significantly
decline in the more technology-dependent conditions (webinar
and video) but improve in the 2 conditions with more peer and
interpersonal contact (workshop and Living Library).

This study adds one piece of incremental evidence to a growing
literature, suggesting that Web-based technologies can represent
an effective conduit for, or complement to, care for people with
BD. In a recent systematic review of Web and mHealth apps
for self-management in BD, for example, we identified 15
studies, several of which demonstrated positive impacts of
digital interventions on QoL [11]. The most commonly
supported self-management strategy categories delivered by
Web-based interventions identified in the review were “ongoing
monitoring,” “maintaining hope,” “education,” and “planning
for and taking action”; the least commonly supported categories
were “relaxation” and “maintaining a healthy lifestyle.”

Qualitatively, user experiences of the 4 KT strategies tested
were also largely positive. Most dominant was an appreciation
of the opportunity for peer contact. Negative descriptions of
experiences tended to focus on the webinar and video strategies,
citing issues such as disliking the academic tone of the webinars,
or an inability to identify with the woman living well with BD
depicted in the videos. Broadly speaking, our qualitative findings

suggested that there was no “one size fits all” approach for
determining the right type of KT strategy for BD
self-management information. Other qualitative analyses of this
qualitative dataset have been published, with a focus on
participants’ experiences of self-management more broadly as
well as perception of their QoL [10,38]. Although this analysis
focused on perceptions of the KT strategies embedded in the
overall self-management intervention, an evaluation of
experiences of engaging with the self-management intervention
more broadly as well as attempts to enact self-management
strategies was conducted [10]. Feelings of empowerment and
responsibility to self-manage BD were discussed, whereas a
minority of participants felt that self-management strategies
lacked power to control BD symptoms. The relationship of
self-management to the health care system was also discussed,
with opportunities to develop a sense of partnership between
clinicians and patients via attention to self-management
identified. A more in-depth discussion of the links of such
experiences to self-efficacy, recovery, and therapeutic alliance
is presented therein. In addition, a qualitative analysis focusing
on individuals’ subjective experiences of their QoL was
conducted [38]. The relativity of subjective QoL judgments to
self, others, and possible futures was explored, and the possible
implications of the flexibility of reference point usage for future
therapeutic interventions were discussed.

Our observation that chronic disease self-efficacy may be
differentially impacted by the mode of KT strategy (ie, ones
containing more vs less peer interaction) is intriguing. On the
one hand, existing literature clearly points to the potential
benefits of Web-based peer support in terms of increasing
feelings of social connectedness, group belonging, and serving
as an avenue to share self-care strategies [39]. Web-based peer
support for people with mental health problems can occur in
diverse ways, including via general support forums (eg, [40]);
advanced interactive forums dedicated to sharing illness
experiences such as PatientsLikeMe [41]; discussion forums
that are embedded within formal Web-based treatment
interventions (as being evaluated, eg, in the BD Mood Swings
2.0 [42,43] and ORBIT [44] trials); or through social media
platforms such as Twitter, Facebook, and Reddit [39,45] and
blogging [46] or video-based platforms [47,48]. Regardless of
the conduit, it appears that engagement rates with apps that
foster social connections may be higher [49].

Web-based engagement should not be viewed, however, as
entirely without risk; Naslund et al [39] note that interactions
on the Web can result in exposure to unreliable information,
hostile or derogatory comments, or feelings of uncertainty or
anxiety about one’s mental health condition. Our finding, albeit
from a modest dataset, that chronic disease self-efficacy may
be negatively impacted by KT strategies with less peer support
may be 1 example of how digital interventions might also have
unintended negative consequences. In a recent study, Williams
et al [47] qualitatively explored users’ experiences of lived
experience videos on an interactive recovery-oriented website
(the Self-Management and Recovery Technology or “SMART”
program) designed for people with psychosis. Although the
delivery and focus of the videos in the SMART program differed
from those of this study (SMART program videos were focused

JMIR Ment Health 2019 | vol. 6 | iss. 4 | e13493 | p.12

on recovery principles rather than on self-management strategies
and were designed to be viewed either with a mental health
worker or independently), results from that study are germane
to this project. In particular, participants’ experiences of the
videos were clearly situated for many in the context of their
personal recovery journey, as the authors’ state:

Responses to the videos appeared to be influenced by
the participants’ existing ways of coping with life and
managing their recovery, as well as by how they used
technology. Participants who did not relate to the
peers as role models perceived that their ways of
coping were too different, or they were at a point in
their recovery journey where they did not want to
identify with peers.
In summary, our quantitative (ie, decreased chronic disease
self-efficacy scores in the video and webinar arms) and
qualitative (ie, some participants reporting difficulties
identifying with the actor living well with BD in the videos)
findings suggest 2 things. First, participants’ experiences of KT
strategies appear to be influenced by their understandings of
their position in their own recovery journey. Second, there
appears to be benefit of KT strategies that incorporate peer
support. Future research is needed to more fully explore the
precise relationship between peer support and engagement with,
or enactment of, concrete self-management strategies.

Limitations

A number of limitations to this study should be noted. First,
participants self-reported their diagnosis of BD; although
confirmation of diagnosis by structured psychiatric interview
would have been preferable, there is some evidence that people
who self-identify as living with BD typically do meet diagnostic
criteria [50]. Second, this study was positioned as an exploratory
phase in a longer-term program of research to advance
understanding of the utility of digital health technologies for
supporting self-management in people with BD. Participants
were volunteers who were paid a modest honorarium for their
participation and were free to self-select which KT modality
they wanted to engage with, likely biasing toward an
engagement method they were intrinsically attracted to, which
in turn may have impacted the range of positive and negative
experiences reported, limiting the generalizability of the results
to routine health service delivery settings. Third, the assessment
time frame for the examination of quantitative outcomes was
short, that is, 3 weeks. Many digital health intervention studies
apply assessment periods of 4 to 8 weeks (eg, [51]).
Furthermore, changes in the outcomes of interest in this study,
such as QoL, are anticipated to emerge relatively slowly in BD
compared with changes in symptoms (eg, [52]), and changes in
self-management behaviors are fully expected to take time to
incorporate into everyday life. Longer assessment time frames
in future work are called for to fully capture expected trajectories
of change in QoL outcomes and self-management behaviors.
Unlike QoL, a sense of personal recovery as measured on BRQ
might be expected to shift quite quickly as people adopt new
attitudes toward their role in managing BD. Responses to BRQ
items such as “I have the resources to manage my health” and

“The activities I do make a difference to others” could shift
solely via insights gained from interactions in the intervention.
Fourth, as there was no control group of participants who did
not partake in any strategy, nonspecific causes (such as attention,
time, demand characteristics, or the honorarium paid for
participation) cannot be ruled out as an explanation for the
observed quantitative outcomes.

Implications and Future Directions

Despite the aforementioned limitations, this study provides a
useful mixed-methods evaluation of the potential impact of a
range of KT strategies on health-related outcomes in people
with BD. The study was conducted between 2014 and 2016;
our CREST.BD program of research has been focused since
then on meeting emerging opportunities and needs of the digital
mental health landscape. Moving forward, we are seeking
funding for work to incorporate the evidence and tools held in
the Bipolar Wellness Centre [23], our Web-based QoL Tool
[26], and the findings from this study to inform the development
of a new mHealth app—“Bipolar Bridges.” In doing so, we are
carefully addressing some of the key challenges currently being
faced by the digital-technology space, which relate prominently
to issues of information credibility, safety, and privacy.

More than 10,000 mental health apps are available for immediate
download today; worryingly, most mental health apps in
commercial marketplaces are not evidence-based nor conform
to clinical guidelines [53]. A 2015 systematic review found the
majority of apps for BD (82/571 available apps were reviewed)
were not aligned with clinical guidelines or established
self-management principles and did not cite sources of evidence
[54]. Some may even offer dangerous recommendations (eg, 1
app recommends that people experiencing BD mania drink
alcohol at bedtime to assist with sleep [54]). Furthermore, many
available apps do not respect the privacy of personal health
information [53-55]. Thus, there are significant barriers for
people facing mental health challenges in identifying safe,
evidence-informed apps [56,57]. Data from adults with BD [58]
report “wish list features” for new apps inclusive of “social
interaction capability” and “between-app integration” and
receptiveness to digitally supported self-management [59]. Data
from youth with BD report prioritization of ease-of-use,
scientific quality, customization, and data privacy [16]. At a
broad level, the BD field needs to advance in terms of creating
technology-supported spaces, which are inclusive of diverse
people, regardless of their gender, sexual orientation,
socioeconomic status, digital literacy, geography, and ethnicity.
Finally, the results of this study indicate that more work is
needed to inform how to best advance social connectivity via
apps. Looking ahead, our Bipolar Bridges project aims to
address some of these key challenges via the creation of a new
app designed to enable diverse users with BD to optimize their
QoL via supported self-management, resting on an innovative
and secure blockchain-based platform. The results of this study
will be applied to hone a comprehensive mixed-methods
(quantitative, qualitative, and machine learning) investigation
of the feasibility, engagement, adoption, impact, and
mechanisms of change associated with the use of the app.

 

JMIR Ment Health 2019 | vol. 6 | iss. 4 | e13493 | p.13