Human-Centered Design of a Clinical Decision
Support for Anemia Screening in Children with
Inﬂammatory Bowel Disease

Steven D. Miller1
Zachary Murphy1
Joshua H. Gray1
Jill Marsteller2
Maria Oliva-Hemker1

Andrew Maslen3
Harold P. Lehmann4
Paul Nagy5
Susan Hutﬂess6
Ayse P. Gurses3

1Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition,
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland,
United States
2Department of Health Policy and Management, Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine Armstrong Institute for Patient Safety
and Quality, Baltimore, Maryland, United States
3Information Technology at Johns Hopkins Health System, Epic
Project Leadership, Johns Hopkins Health System, Baltimore,
Maryland, United States
4Division of Health Science Informatics, Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, Maryland, United States

Appl Clin Inform 2023;14:345–353.

Address for correspondence Steven D. Miller, MD, MBE, Division of
Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition, Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, 600 North, Wolfe Street, CMSC 2-126,
Baltimore, MD 21287, United States (e-mail: Smill132@jhmi.edu).

5Department of Radiology, Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Johns Hopkins Technology Ventures, Baltimore, Maryland,
United States
6Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Johns Hopkins
University, Baltimore, Maryland, United States

Keywords
►clinical decision
support systems
►usability testing
►human-centered
decision
►clinical workﬂows

Abstract
Background
Inﬂammatory bowel disease (IBD) commonly leads to iron deﬁciency
anemia (IDA). Rates of screening and treatment of IDA are often low. A clinical decision
support system (CDSS) embedded in an electronic health record could improve
adherence to evidence-based care. Rates of CDSS adoption are often low due to
poor usability and ﬁt with work processes. One solution is to use human-centered
design (HCD), which designs CDSS based on identiﬁed user needs and context of use
and evaluates prototypes for usefulness and usability.
Objectives
this study aimed to use HCD to design a CDSS tool called the IBD Anemia
Diagnosis Tool, IADx.
Methods
Interviews with IBD practitioners informed creation of a process map of
anemia care that was used by an interdisciplinary team that used HCD principles to
create a prototype CDSS. The prototype was iteratively tested with “Think Aloud”
usability evaluation with clinicians as well as semi-structured interviews, a survey, and
observations. Feedback was coded and informed redesign.
Results
Process mapping showed that IADx should function at in-person encounters
and asynchronous laboratory review. Clinicians desired full automation of clinical
information acquisition such as laboratory trends and analysis such as calculation of
iron deﬁcit, less automation of clinical decision selection such as laboratory ordering,
and no automation of action implementation such as signing medication orders.
Providers preferred an interruptive alert over a noninterruptive reminder.
Conclusion
Providers preferred an interruptive alert, perhaps due to the low likeli-
hood of noticing a noninterruptive advisory. High levels of desire for automation of
information acquisition and analysis with less automation of decision selection and

received
November 15, 2022
accepted after revision
February 17, 2023
accepted manuscript online
February 21, 2023

Georg Thieme Verlag KG,
Rüdigerstraße 14,
70469 Stuttgart, Germany

DOI https://doi.org/
10.1055/a-2040-0578.
ISSN 1869-0327.

Case Report
345

Accepted Manuscript online: 2023-02-21   Article published online: 2023-05-10

Background and Signiﬁcance

Inﬂammatory bowel disease (IBD) affects up to 300,000
children in the United States1 and is characterized by gut
inﬂammation leading to bloody diarrhea, weight loss, and
multisystemic complications.2 The most common IBD com-
plication is iron deﬁciency anemia (IDA),3 which worsens
quality of life4 and developmental outcomes in children.5

Guideline-based IBD IDA care involves annual screening for
anemia and treatment with iron when deﬁciency is present,
but adherence to guidelines is often poor.6,7

Clinical decision support systems (CDSSs) integrated into
electronic health records (EHRs) provide an opportunity to
deliver evidence-based recommendations that are well inte-
grated into systems of care.8–11 Human-centered design
(HCD) has been applied to the development of CDSS12–15

to improve integration of CDSS tools into clinical workﬂows
and to improve usability with the goals of improving patient
safety, enhancing clinical outcomes, and improving process
efﬁciency, among other aims.12,13,16,17 HCD involves in-
depth analysis of work systems and care processes12,16,18

to inform design of a CDSS prototype, which undergoes
iterative
redesign
using
human
factors
(HF)
princi-
ples,12,19,20 taking into account the ﬁve “rights” of clinical
decision support (CDS).21 Key gaps in the research of HCD of
CDSS include methods of translating requirements into build
and demonstration of how HCD contributes to design.14,22

Objective

The objective was to use HCD methods to evaluate baseline
care practices to inform the iterative design of a CDSS that
was integrated into clinical workﬂows and designed to
improve IBD IDA care, the IBD Anemia Diagnosis Tool or IADx.

Methods

Organizational Setting
This study was conducted in the Pediatric Gastroenterology
Division at Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine.23 At
the time of the study, the division had 12 full-time faculty, 6
fellows, and 1 nurse practitioner who provided care to 500
childrenwith IBD. All research was conductedwith approval of
the institutional review board. An interdisciplinary team was
assembled including IBD experts (M.O.-H., S.H.), EHR software
developers (S.D.M. and A.M.), health informaticians (S.D.M., H.
P.L., Z.M., J.H.G., and P.N.), and an HF engineer (A.P.G.). ►Table 1
summarizes the methodology used to carry out the HCD and
formative evaluation of IADx.

Process Mapping
To determine the approach to anemia screening by clinicians,
semi-structured interviews were performed with a junior
and senior IBD clinician (S.D.M. and M.O.-H.) in the Pediatric
Gastroenterology Division using an interview guide (see
Supplementary Material A, available in the online version).
The interviewer used responses to draft a process map using
draw.io,24 which was validated in a follow-up interview.

IADx Prototype Design
A 1-hour virtual design meeting was held25 with health
informaticians and clinicians (S.D.M., H.P.L., and A.M.) in
which the process map was used to identify tasks that could
be supported by CDSS. The group selected an intervention
involving an interruptive alert with a linked order set. A
prototype was designed on paper and shown to senior IBD
researchers (M.O.H. and S.H.) for feedback. Over a series of
eight additional 30-minute design sessions, S.D.M. and A.M.
built a functioning EHR-based CDSS prototype in the

action may be generalizable to other CDSSs designed for chronic disease management.
This underlines the ways in which CDSSs have the potential to augment rather than
replace provider cognitive work.

Table 1 Summary of data collection methods and aims

Abbreviations: CDSS, clinical decision support system; SUS, system usability scale.34

Applied Clinical Informatics
Vol. 14

346

EpicCare Ambulatory EHR.26 Conditional rules were created
to identify patients with IBD. Evidence-based laboratory
thresholds27 were used to determine whether or not patients
had IDA and Health Maintenance Plans in Epic were linked to
laboratory monitoring tests. When the patient was due for at
least one laboratory or had IDA within the prior year and no
iron prescription, a best practice advisory (BPA) with a linked
order set with preselected laboratories and medications was
presented to the clinician.

Simulation-Based Usability Evaluation of the IADx
Prototype
Simulation-based evaluation was performed to iteratively re-
ﬁne the IADx prototype with clinician end-users using a “Think
Aloud” technique where users verbalized thoughts while using
IADx, a postexperimental short survey and a semi-structured
interview (see ►Table 1; ►Supplementary Materials B, C,
and D, available in the online version).28 The feedback was
recorded, transcribed, and analyzed for common themes,
which were incorporated into the redesign.8,29

Participants
Participants were recruited via email from active providers
with purposive sampling to include a variety of roles and
experience levels. No compensation was offered.

Clinical Scenarios and Tasks
IADx was tested in Epic TST at the Johns Hopkins University
Simulation Center using a “computer on wheels” worksta-
tion. A member of the study team (Z.M.) sat next to the
participant to guide the session, conduct observations
using an observation guide, perform semi-structured inter-
views,
and
record
responses
(see
►Supplementary
Materials B, C, and D, available in the online version).
Each end-user tested two simulated in-person ofﬁce visits
and two asynchronous In Basket encounters to review labo-
ratory results. Simulated patient records varied by (1) status
of anemia screening (screened vs. unscreened), (2) presence
of IDA (IDA vs. no IDA), (3) presence of iron treatment
(treated IDA vs. untreated IDA), and (4) interruptive vs.
noninterruptive alert. Order of encounters was randomized
using a modiﬁed Latin square method.30

Measures and Data Collection
Audio and video of the participant and computer screen were
recorded using B-Line Sim Capture,31 and other data were
collected on REDCap.32,33 After completion of all four sce-
narios by each participant, the System Usability Scale (SUS)34

was administered and semi-structured interviews were
performed (see ►Supplementary Material D, available in
the online version).

Data Analysis for Iterative Redesign of IADx
After each session, audio recordings were transcribed by study
staff and independently coded (S.D.M. and Z.M.) according to a
priori deﬁned categories of usability, visibility, workﬂow, con-
tent, understandability, practical usefulness, medical useful-
ness, and navigation (see
►Supplementary
Material
E,

available in the online version).8 Coders met to reconcile
differences. The coded data were interpreted using HF princi-
ples including the ﬁve “rights” of CDS21 with an HF engineer
(A.P.G.), and incorporated into tool redesign. Across each of the
two rounds of IADx redesign, participants were recruited until
all categories of “Think Aloud” feedback achieved theoretical
saturation.35 Task completion and perceived difﬁculty rates as
well as SUS score were compared between rounds by Fisher’s
exact test and t-test methods using R version 3.5.2.

Results

Process Map
Screening occurs in the context of clinic visits, wherein the
provider must remember to consider screening, order labo-
ratories, and remember to follow-up results. Iron treatment
was initiated on review of laboratory tests during clinic visits
or In Basket encounters (►Fig. 1) and required calculation
of dosage, ordering of follow-up laboratories, and patient/
family education.

IADx Design
During the initial design meetings, IADx was created to act at
the steps of screening for IDA, interpretation of laboratory
results, and ordering of iron and repeat IDA screening for
patients found to have IDA (►Fig. 1). The initial IADx proto-
type displayed laboratories for which the patient was due
and linked to an order set containing laboratory orders, iron
orders, and patient instructions, which were preselected and
editable by the user.

“Think Aloud” Usability Testing Results
Six providers participated across two rounds of testing.
Participant characteristics except for years in practice were
similar between rounds (►Table 2).

►Table 3 summarizes “Think Aloud” and semi-structured
interview comments across two rounds of testing with
related design choices, HF principles, and process implica-
tions. ►Fig. 2A and B contain screenshots of IADx with
highlighted HF redesign principles. Coded provider feedback
was incorporated into iterative redesign. In round one,
providers desired to “see a trend” of laboratories and normal
values to make treatment decisions, so laboratory trends and
normal ranges were added. End-users raised concerns about
redundant and confusing features in the tool including
laboratory due dates, so these were removed. Providers
reported not using oral iron to treat IDA but preferred
intravenous (IV) iron with desire for auto-calculation of
the treatment dose of IV iron.
Comments from round two afﬁrmed that end-users felt a
pop-up alert would be preferred as it “really bring your
attention to the anemia,” and that the pop-up should ﬁre at
the time of order entry. “Think Aloud” feedback showed that
providers preferred a more streamlined CDSS without a
comment box in the pop-up alert but with a link to pertinent
order sets. In addition to laboratory trends, providers
requested data on iron prescriptions, which were added.
See ►Table 3 and ►Fig. 2B for examples.

Applied Clinical Informatics
Vol. 14

347

SUS scores were similar across rounds with mean (stan-
dard deviation) scores of 77.5 (5.0) in round one and 75.0
(7.5) in round two, with no major change in score on any
individual question. Most activities were completed easily or
with little difﬁculty except placement of laboratory orders,
which was difﬁcult 33% of the time in round one and 0% in
round two.

Discussion

Here, we present the HCD of IADx from development of a
process map through iterative prototyping with formative
usability evaluation to create a usable CDSS tool. We show
how HF principles can be incorporated into CDSS creation at

each stage of prototype development22 within a commercial
EHR.12,36

Lessons Learned

• A striking result of the “Think Aloud” feedback was the
provider preference for an interruptive alert. Prior studies
have shown that interruptive alerts are frequently dis-
abled37,38 due to inappropriate alert triggering, poor
usability, or poor ﬁt with the workﬂow,39 with recom-
mendation to avoid using interruptive alerts for non-
emergent
CDSS.40,41
There
is
some
evidence
that
interruptive alerts do cause more change in provider
behavior than noninterruptive alerts,39 giving credence

Fig. 1
Process map for care of children with anemia and inﬂammatory bowel disease before and after IADx. Black lines indicate baseline and
post-IADx workﬂow. Red lines are replaced by IADx. Blue lines indicate actions taken over by IADx. IADx, IBD Anemia Diagnosis Tool; HMP, health
maintenance plan; IBD, inﬂammatory bowel disease; IDA, iron deﬁciency anemia.

Applied Clinical Informatics
Vol. 14

348

to the idea that a noninterruptive IADx would commonly
be ignored.42 Provider preference may partly be explained
by the fact that users were only offered the options of
either an interruptive or noninterruptive BPA. A non-
interruptive alert could be preferred, as in the Vitamin
D soft stop reminder at order entry in Hendrickson et al,43

or the dynamic order set to impact inpatient blood
utilization as in Ikoma et al.42 Alternatively, providers
may tolerate this interruptive alert since it was custom-
ized to local need, occurred at the time in the workﬂow,
and
contained
sufﬁcient
information
for
decision
making.21,44,45

• “Think Aloud” testing showed the provider preference for
high levels of automation of information acquisition and
analysis with some automation of decision selection
(laboratories but not medications), and no automation
of action implementation.46 In the case of IADx, the low
risk of laboratory ordering and the higher risk of iron
medication may have contributed to this preference.
Other studies on HCD of CDSS tools similarly showed
that providers valued auto-retrieval of key data and

Table 2 Participant demographics

Abbreviation: BPA, best practice alert.

Table 3 End user feedback mapped to design principles and process implications

(Continued)

Applied Clinical Informatics
Vol. 14

349

prepopulation of available clinical information16 but pre-
ferred that ultimate decisions about what to do with the
automatically gathered and analyzed information be left
to the end-user.12

• Using HF principles to interpret end-user feedback for
iterative redesign of IADx resulted in a tool that put
everything needed for a decision on a single screen16

through medication history in the linked BPA, patient
information summary, laboratory trends with normal
ranges, and built-in calculators. We would have liked to
format the laboratory trends and normal ranges in a more
visually elegant tabular display, but limitations of the EHR
environment precluded this. A future IADx iteration could
be
implemented
using
web-based
tools
including
CDSHooks47 and Smart on FHIR48 to allow for scaling
across sites and improved ﬂexibility in the presentation of
patient-level data pertinent to decision making.

Limitations
This single-center study created a tool in response to local
factors, which may limit the generalizability. Due to time
and funding constraints, the baseline workﬂow evaluation
only incorporated interviews with two physician practi-
tioners
rather
than
more
in-depth
methodology,49,50

potentially missing opportunity for interventions besides
an interruptive alert. The small number of volunteer par-
ticipants may introduce self-selection bias for end-users
interested in technology. The study focused on feedback
from provider end-users, missing input from other mem-

bers of the care team. This study was limited only to
the formative design of a CDSS rather than outcomes of
implementation, which is of critical need to steer HCD
methodology in directions that produce not just usable and
workﬂow-integrated tools but ones that improve real-
world clinical outcomes. Many of these limitations can be
addressed in a future multi-center CDSS development and
implementation effort.

Conclusion

This study presents the HCD of IADx, a tool to improve IDA
care in children with IBD. The principles of high levels of
automation of information acquisition and analysis but more
limited automation of decision selection and action imple-
mentation may be broadly applicable to the development of
other CDSS tools. In some cases, locally developed CDSS that
is well-integrated into existing workﬂows may be usefully
deployed as an interruptive alert
when preferred by
providers.

Clinical Relevance Statement

HCD helps develop CDSS tools that are integrated into clinical
workﬂows. Practitioners want CDSS that automates infor-
mation acquisition and analysis, but prefer that clinical
decisions be left to the provider. CDSS that is well integrated
into the workﬂow can in some cases be implemented as an
interruptive alert, even for nonemergent clinical processes.

Abbreviation: BPA, best practice alert; IV, intravenous.

Applied Clinical Informatics
Vol. 14

350

Multiple-Choice Questions

1. What are the beneﬁts of human-centered design of clini-
cal decision support systems?
a. Increased clinical throughput.
b. Improved integration into clinical workﬂows.
c. Shortened software development lifecycle.
d. Reduced requirement for clinical support staff.

Correct Answer: The correct answer is option b. Expla-
nation: Human-centered design (HCD) has been applied
to the development of clinical decision support systems
(CDSS) as it brings a focus to people, tasks, and systems
and seeks to incorporate human factors principles into
design. HCD has been shown to improve integration of
CDSS tools into clinical workﬂows and to improve usabil-
ity. HCD involves in-depth analysis of work systems and
care processes to understand cognition and tasks. This
evaluation informs the design requirements and develop-
ment of a CDSS prototype, which undergoes iterative

redesign using HF principles by a multidisciplinary team,
incorporating
feedback
end-users
on
CDSS
design
characteristics.

2. In the case of IADx, which cognitive processes did practi-
tioners want to be addressed by the clinical decision
support system?
a. Information analysis
b. Action implementation
c. Machine learning
d. Process redesign

Correct Answer: The correct answer is option a. Explana-
tion: Clinicianend-users universally desiredthat the clinical
decision support system (CDSS) would automate informa-
tion acquisition and information analysis. Providers were
somewhat split about whether the CDSS should automate
decision selection with preference to select laboratories for
subsequent provider signature but not medications. Pro-
viders did not want automation of action implementation
by the CDSS,suchashaving thesystemactually place orders.

Fig. 2 IADx across two iterations. (A) 1. Interruptive alert after one round of feedback. 2. Best practice advisory patient data summary after one
round of feedback. 3. Best practice advisory data summary and laboratory orders after one round of feedback. 4. Best practice advisory
laboratory and medication orders after one round of feedback. IADx build after incorporating feedback from round one of usability
evaluation. (B) 1. Interruptive alert after two rounds of feedback. 2. Normal values' table after two rounds of feedback. 3. Best practice
advisory medication orders after two rounds of feedback. IADx build after incorporating feedback from round two of usability testing. (C) No
legend. (D) Total iron binding capacity. (E) No legend. IADx, IBD Anemia Diagnosis Tool.

Applied Clinical Informatics
Vol. 14

351

Protection of Human and Animal Subjects
The study was performed in compliance with the World
Medical Association Declaration of Helsinki on Ethical
Principles for Medical Research Involving Human Sub-
jects, and was reviewed by Johns Hopkins University
Institutional Review Board.

Conﬂict of Interest
The authors have no ﬁnancial or personal relationships
with people or organizations that could inappropriately
inﬂuence or bias the objectivity of the submitted content.
The authors have no conﬂicts of interest.