ORIGINAL ARTICLE

Human-Centered Design for Public Health Innovation:
Codesigning a Multicomponent Intervention to Support Youth
Across the HIV Care Continuum in Mozambique

Trena I. Mukherjee,a Allison Zerbe,b Joanna Falcao,c Shauna Carey,d Alexandra Iaccarino,d Brynn Kolada,d

Bruno Olmedo,d Cady Shadwick,d Hitesh Singhal,d Lauren Weinstein,d Mirriah Vitale,c

Eduarda De Pimentel De Gusmao,c Elaine J. Abramsa,b,e

Key Findings

n
Using human-centered design (HCD), key learnings
identified opportunities for intervention to promote
viral suppression and improve ART adherence and
retention in care among adolescents and young
people living with HIV (AYAHIV). Opportunities
included fostering a sense of belonging and peer
connectedness with other AYAHIV, providing
contextually resonant medical knowledge that fits the
unique context of adolescence and young adulthood,
reducing misconceptions and stigma surrounding
HIV, and cultivating a sense of hope for AYAHIV.

n
Intervention components include a media campaign to
reduce HIV stigma and increase medical literacy; a
toolkit to help providers communicate and address the
unique needs of AYAHIV clients; peer-support groups
to improve medical literacy, empower youth, and
provide positive role models for people living with HIV;
support groups for parents/caregivers; and discreet pill
containers to promote adherence outside the home.

Key Implications

n
Public health practitioners should consider how HCD
provides a pathway for public health innovation,
shortens the research to practice gap, engages
marginalized communities, and integrates novel
interventions into existing complex systems when
coupled with other synergistic research methods
such as implementation science.

Resumo em português no final do artigo.

ABSTRACT
Adolescents and young people represent a growing proportion
of people living with HIV (AYAHIV), and there is an urgent
need to design, implement, and test interventions that retain
AYAHIV in care. Using a human-centered design (HCD) ap-
proach, we codesigned CombinADO, an intervention to pro-
mote HIV viral suppression and improve antiretroviral therapy
(ART) adherence and retention in care among AYAHIV in
Nampula, Mozambique. The HCD process involves formative
design research with AYAHIV, health care providers, parents/
caretakers, and experts in adolescent HIV; synthesis of findings
to generate action-oriented insights; ideation and prototyping
of intervention components; and a pilot study to assess feasibil-
ity, acceptability, and uptake of intervention components.
CombinADO promotes ART adherence and retention in care by
fostering peer connectedness and belonging, providing accessi-
ble medical knowledge, demystifying and destigmatizing HIV,
and cultivating a sense of hope among AYAHIV. Successful pro-
totypes included a media campaign to reduce HIV stigma and in-
crease medical literacy; a toolkit to help providers communicate
and address the unique needs of AYAHIV clients; peer-support
groups to improve medical literacy, empower youth, and provide
positive role models for people living with HIV; support groups
for parents/caregivers; and discreet pill containers to promote
adherence outside the home. In the next phase, the effectiveness
of CombinaADO on retention in care, ART adherence, and viral
suppression will be evaluated using a cluster-randomized control
trial.
We demonstrate the utility of using HCD to cocreate a multicom-
ponent intervention to retain AYAHIV in care. We also discuss
how the HCD methodology enriches participatory methods and
community engagement. This is then illustrated by the youth-
driven intervention development of CombinADO by fostering
youth empowerment, addressing power imbalances between
youth and adult stakeholders, and ensuring that language and
content remain adolescent friendly.

INTRODUCTION
H

IV is the leading cause of death among adolescents
and young adults in sub-Saharan Africa, and the
second leading cause of death globally.1 Mozambique is
among the 10 countries with the highest HIV prevalence

aDepartment of Epidemiology, Columbia Mailman School of Public Health, New
York, NY, USA.
bICAP at Columbia University Mailman School of Public Health, New York, NY,
USA.
cICAP at Columbia University, Maputo, Mozambique.
dIDEO.org, New York, NY, USA.
eDepartment of Pediatrics, Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons,
Columbia University, New York, NY, USA.
Correspondence to Trena Mukherjee (tm2925@cumc.columbia.edu).

1

(12.6%) globally, and among the 6 countries that
account for more than half the population of ado-
lescents living with HIV (ALHIV).2,3 With nearly
two-thirds of the population under age 25 years,
and nearly half (47%) under age 15 years,4

Mozambique is facing a substantial youth bulge.
There are an estimated 140,000 adolescents
(aged 10–19 years) and 320,000 young people
(aged 15–24 years) living with HIV (AYAHIV) in
Mozambique, and AYAHIV remain a vulnerable
population.5 Although nearly 70% of ALHIV glob-
ally acquired HIV infection through vertical trans-
mission,6 adolescents and young people are at
greater risk for acquiring HIV due to multiple and
intersecting forms of discrimination and structural
inequality, lack of access to age-appropriate health
services, high rates of poverty, unemployment,
and illiteracy.7 Poor HIV and sexual health knowl-
edge contribute to disproportionate rates of HIV in
Mozambique, where only 30% of adolescent boys
and girls know how to prevent HIV.3 For adoles-
cent girls and young women, early sexual debut
and high unmet need for family planning contrib-
ute to poor health outcomes, and 3 of every 5 girls
aged 15–19 years in Nampula, Mozambique
have had at least 1 pregnancy.8 Despite recent
progress, viral suppression among AYAHIV, parti-
cularly adolescent boys and young men, remains
lower than adults aged 25 years and older and is
negatively correlated with age. Among AYAHIV
aged 10–14 years, 15–19 years, and 20–24 years,
viral suppression is 64%, 72%, and 80% among
females, respectively, and 60%, 62%, and
75% among males, respectively.4

To achieve the UNAIDS 95-95-95 goals, an in-
tegrated approach across the HIV care continuum
is needed for AYAHIV. Health systems are dynam-
ic, resource constrained, and interconnected. For
this reason, complex health interventions that ad-
dress multiple, intersecting factors at the individu-
al, interpersonal, community, and societal levels
and that adapt to local contexts are essential for
addressing the HIV epidemic.9 Prior evidence sug-
gests using a combination approach that consists
of biomedical, structural, and behavioral interven-
tions is best suited for addressing AYAHIV.10 A
systematic review of recent (i.e., those published
between 2015–2019) interventions to improve
antiretroviral therapy (ART) adherence among
AYAHIV in lower- and middle-income countries
identified only 7 interventions.11 The 3 interven-
tions at the individual level were not found to im-
prove ART adherence and viral suppression. Of
the 4 interventions at the community level, the
2 interventions that included home-based visits

from community-based support workers or peer
counselors significantly improved ART adherence.
Thus, interventions designed to target a single
barrier to ART adherence are insufficient, and a
combination of interventions is warranted. To
maximize uptake of a combination of interven-
tions, the dynamic nature of contextual factors
must be taken into account across the individual,
community, and policy contexts.12 Therefore, the
integration of interventions into existing practice
must be considered early in the process of program
development and implementation. Furthermore,
acknowledging that AYAHIV are not a homoge-
nous population and that they are influenced
by peers, family, and their community, tailored
approaches are crucial to meet the unique chal-
lenges, strengths, and opportunities that adoles-
cents and young people possess.10,13

Human-centered design (HCD) is a person-
based approach for social innovation that is well-
suited for developing interventions in partnership
with youth.14 The HCD approach helps shape
interventions that are grounded in the needs and
desires of AYAHIV and other stakeholders across
the health system and optimizes the likelihood
that interventions will be integrated into existing
health systems.15 Initially developed in the private
sector, HCD seeks to develop services and products
based on a holistic understanding of consumer
needs, aspirations, and behaviors and has been
successfully employed by the private sector to de-
velop products such as the retail experience at the
Apple store and Oral-B toothbrushes.16 More re-
cently, HCD has been employed by the public
sector to develop programs, services, or products
for social innovation.17 The U.S. President’s
Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR), the
U.S. Agency for International Development
(USAID), and their implementing partners have
used HCD to promote HIV prevention and re-
productive health globally. Examples include
pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) rollout in
Zambia;18,19 integrating sexual and reproduc-
tive health and HIV testing and prevention20

with promoting ART adherence for adolescent
girls and young women in Rwanda;21 improv-
ing TB preventative treatment uptake among
people living with HIV in Kenya;22 and promot-
ing HIV service uptake among men who have
sex with men in the Philippines.23

Although HCD is increasingly being employed
to develop public health services and programs, it
remains a novel approach to intervention devel-
opment and dissemination in global health re-
search.15,24 In this article, we introduced HCD as

Based on prior
evidence of
interventions for
AYAHIV, we
conclude that
interventions that
target a single
barrier to ART
adherence are
insufficient.

2

an approach that enriched participatory meth-
ods and fostered community engagement when
developing complex, multicomponent interven-
tions. HCD methodology is then illustrated by
the CombinADO study, which aimed to promote
HIV viral suppression and improve ART adherence
and retention in care among AYAHIV in Nampula,
Mozambique. Finally, we conclude with a discus-
sion of the advantages of using an HCD approach to
cocreate acceptable, feasible, and sustainable inter-
ventions and how this method is particularly well
suited for youth populations.

METHODS

What Is Human-Centered Design (HCD)?
HCD is a creative problem-solving approach for
developing, refining, and testing products, pro-
grams, and services.16 This approach is adaptive
and flexible by employing a structured, interactive
approach for engaging stakeholders (e.g., adoles-
cents, people living with HIV, health care workers
[HCWs], and policy makers) in rapid iteration cycles
that diverge (create choices) and converge (make
choices) until a concept is determined to be viable,
feasible, and desirable by key stakeholders to ensure
that interventions are both wanted and sustainable.
Through the application of design thinking,
HCD seeks to understand the diverse dynamic
interconnections within a complex system to un-
derstand barriers and facilitators of implementa-
tion and scale-up. While HCD offers an approach
to inciting empathy to define and understand the
problem and to designing and evaluating solu-
tions, design thinking is the iterative process that
leads to the development of solutions that are via-
ble, feasible, and desirable.
HCD also facilitates interdisciplinary collabo-
ration among stakeholders with diverse back-
grounds25 that may include individuals with
subject matter and/or design expertise in a variety
of fields such as sociology, public health, systems
science, systems or service design, visual or graph-
ic design, and design research. As a participatory
approach, HCD also facilitates empowerment and
collective ownership by integrating community
members into the research team. As active mem-
bers of the research team, communities assist
with identifying appropriate research questions,
data collection, interpretation of results, interven-
tion development, adaptation, and implementa-
tion strategies. The ability to empathize is crucial
for HCD and allows researchers to set aside their
own assumptions and gain real insight into the
needs, wants, and aspirations of the communities

for whom they are developing interventions. This
allows communities to confront the issues that im-
pact them most, address community resistance up
front, incorporate community values to generate
buy-in, and build consensus early on.
The HCD approach and design thinking pro-
cesses can vary by organization.24 However, HCD
consists of distinct phases in which the problem is
first identified and defined (i.e., inspiration); early
concepts are generated, tested, and refined (i.e.,
ideation); and solutions are integrated into the larg-
er system (i.e., implementation) (Figure 1).24,26

Figure 1 and Box 1 provide an overview of HCD
and the design thinking process that the design
firm IDEO.org used for this project.26 Although dis-
played linearly, it is important to note that design
thinking may be cyclical, and it is not uncommon
to circle back to previous steps.25

Development of the CombinADO Intervention
In 2018, the National Institute of Child Health and
Development put out a request for research propo-
sals to generate much-needed scientific innovation
to yield effective public health interventions for
young people affected by HIV in resource-limited
settings
Prevention
and
Treatment
through
a
Comprehensive Care Continuum for HIV-affected
Adolescents
in
Resource
Constrained
Settings
(PATC3H).27 Researchers from ICAP at Columbia
University, in collaboration with the Mozambique
Ministry of Health, were awarded a grant to use
HCD to complete formative research to design
(Phase 1, Figure 2) and evaluate (Phase 2) a combina-
tion intervention to improve HIV-related health out-
comes among AYAHIV in Nampula, Mozambique.
This article solely focuses on intervention develop-
ment, which was completed in Phase 1.
To develop the intervention, research investi-
gators collaborated with IDEO.org, a nonprofit or-
ganization that specializes in partnering with
organizations and using HCD methodology to
develop and scale products and services for social
innovation. To develop a multicomponent, clinic-
based intervention to improve uptake of ART
among young people living with HIV, design
researchers from IDEO.org and research investiga-
tors from ICAP and the Mozambique Ministry of
Health attended several in-person meetings in
New York to develop a research plan and protocol,
followed by 16 weeks of data collection and inter-
vention prototyping in Nampula (Figure 2).

Study Participants
We purposively recruited seropositive and sero-
negative adolescents (aged 15–18 years; n=4) and

HCD uses a
structured and
interactive
approach to
engage
stakeholders in
rapid iteration
cycles until a
concept is deemed
viable, feasible,
and desirable by
key stakeholders.

3

young people (aged 19–24 years; n=19), parents
of AYAHIV (n=6), key community influencers
(n=7), health care providers (n=5), and national
and international youth HIV experts (n=7) in
Nampula, Mozambique. Purposive sampling is
typical for HCD as the goal is to understand the
environment and context rather than the gener-
alizability of findings. Participants were exclud-
ed if they did not fit the group profile or were
unable to provide assent/consent. Study activi-
ties varied based on participant preference, pro-
file, availability during study activities, and
scheduling constraints (Figure 3). Participants
were compensated 300 MZN (US$5) for their
time and transportation.

Ethics Approval
This study was approved by ethical review
boards at Columbia University Medical Center
and
the
Mozambique
National
Bio-Ethics
Committee for Health in July 2019. All adult
participants provided written consent, and all
youth participants provided written assent and
obtained parent/guardian consent before engag-
ing in any research activities.

RESULTS
We provide an overview of the HCD approach
employed by IDEO.org (Box 1), followed by
our findings.

Design Research
The goals of design research were to: (1) learn what
motivates and incentivizes young people as related
to health and wellness; (2) identify the unique bar-
riers and facilitators for ART adherence for young
people; (3) understand who young people trust,
which relationships are supportive, and learn how
they obtain health information; and (4) identify
factors that influence young people’s decision mak-
ing, information access, and health knowledge.
Design research was completed with a total of
51 stakeholders over 4 weeks: 26 young adults
aged 19–24 years, 4 adolescents aged 15–18 years,
9 key stakeholders, 6 parents of AYAHIV, 5 health
care providers, and 1 young social media influen-
cer in Nampula, Mozambique. Methods included
ranking and card sort activities to understand
who adolescents and young people trusted in a va-
riety of health-related situations, identify the most
common barriers and motivators for ART adher-
ence, and confirm or refine hypotheses. Local
translators and artists assisted with data collection
and created materials used throughout design re-
search (e.g., interactive data collection tools;
Figure 3). Synthesis of design research findings to
identify the learnings outlined in Figure 3 was
completed over 4 weeks. Synthesis was primarily
led by IDEO.org and the ICAP study team and
was refined and clarified for language and content
by AYAHIV using the methodology outlined in
Box 1.

FIGURE 1. What Is Human-Centered Design?

4

Design research revealed that adolescents
were most comfortable talking to their parents or
caretakers about their HIV status. In contrast, ado-
lescents were comfortable talking about sex with
their friends but not their parents. Aunts/uncles

were someone who both represented the trust of
parents and the informality of friends, and adoles-
cents were more willing to open up to them about
sex and even HIV. Participants cited lack of food,
lack of social (family) support, and discrimination

FIGURE 2.
Timeline of Human-Centered Design Approach to Developing the CombinADO Intervention in
Mozambique

BOX 1. IDEO.org’s Five Steps for Design Thinking

Design Research Defines the Problem
Design research involves contextual mapping and formative research to identify a community’s needs, wants, desires, and constraints. The goal of
design research is to understand communities, their influences, and obtain a wide range of experiences using a rapid and flexible process.
Although quantitative data may be collected, qualitative data using ethnographic or anthropological methods are most often used to allow for
the researcher to be more embedded within the community and to learn through observations. Data capture involves rapid field notes, photos,
videos, or artifacts (e.g., products purchased from a local market or drug store) to enable rich storytelling through visual or media output. Data are
then transferred to sticky notes, in which 1 key finding, quote, or image is placed onto a sticky for data management. Although unconventional in
traditional research, sticky notes allow for data that are concise and distilled into its simplest form to enable quick written or visual data sharing.

Insights Identify Opportunities for Intervention
In the next phase, synthesis involves rapid, flexible, and iterative analysis of design research findings to generate actionable insights and to identify
areas for intervention (“design opportunities”). The use of sticky notes allows for rapid data processing as data are grouped and regrouped to
identify themes. Themes that emerge from design research are distilled into succinct statements that summarize the most valuable research findings
(“insights”). Synthesis frameworks can be applied to inform intervention development by eliciting empathy and using visual storytelling to commu-
nicate messages to place findings in context and understand the human experience of the user.

Ideation Brainstorms Potential Solutions to Problem
Ideation starts with generating open-ended “how might we” statements in response to the insights developed during synthesis. These statements
reframe the problem as an opportunity to elicit a large number of ideas for innovative solutions. Once the ideation session is complete, the ideas
are consolidated, refined, and short-listed based on feasibility, desirability, and viability constraints.

Prototyping Allows Rapid Hypothesis Testing
Unique to human-centered design is the process of prototyping individual components of an intervention, with the goal of developing a combina-
tion intervention that intersects desirability, feasibility, and sustainability upon scale-up. Prototyping enables hypothesis testing, challenges under-
lying assumptions, and facilitates learning from small scale, intentional “failures” in a controlled setting. Through rapid cycles of iterative
cocreation, feedback is gathered from individuals, their peers, and influencers. Prototypes are then iterated and improved upon in the next cycle
until an optimal intervention is developed for larger-scale testing.

Implementation Scales Up Sustainable Solutions
Once desirable, feasible, and sustainable prototypes are developed, they are ready to be combined and evaluated in a small-scale pilot. During
implementation, the intervention is integrated into the larger system, and all products, services, and branding are finalized and scaled up. The final
intervention is then monitored and evaluated through various study designs (e.g., randomized control trial).

Design research
participants cited
lack of food, lack
of social
support, and
discrimination due
to stigma as the
most common
barriers to
adherence.

5

due to stigma as the most common barriers to
adherence. Interestingly, social support is equated
with parents and not friends. Participants re-
cognized that solutions must include the commu-
nity as well as the individual, and adolescents
preferred holistic, motivation-based approaches
(e.g., a sports league, mental health support, and
classes to develop their professional skills) in addi-
tion to things like medication reminders. Staying
healthy was the primary motivation for ART ad-
herence, but adherence in the present was gener-
ally not associated with success and achievement
in the future.
The research team also completed several infor-
mal observations of health services to be able to
empathize with adolescents and young people in
Nampula. Through this, they learned that there is
little privacy during HIV testing and little dialogue
about the implications of the test result or about
sexual behavior and prevention moving forward.
The adolescent support groups missed the opportu-
nity to empower youth to engage in peer support.
Time spent with AYAHIV revealed how HIV

interferes and hinders their lifestyle and a lack of
representation of healthy AYAHIV. Messaging re-
garding how HIV affects lifestyle (not just health),
how to achieve success, and how to form peer con-
nections resonated the most with AYAHIV.
Finally, key informant interviews with experts
in the field of adolescent HIV (e.g., ICAP project
staff, health facility directors, and staff from re-
gional health offices and the Ministry of Health)
indicated that there was a lack of understanding
of why prior programs had failed and that future
programming must be adaptable, responsive to
evolving client needs, and considerate of local cul-
ture to be successful.

Insights
Synthesis led to several insights at the individu-
al, interpersonal, and community levels. These
insights were developed with the emotional ex-
perience across the HIV care continuum (i.e.,
journey mapping) and behavioral adherence
archetypes (i.e., personas) in mind.

FIGURE 3. Design Research Findings With Key Stakeholders on ART Adherence for AYAHIV in Mozambiquea

Abbreviations: ART, antiretroviral therapy; AYAHIV, adolescents and young people living with HIV.

aMore details about each method can be found at: https://www.designkit.org/methods.

We developed
insights with the
emotional
experience across
the HIV care
continuum.

6

Individual


Drug fatigue isn’t just about pills—it’s about
giving up on the future.


People are motivated by what ART can do for
their lifestyle, not their cells.

Interpersonal


People will sacrifice their health to protect their
secret.


Young people have to continually “relearn”
how to live with HIV at every big life milestone.


Caregivers are the most important but often
least prepared source of support for unmarried
teens.


The potential consequences of disclosure keep
married people from their most powerful ad-
herence asset: their partners.

Community


In the uncertainty of poverty, people will trade
tomorrow for today.


Finding community amidst the loneliness of se-
crecy makes a lifelong journey feel possible.


Contextually incompatible medical informa-
tion causes gaps in ART adherence.


Many people believe “If I don’t feel sick, I don’t
need meds.”


Where culture and science clash, people find
confidence in compromise (i.e., the use of tradi-
tional cultural practices and Western medicine
[ART]).


When it comes to HIV, seeing is believing.


Traditional gender roles inhibit men’s access to
HIV testing and treatment.

Ideation
Eight “how might we” statements (Box 2) inspired
idea generation of hundreds of potential solutions.
Solutions were then sorted, ranked, and narrowed
down into testable concepts based on accessibility,
contextual relevance, and feasibility and were
mapped out across the user journey and personas
developed during synthesis. IDEO.org led ideation
sessions in partnership with research staff from
ICAP. AYAHIV and caregivers participated in
cocreation workshops to further refine concepts
and messaging.

Prototyping
AYAHIV and health care providers cocreated pro-
totypes alongside local artists and the research
team. Low fidelity, rough prototypes were tested
with 99 individuals including AYAHIV (n=63),
caretakers (n=8), health care providers (n=5),
community members (HIV-positive or -negative)
(n=18), HIV peer support group facilitators (n=2),
and codesigners/translators (n=3) over 2 weeks.
Prototypes were evaluated for acceptability, desir-
ability, feasibility, ability to address barriers to ART
adherence and impact on behavior change and ad-
herence. Data captured during initial prototyping
sessions included observational data of partici-
pants interacting with prototypes, qualitative
feedback, and brief open-ended surveys. These
data were then interpreted by the research team,
and key learnings were summarized. Prototypes
that were removed from consideration included
a motivational diary, loyalty cards, storytelling

BOX 2. How Might We Support Youth Across the HIV Care Continuum?

1.
How might we redesign the testing moment to equip patients with the right information and motivation to engage
with and adhere to their treatment?

2.
How might we leverage checkups to reengage and troubleshoot beyond just measuring viral load?

3.
How might we alleviate poverty-related barriers so that all young people have a chance to thrive on antiretroviral
therapy (ART)?

4.
How might we strengthen people's motivation to adhere to ART to go beyond “staying healthy”?

5.
How might we help people living with HIV find a community that helps them thrive?

6.
How might we support the trust circles of people living with HIV to support them and their treatment journey in the
best possible way?

7.
How might we destigmatize and normalize the mainstream narrative around HIV to increase retention and
adherence?

8.
How might we protect and enable people's discretion to facilitate their retention and adherence?

7

nights, and 1:1 peer support due to privacy and
disclosure concerns (Figure 4). Ultimately, 12 pro-
totypes spanning the HIV care continuum were
selected;
core
components
included
support
groups, media campaigns, and HIV treatment
toolkits. Each component was then rated by the
research team (Figure 5) based on acceptability,
feasibility (set up and ongoing effort), influence
on key barriers identified through design research,
and changes needed in the next round of
prototyping.
Prototypes were iterated and improved upon
or removed based on key learnings related to

barriers and facilitators of ART adherence. Key
learnings included that there is a culture of secrecy
and fear surrounding HIV that prevents young
people and their caregivers from connecting with
other people living with HIV. However, AYAHIV
can foster a sense of belonging, build confidence,
and provide healthy examples of people living
with HIV by placing ART adherence within
the context of their daily lives. Moreover, provid-
ing contextually relevant medical information
enables young people to understand the benefits
and consequences of ART, so that they are better
equipped and motivated to make choices that are

The top panel displays the application of synthesis frameworks (user journey by personas). The bottom panel
displays the process of narrowing down concepts after ideation. ©2019 IDEO.org

Key learnings
included that
there is a culture
of secrecy and fear
surrounding HIV
that prevents
young people and
their caregivers
from connecting
with other people
living with HIV.

8

FIGURE 5. Prototyping: Lessons Learned

FIGURE 4. Prototyping Across the HIV Care Continuum

9

conducive to adherence. Prior insights highlighted
the need for increased knowledge about ART that
is culturally congruent. Finally, HIV stigma is a
major barrier to adherence, which is impacted by
social situations, relationships, and community
perceptions of HIV. HIV knowledge and empathy
are needed to demystify and destigmatize HIV at
the community level and to encourage disclosure
of HIV status to caregivers or partners, who offer
powerful adherence support.
During prototyping, positive feedback from
community members included:

HIV materials usually have drawings. These posters re-
mind us that real people who are smiling and healthy
have HIV too. —AYAHIV

I learned to give real support and how to respond if any
child comes to me when they are being discriminated
against because of HIV. I will hug her and give her a
kiss. —Community member, HIV status unknown

I had no idea 1 in 10 people in Mozambique have HIV.
People in my life might have it, or the people I work with
at the market. Why do we discriminate against it when
it’s so common? I don't think I could discriminate
against the people I love. —Patient at a health clinic,
HIV status unknown

The 12 prototypes (i.e., intervention compo-
nents) were combined into a multicomponent
intervention to be evaluated in a pilot study
(Figure 5). Altogether, components were designed
to promote adherence and retention in care
by fostering peer connectedness and belonging
(e.g., peer support); providing accessible medical
knowledge (e.g., youth-friendly clinic experi-
ence); demystifying and destigmatizing HIV; and
cultivating a sense of hope among AYAHIV (e.g.,
community empathy building) (Figure 6).
Each
intervention
component
was
then
piloted at 2 urban health facilities in Nampula,
Mozambique, over 12 weeks (July 2020–October
2020). Cross-sectional data were collected to eval-
uate acceptability, feasibility, and uptake of each
component using direct observations (n=24) and
exit interviews (n=74) after clinical consultations
with AYAHIV; semistructured interviews with
AYAHIV (n=42), HCWs (n=4), and key infor-
mants (n=2); focus group discussions (FGDs);
and quantitative surveys with clients at each
health facility (n=60). Descriptive statistics of
quantitative survey data were completed in
Stata.28 Interviews and FGDs were completed in
Portuguese and then translated and transcribed.
NVivo 12 was used to identify themes and emer-
gent codes.29

FIGURE 6. The Final Multicomponent CombinADO Interventiona

aPeer-support groups unable to be piloted during coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.

10

HCWs recorded the total number of times they
used the self-reflection kit, motivational wall,
pillboxes, treatment tool kit, and informational
wall daily. During the 12-week pilot, a total of
452 AYAHIV were seen across both health facili-
ties. On average, the self-reflection kit was used
83% of the time, the motivational wall 91%, pill-
boxes 72%, and treatment tool kit 88%.
Direct observation of clinical consultations
indicates that the pill containers were used
92% of the time, motivational wall 88%, self-
reflection tool kit 79%, and the treatment tool
kit 75%. Exit interviews with AYAHIV clients in-
dicated that the majority used all CombinADO
tools, with the treatment toolkit used the least
(73%), and the video used the most (99%).
FGDs with the AYAHIV indicate that all proto-
types were highly acceptable and appealed to cli-
ents of all ages and gender.

These posters are more innovative; they are more up to
date. There are certain posters at the health facility, for
example about TB, where they do not use real people
there. Now, these posters show real images, phrases,
and motivational messages, and the people themselves
who passed those messages. The messages are confirmed
by the images. —AYAHIV health facility client

In-depth interviews with the clients revealed
that AYAHIV thought that the video and the treat-
ment toolkits were the most useful tool to improve
adherence and retention and minimize feelings of
loneliness and stigma. More than 90% of AYAHIV
who used the treatment toolkit and watched the vid-
eo agreed that they had learned something new
about ART and that these tools would help them
with ART adherence. Themes drawn from in-depth
interviews with AYAHIV included that these tools
showed them that they can have a healthy family,
that they feel that they are not alone, and that they
were taught how to live with HIV.

Because the [treatment toolkit] gives us answers to many
things and the human being wants answers, he doesn't
want doubts, the [treatment toolkit] gives these answers,
and that helps, it makes us understand more what we
are going through. —AYAHIV health facility client

I saw a lot of important things [in the video]—how we
can protect ourselves, how we can get used to friends
knowing that we have that disease, and many other
things. —AYAHIV health facility client

The video came to teach me that people with HIV are not
inferior to others, we are all the same and we can play,
talk to anyone. —AYAHIV health facility client

In-depth interviews with health care provi-
ders revealed that the video and treatment
toolkit facilitated better communication with
AYAHIV.

With the video and the treatment toolkit, we have more
contact with the teenager and there are certain questions
that the [treatment toolkit] already has the answer to
and he is already confident. . . and at some point, he
becomes our friend. So, for me, it will help to retain
them. —Health care provider

One health care provider also described how
the tools gave a renewed sense of hope for both
themselves and their client once they understood
how ART adherence and an undetectable viral
load can fit into the context of a healthy life.

I see teenagers who are already for 5 or 6 years taking
ARVs but with high viral load, but why? [I ask them]
“How many pills were left?. . . 5.” But now he has an
objective for taking the pills and trying to be undetect-
able. So, I think this part helped me and I hope it helped
them too. —Health care provider

AYAHIV were also asked whether they under-
stood all the information included in the tools and
were assessed for HIV knowledge during exit
interviews. Over 90% reported they understood
the information presented to them across the
tools; however, more than half (59%) were
unsure about viral suppression and the concept of
undetectable=untransmissible (U=U). This sug-
gests that AYAHIV may need multiple opportuni-
ties to interact with the tools and communicate
with their health care provider to improve ART
health literacy.
In response to the coronavirus disease (COVID-
19) pandemic,
the
Mozambique
Ministry
of
Health recommended spacing HIV consultations
3 months apart, which meant that most AYAHIV
included in the pilot only had 1 opportunity to in-
teract with intervention components. This limited
the ability to assess mid-term impact in areas
where repetition may be especially beneficial for
influencing outcomes (e.g., behavior change or
literacy) Additionally, the support groups and
peer navigation components could not be piloted
due to restrictions related to the COVID-19
pandemic.
Once the pilot culminated, a healthy facility
director described how there was initially some
hesitation in using the new tools but that HCWs
were able to meet the demand. This suggests that
the integration of new tools to support adherence
was both feasible and accepted by providers and
AYAHIV clients.

More than 90% of
AYAHIV who used
the treatment
toolkit and
watched the video
agreed that they
had learned
something new
about ARTand
that these tools
would help them
with ART
adherence.

11

I remember that when I was doing the first training in
which I had to talk about the new instruments, the
HCWs were the first to say that “this package is big, it is
a lot, and it will take me a lot of time and the consulta-
tion is long.” Today we are almost at the end of the pilot,
and they are the same HCWs who say that “it cannot
end because we are already managing to meet the de-
mand and the adolescents like it.” —Key informant
interview

Based on recommendations from all pilot par-
ticipants, future implementation should consider
increasing privacy in the consultation rooms so
that AYAHIV are more comfortable using the
CombinADO tools, communicating that wait
times may increase as HCWs become familiar
with CombinADO tools during consultations, fa-
cilitating communication between health facilities
engaged in the study to share best practices, and
addressing the needs of AYAHIV with low literacy.
Prototype-specific recommendations primarily in-
cluded changes to design elements (e.g., changing
colors, adding clarifying language or additional in-
spirational messaging, or including real people to
increase credibility).

Implementation
In Phase 2, a cluster-randomized control trial will
be used to evaluate the effectiveness of the
CombinADO intervention in increasing retention
in care, ART adherence, and viral suppression at
12 health clinics in Nampula (clinicaltrials.gov:
NCT04930367).30

DISCUSSION
Adolescents and young people represent a grow-
ing proportion of people living with HIV and pre-
sent the highest rates of attrition across the HIV
care cascade and of AIDS-related mortality.12 Few
evidence-based interventions have been proven
to be effective in achieving viral suppression in
this population, and there is an urgent need to de-
sign, implement, and test interventions that retain
adolescents and young people in care.12

The most promising strategies for treatment
adherence and retention in HIV care for AYAHIV in-
volve multiple components and innovative inter-
ventions that are acceptable, feasible to deliver, and
responsive to the unique ART adherence challenges
and contextual realities experienced by AYAHIV.31

In addition to managing a chronic condition,
AYAHIV must navigate physical, social, and emo-
tional changes and the challenges of navigating sex-
ual health, relationships, and emotional well-being;

HIV stigma and disclosure; caregiver stress; peer
relations; mental health and/or substance use; and
medication management.32,33 Multicomponent
interventions tend to be bottom-up and community-
driven, where communities determine a set of
interventions, adopt or adapt a particular combi-
nation of interventions that are implemented si-
multaneously,
and
evaluate
effectiveness
in
real-world settings.34 HCD offers a framework to
incite empathy and foster community engage-
ment to ensure that public health services, pro-
ducts, and policies are readily adopted, effective,
and innovative.35 When used as a participatory
method, the HCD process allows for quicker
intervention development, dissemination, and
implementation of interventions that are accept-
able, feasible, desirable, scalable, and sustainable.
In contrast to traditional research methods, HCD
is less protocol driven and more flexible and re-
sponsive to community needs. The investment
of greater resources upfront to codesign and
tailor interventions for the local context helps to
detect key issues for integration of new interven-
tions within existing systems and identifies bar-
riers and facilitators that may affect uptake.16,36

When used for research, HCD can employ the
principles of community-engaged research37 and
participatory methods by integrating communities
into the research team to assist with the refine-
ment of research questions, participant recruit-
ment, data collection, interpretation of findings,
intervention development, and evaluation. An in-
terdisciplinary team of stakeholders and the
integration of nonacademic researchers that in-
clude nonsubject matter experts bring a “begin-
ner’s mindset” (i.e., a new set of eyes on some
very old problems), which often leads to remark-
ably insightful findings. The HCD process also
embeds researchers into a community, which
better enables researchers to garner permissions,
facilitate stakeholder buy-in, and build empathy,
trust, and credibility.38 Furthermore, HCD com-
bines multiple data collection methods (e.g., eth-
nographic observations and quantitative and
qualitative data) to understand the complex sys-
tem in which individuals reside and interact.
Similarly, systems thinking can include qualita-
tive, action-based methodologies that enable
stakeholders to examine system components
and the dynamic relationship between them,
across multiple levels across the socioecological
model.39 By incorporating systems thinking,
HCD seeks to understand the broader context in
which individuals are interconnected within so-
cieties and considers root causes of a problem

The most
promising
strategies for
treatment
adherence and
retention in HIV
care for AYAHIV
involve multiple
components and
innovative
interventions that
are acceptable,
feasible to deliver,
and responsive to
the unique ART
adherence
challenges and
contextual
realities
experienced by
AYAHIV.

12

and downstream consequences of solutions to
complex health problems. Moreover, HCD brings
creativity and innovation to traditional public
health programming and may be best paired with
experts from other disciplines (e.g., community-
based participatory research or implementation
science) to amplify its value.35,36 HCD can also
promote greater intervention uptake by placing
community needs at the forefront and may be es-
pecially useful in ensuring mass media and inter-
personal communication tools remain culturally
relevant so that interventions are not only accept-
able but also desirable.
This study demonstrates the utility of using
HCD to cocreate a multicomponent intervention
to promote adherence and retention in care for
AYAHIV. Prior studies have found that youth-
driven interventions lead to greater structural
level changes,40 and the use of HCD for youth
interventions has successfully been applied to a
variety of public health problems including in-
creasing access to sexual and reproductive health
for girls and boys, uptake of contraceptives and
HIV self-testing, advancing gender equity, devel-
opment of learning hubs for refugees and dis-
placed
children,
development
of
adolescent-
friendly health clinics and safe spaces, violence re-
duction, and diabetes prevention.41–44 Although
HCD methodologies can be used with nearly any
population, they may be particularly well-suited
for youth-driven intervention development. HCD
provides a framework for cocreating interventions
in collaboration with youth by incorporating lived
experiences and provoking empathy and mutual
understanding of the root causes of a problem
within the larger socioecological environment.
HCD methodologies are less formal than tradition-
al qualitative and quantitative research methods;
however, they are able to collect “unconvention-
al” data by incorporating interactive, visual, and
observational data collection methods that more
closely resemble play. For example, data can be
collected through role playing in which youth
“show” how they interact with products, services,
or programs, rather than tell to ensure that youth
have real agency in defining the service experi-
ence. Furthermore, participants may also be asked
to rank cards, sticky notes, photos, and use colors
or drawings to express priorities and feelings, rath-
er than use traditional Likert scales. This has sever-
al advantages, including quicker data collection,
data processing, and hypothesis generation (or re-
finement) in the moment. This also addresses lit-
eracy challenges which enables a wider variety of
youth to participate and ensures language and

content remain adolescent friendly. When used
with youth populations, HCD legitimizes the
experiences and opinions of youth, fosters youth
empowerment, allows youth to invest in their
communities, and addresses power imbalances
between youth and adult stakeholders.40

Challenges and Limitations
Although HCD has been used for health care inter-
vention development, relatively little HCD or de-
sign thinking has been reported within the
academic literature. Instead, HCD projects tend to
be reported in the gray literature, lack clear meth-
odology, and use varied language for similar con-
cepts.45 Although organizations like Design for
Health have tried to bridge the gap between HCD
designers and public health practitioners, robust,
academic literature on HCD and public health is
still an emerging area.17 The use of HCD by aca-
demic researchers will require training, familiarity
with HCD terminology, and the expertise of a de-
sign firm, which can be high cost and resource in-
tensive. The HCD approach is not designed to
evaluate efficacy or effectiveness but can be rigor-
ously evaluated via randomized control trials. 30,46

Furthermore, the final intervention may have
limited generalizability since data are collected
via purposive sampling to be contextually specific.
However, the intervention may be transferred and
inform intervention development in other set-
tings. Despite these limitations, the flexibility and
creativity of HCD allow for public health innova-
tion with applications in global health.47

CONCLUSION
Overall, this article demonstrates a creative pro-
cess embedded in a traditional research study.
HCD can serve as a community engagement
model by incorporating community values, gener-
ating buy-in, and building consensus and collec-
tive ownership early on. A small but growing
body of evidence shows that HCD, when coupled
with other synergistic research methods such as
community-based participatory research31 or im-
plementation science,32 provides a pathway for
innovation, shortens the research to practice gap,
engages marginalized communities, and inte-
grates novel interventions into existing complex
systems. When used as a precursor to implemen-
tation science, the HCD process ensures that inter-
vention development (or adaption) is grounded in
contextual needs, assumptions are tested early,
and that concepts are rapidly iterated upon and

When used with
youth populations,
HCD legitimizes
the experiences
and opinions of
youth, fosters
youth
empowerment,
allows youth to
invest in their
communities, and
addresses power
imbalances
between youth
and adult
stakeholders.

13

refined before resources are dedicated to imple-
mentation and scale-up.

Acknowledgments: The authors wish to thank all the participants who
generously gave their time to participate in this study as well as staff for
their contributions to the study. We also wish to thank the translators for
their participation as well as the 10 youth living with HIV who
participated as cocreators helping to design solutions. We also would
like to acknowledge the health facilities staff for supporting study
implementation.

Funding: This research was supported through Prevention and Treatment
through a Comprehensive Care Continuum for HIV-affected Adolescents
in Resource Constrained Settings (PATC3H) sponsored by the Eunice
Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development under award number 4UH3HD096926 and the National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases under award number
5T32AI114398. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and
does not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes
of Health.

Disclaimer: The funders had no role in study design, data collection and
analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.

contributed to the conception and design of this study. JF, AZ, SC, AI, BK,
BO, CS, HS, LW, MV, EP, and EJA were involved in the implementation
and supervision of this study. TIM and EJA conceptualized the
manuscript, and TIM wrote the first draft. All authors critically reviewed
the manuscript and provided final approval of the version to be
published.