HYPOalert: Designing Mobile Technology for Hypoglycemic 
Detection and Monitoring—Based on Human Breath 

Anthony Faiola, Haleh Vatani, Kate Greenhill 

Dept. of Biomedical & Health Information 
Sciences, University of Illinois at Chicago 
Chicago, IL, USA 

Manjula Bhuma 
Dept. of Health Informatics, 
Karolinska Institutet,  
Solna, Sweden 

Mangilal Agarwal 
Dept. of Mechanical Engineering, 

Purdue University, Indianapolis, 
IN, USA 

ABSTRACT 
Hypoglycemia (HYPO) is characterized by low blood glucose 
(BG)—leading to complications such as sweating, weakness, 
passing-out, coma, and even death. Effective HYPO 
management is required to avoid complications and to increase 
quality of life. Recently, a noninvasive smart breathing sensor 
was developed for detection of HYPO in human breath 
(HYPOalert). The device has the ability to deliver data (via 
Bluetooth) to a mobile application—with the intent to support 
Type 1 and 2 diabetics with the self-management of their 
hypoglycemia. This paper presents the first two (prototype) 
design iterations of research and testing of HYPOalert. Twelve 
Type 1 and 2 diabetics were interviewed to deduce user 
requirements and to understand their perception and level of 
interest in the proposed mobile system. Outcomes informed a 
human-centered design process of the interactive prototype, 
currently under final testing. Results were positive—showing 
that users were very interested in HYPOalert’s use of 
visualization, as well as its HYPO monitoring and alert system 
that supports diabetes patients’ healthy lifestyle management. 

Author Keywords 
Hypoglycemia; Diabetes, Breathing sensor; Mobile health; 
Interface; Data visualization  

ACM Classification Keywords 
H: Information Systems→H.5: INFORMATION INTERFACES 
AND PRESENTATION (e.g., HCI)→H.5.2: User Interfaces 

INTRODUCTION 
In 2012, the American Diabetes Association stated that one-
tenth of all health care dollars were spent on costs directly 
attributable to diabetes. The total cost—$245 billion. More 

importantly, over half of these costs were directly or indirectly 
resulting from poor maintenance of blood glucose (BG) levels 
[3]. Diabetes has two classifications with accompanying 
medical conditions—depending upon the glucose level. Type 
1 diabetes (T1D) is characterized by deficient insulin 
production and requires external insulin administration every 
day, and Type 2 diabetes (T2D) is an outcome of the body’s 
ineffective usage of insulin [6]. The direct healthcare costs 
per-person for Type 1 diabetes (T1D) are 50% higher than 
for Type 2 diabetes (T2D) [1]. According to recent data, 
there are more than 970K people living in the US who have 
T1D, with projections that by 2050, more than half of these 
will be children. Diabetes mellitus is a chronic disease 
caused by the body’s insufficient production of insulin. As a 
hormone, insulin regulates BG levels, thus diabetics take 
insulin as an external medication to regulate BG levels [2]. 
Managing diabetes requires tight control of BG levels, 
where too high BG results in hyperglycemia (HYPER) and 
causes long-term complications. Conversely, low BG results 
in hypoglycemia (HYPO, i.e., BG levels of <70 mg/dL) [4] 
and 
can 
cause 
short-term 
complications 
including 
unconsciousness, permanent brain loss, or even death. 
HYPO, common in T1D, is most dangerous for infants, 
young children [16], elderly [10], and those who have 
impaired awareness for HYPO [8]. In addition, the fear of 
HYPO causes many patients to err towards HYPER and lead 
passive life-styles, including decisions not to engage in 
healthy exercise [5] and not driving [14]. 
Of the mHealth diabetes devices and applications (apps) 
on the market, there are four basic ways of glucose 
monitoring: skin prick, saliva, urine, and continuous glucose 
monitoring systems. The most used methods for detecting 
HYPO are invasive and rely on analyzing glucose levels in 
blood (through finger-stick) or interstitial fluids (continuous 
glucose monitors, CGMs) [9]. However, CGMs often under-
report HYPO [7] or display a significant time lag before 
indicating HYPO [11]. A recent study showed CGMs may 
not significantly improve glycemic control in children with 
T1D  [12]. Each method has its own limitations related to 
invasiveness, expense, and availability. There is, however, a 
method that has shown considerable promise is trained 
canines—diabetes alert dogs (DADs), that act as an early 
warning system by alerting patients without any noticeable 
symptoms of HYPO [15] [16]. 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not 
made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear 
this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components 
of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with 
credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to 
redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request 
permissions from Permissions@acm.org. 
PervasiveHealth '18, May 21–24, 2018, New York, NY, USA 
© 2018 Association for Computing Machinery. 
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6450-8/18/05…$15.00 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3240925.3240975 

___________________________________________________________________

This is the author's manuscript of the article published in final edited form as:

Faiola, A., Vatani, H., Greenhill, K., Bhuma, M., & Agarwal, M. (2018). HYPOalert: Designing Mobile Technology for Hypoglycemic Detection and Monitoring–Based on Human 
Breath. Proceedings of the 12th EAI International Conference on Pervasive Computing Technologies for Healthcare, 402–406. https://doi.org/10.1145/3240925.3240975

Figure 1. Illustrates the 
nanosensor array and de-  
vice configuration with 
breath-inlet, 
antenna, 
battery, Bluetooth, and 
charger.  
 

As noted, research has demonstrated that DADs can 
smell the metabolic by-products of HYPO even before it 
registers on a glucose-based detection device, prompting 
patients to check their BG levels and take action before they 
suffer a HYPO episode. This early detection is due to the 
ability of DADs to smell volatile organic compounds (VOCs) 
from breath caused by metabolic changes that lead to HYPO, 
not by smelling glucose itself. Preliminary studies indicate 
patients with DADs have improved glycemic control and 
improved quality of life with fewer complications and lower 
healthcare costs. However, there are long wait-lists and 
many costs associated with training and maintaining DADs. 
As such, we believe an accurate, affordable, and non-
invasive device can be designed to detect (through human 
breath) these metabolic changes. The smart sensor system 
will mimic the DAD’s ability to detect HYPO from VOCs 
in breath—thus being a technological breakthrough in 
hypoglycemic detection, while decreasing costs of care, 
decreasing morbidity and mortality, and transforming the 
health and well-being of patients with diabetes.  
 
PROPOSED RESEARCH 
In response to these challenges, we are in the final phase of 
designing and developing a noninvasive connected mobile 
health system for T1D and T2D patients—that includes a 
canine-inspired, smart nanosensor (breathing device) 
technology that connects via Bluetooth with a mobile 
application. We tentatively refer to the system as: 
HYPOalert. The app has the capability of 24/7 (HIPAA 
compliant) determination of HYPO, while providing early 
warning alerts detecting chemical changes in human breath. 
Incorporated into a smart device, the sensor system will 
communicate health data to caregivers, collect data for 
health management, and integrate with other diabetes 
management devices. See Figure 1. 
 

 
 
Thus far, the research team has collected and analyzed 
human breath samples using gas chromatography/mass 
spectrometry—creating signature VOC breath profiles that 
correlate to HYPO. Second, the design, fabrication and 
testing of the nanosensor array and breathing smart sensor 
device will allow patients to obtain a registered response—
arising from any detected metabolic change during a 
transient condition leading to HYPO. Each sensor on the 

array will respond to one or more of the identified VOCs. 
The sensor array will be equipped with computational 
resources and wireless data transmission-communication 
modules. Data will be transmitted via Bluetooth and mobile 
devices (e.g., smartphone)—alerting patients or caregivers 
(between doctor-recommended blood glucose measurement 
intervals) that the patient may be trending toward HYPO and 
needs to test BG levels or take immediate corrective action.  
The focus of this paper (and subsequent presentation) 
will review the design and testing of the first two prototype 
iterations of the mobile app—that will accompany the 
forthcoming smart breath device system. 
 
DESIGN ITERATION—PHASE 1 
Design Iteration Process 
Based on a preliminary review of existing diabetes products 
and mobile applications, we developed a series of 
exploratory static/rapid interfaces for inspection by diabetes 
patients. As outlined, the primary purpose of HYPOalert is 
to warn patients of an approaching or existing state of 
HYPO. For this reason, the initial interfaces reflect this 
primary functional aspect. Figure 2 illustrates the first 
conceptual iteration of HYPOalert. Based on this iteration 
of interfaces, we performed a user requirements study—
focusing on understanding user needs through questionnaire, 
semi-structured interviews, and a preliminary review of the 
first iteration of the mobile app interface design. Findings 
provided design requirements and the users’ overall 
perception and interest in a breath smart sensor app for 
supporting HYPO monitoring. 

 
Figure 2. First iteration of the HYPOalert static interfaces. 
First interface displays the app splash-page. All remaining 
interfaces indicate the patient’s name and reading date/time. 
Interfaces 2-4: (1) Three color-coded visualization areas: 
Green=NORMAL, Yellow=APPROACHING (or Caution), 
and Red=HYPO, and (2) Hourly indication of breathing 
times and their location on the HYPO visualization scale. 
Interface 4 displays the patient’s weekly breathing summary, 
broken down in percentages. 
 
Method—User Requirements and Design Testing 
Participants: We recruited 12 participants with T1D (60%) 
and 8 with T2D (40%), n=20. Recruitment including paper 
flyers circulated across the University of Illinois at Chicago 
(UIC) campus and email to all UIC staff and students. All

3 

participated receive an Amazon $10 eGift for their 
participation. Inclusion criteria included: volunteer’s age 
must be above 18 years, must speak fluent English and all 
vulnerable populations are omitted. 
Interview, Questionnaire and Rapid Prototype Review: 
Participants received eight open-ended interviews and 13 
multiple-choice survey questions. At the conclusion of the 
questionnaire, participants were shown the first iteration of 
the mobile app interface designs, with follow-up questions 
related to benefits, functionality, and overall appeal. Data 
analysis of the 13 questions consisted of means and standard 
deviations (SD)—converting integer values using Excel 
2010. The histogram values of each question were 
graphically displayed as bar plots and pie charts.  
 
Findings 
Questionnaire: Regarding the method for tracking BG 
levels, 65% participants use the skin prick, 30% used both 
continuous glucose monitoring and skin prick, and 5% used 
urine testing. Regarding HYPO management, 35% of 
participants had sugar intake at random hours, 25% make use 
of health apps to track glucose levels by measuring food 
intake and physical exercise, while only one participant uses 
noninvasive glucose tracking. Only three participants use a 
combination of all three methods for managing HYPO 
levels. Only 20% of participants did not use any method to 
track their HYPO levels.  
Regarding satisfaction with their current monitoring 
system, only 10% of participants were pleased, 45% 
participants are somewhat satisfied, and 40% are not 
satisfied with their current BG measuring method and 
devices. A total of 85% of participants expressed their 
interest to use the proposed HYPOalert noninvasive 
breathing sensor over their current HYPO management 
devices. Regarding the extent of use of a breathing sensor, 
70% wished to use the device more than 20 times a day, if 
available today—while only 20% expressed that they would 
only use it only once a day to manage their HYPO condition. 
Regarding BG data display types, 40% of participants 
wanted to see their data visualized with alerts, rather than a 
color-coded visualization—while 45% wished to see the 
data visualization color-coded (with numbers, color coding 
data, and line/bar plots)—similar to the HYPOalert app. And 
15% expressed an interest in visualizing their BG data with 
bar or line plots only. Regarding sharing their data with 
others, 95% stated their interest in including their family, 
while 90% wanted to include a way to share their HYPO data 
with their primary provider.  
All participants (100%) were interested in using the 
HYPOalert app, with its data visualization system—stating 
that it would help advance their understanding and 
management of a HYPO condition. All participants (100%) 
were slightly to strongly in agreement that the proposed 

HYPOalert system (sensor and app) would positively impact 
their daily lifestyle practices. 
Open-Ended Interview: Outcomes of our interviews 
showed the frequency of both severe HYPO and mild HYPO 
episodes among the participants. We found that the 
occurrence of mild HYPO episodes (5.1±7.3 times per week) 
is approximately 10-fold higher than the severe HYPO 
episodes (2.1±2.3 times per month). The average 
participants monitoring of Blood Glucose (BG) levels was 
2.8±2.9 times per day—while BG monitoring still varied 
from patient to patient, e.g., one T1D participant monitors 
BG levels 10 times a day whereas four participants check 
their BG randomly throughout the week.   
About 80% of participants use BG measuring devices to 
specifically manage their hypoglycemia. Although, most of 
participants use traditional or advanced BG monitoring 
devices, the adoption of mHealth apps is very poor, i.e., 75% 
of participants do not use any type of mobile app that links 
their BG results from the device to their smartphone. The 
remaining 25% use GoMeal, Dexom, OneDrop, or other 
apps to review BG data from their monitoring devices. 
Regarding HYPO data visualization, the majority of 
participants (70%) recommended that the device save the 
breathing sensor data through a log option (up to six months), 
with the ability to visualize the data at any point in time 
according to glucose levels, mg/dL and trends. In addition, 
three participants expressed their interest to include an 
option for food intake data whereas one participant 
suggested we include insulin dosage option and alerts when 
HYPO occurs. Two patients would like to include 
predictions or causes of HYPO. 
 
DESIGN ITERATION—PHASE 2 
Product Review 
To better understand the advancements of other mHealth 
diabetes products, we conducted an audit of two FDA 
approved mobile products that include both a BG measuring 
device, with data transmission capabilities (via Bluetooth or 
directly) to a smartphone app. Our assessment included the 
Dario and iHealth wireless blood glucose monitoring systems. 
After registering online, our team tested and assessed the 
products for two weeks; including daily blood samples. We 
then de-constructed and built an interface/system information 
architecture flow-chart, followed by a comparative analysis 
of the two products using the same criteria. 

Briefly, both apps offer innovative solutions that improves 
patient satisfaction by enabling them to manage health more 
efficiently. Patients can set thresholds for normal and danger 
glucose levels, personalized goals, medication reminders, 
diet, and exercise plans. They can also log their blood sugar 
level manually/using the device as often as they want, follow 
their progress visually, and export results as an Excel, PDF, or 
CSV file to their healthcare provider or family members using 
e-mail, text, or via shared access in social media.

At the same time, our findings showed there was a lack 
of consistency in color codes to display some of the HYPO 
BG reading levels, creating some confusion in interpreting 
the results. For example, although iHealth had a well-
designed interface and visualization system, the color coding 
system was difficult to distinguish. While Dario provides 
access to most options with an inside hamburger menu, 
iHealth features/commands can be assessed directly from the 
interface as icons, text or a combination of both. Unlike 
Dario, iHealth requires Bluetooth connection, and does not 
support the visually impaired. However, Dario supports 
adding emergency contacts and uses GPS to locate the 
patient when blood glucose levels reach a dangerous range.  
 
Design Process 
Findings from the first iteration and the review of the two 
BG monitoring systems informed our design of the 
interactive prototype (Figure 3) of phase two. Usability 
testing using the interactive prototype (on an iPhone 7 Plus) 
is currently on the way—consisting of three parts: (1) a 
scenario task-based time-on-task study, (2) a post-test 
questionnaire, and (3) a post-test interview. 
 

 
Figure 3: Illustrates the HYPOalert interactive interfaces that focus 
on data monitoring using several temporal systems, the alert system, 
along with reminders, settings, and summary reports. 

 
 

CONCLUSIONS 
Hypoglycemia can be a life-threating condition, of which 
regular metabolic monitoring is critical. This paper reported 
on a two-iteration design process of a mobile app 
(HYPOalert) that will accompany a new noninvasive smart 
sensor that detects HYPO by human breath for Type 1 and 2 
diabetics. After our first design iteration, we interviewed 
users regarding the system (with static prototypes). Findings 
suggest a strong reception of HYPOalert. Participants agreed 
that the proposed system will have a positive impact on 
managing their HYPO. We then conducted the evaluation of 
two FDA approved mHealth BG monitoring systems to 
compare/assess product features. Our comparative analysis 
was used to inform/enhance the prototype design of the 
second iteration. Lessons learned have guided our 
understanding that—Data visualizations should offer a 
summary of individual BG level readings/trends, with 
customizable timeframes and a standardized color coding 
system that accompanies the actual values displayed. We’ve 
confirmed that customizing BG thresholds for normal and 
danger levels is required to enable HYPO alerts and for 
patients to define their own BG management plan. Finally, a 
usability study that observes for ease of use and functionality 
is currently on the way. Study findings will provide 
significant insight for the third design iteration of product 
development, followed by a clinical trials.