Document downloaded from: 

 

This paper must be cited as:  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The final publication is available at 

 

 

Copyright 

 

Additional Information 

 

http://hdl.handle.net/10251/170288

Fico, G.; Martinez-Millana, A.; Leuteritz, J.; Fioravanti, A.; Beltrán-Jaunsarás, ME.; Traver
Salcedo, V.; Arredondo, MT. (2019). User Centered Design to Improve Information
Exchange in Diabetes
Care Through eHealth: Results from a Small Scale Exploratory Study. Journal of Medical
Systems. 44(1):1-12. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10916-019-1472-5

https://doi.org/10.1007/s10916-019-1472-5

Springer-Verlag

Noname manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)

User Centered Design to improve information
exchange in Diabetes Care through eHealth

Results from a small scale exploratory study

Giuseppe Fico · Antonio
Martinez-Millana · Jan-Paul Leuteritz ·
Alessio Fioravanti · Maria Eugenia
Beltran · Vicente Traver · Maria Teresa
Arredondo

Received: date / Accepted: date

Abstract Heterogeneity of people with diabetes makes maintaining blood
glucose control and achieving therapy adherence a challenge. It is fundamen-
tal that patients get actively involved in the management of the disease in
their living environments. The objective of this paper is to present and eval-
uate the processes needed to build a supporting self-management system for
diabetes in community settings. We used User Centered Design techniques for
deﬁning and personalizing an eHealth solution for the management of dia-
betes, and assessing the use and compliance of a self-management system in a
multicenter randomized pilot study. Particularly, User Centered Design prin-
ciples were used to involve diabetic patients and treating professionals into
the design, development and evaluation of a self-management system; which
comprised three iterative cycles: scenario deﬁnition, user archetype deﬁnition
and system development. A comprehensive system was developed integrating
modules for the management of blood glucose levels, medication, food intake
habits, physical activity, diabetes education and sending messages. The sys-

G. Fico, A. Fioravanti, M.E. Beltran and M.T. Arredondo
Universidad Politcnica de Madrid
Photonics Technology and Bioengineering Department
Life Supporting Technologies Group, Madrid, Spain.

A. Martinez-Millana, V. Traver
ITACA.Universitat Polit`ecnica de Val`encia, Valencia, Spain

J.P. Leuteritz
Ergonomics and Vehicle Interaction
Fraunhofer-Institute for Industrial Engineering (IAO), Berlin, Germany

Funding Statement
European Commission under the 7th Framework Program grant agreement number
216270.3.

2

tem was adapted for two types of principal users (personas): Type 1 Diabetes
user and Type 2 Diabetes user. 20 patients and 24 treating professionals were
enrolled in the study and used the system for a period of four weeks. The
assessment of usage and compliance metrics yielded similar results, which dif-
fered signiﬁcantly among the two types of users, except for the medication
module, which showed a signiﬁcantly diﬀerent use and compliance (p=0.01).

Keywords Personal Health Records · User Centered Design · Diabetes
Management · mHealth · co-design

1 Introduction

Modern health care systems are designed to treat acute diseases rather than
managing chronic conditions [1]. Chronic diseases would require long-term care
management programs to ﬁrst stabilize patients and then prevent or delay
complications [2]. Diabetes Mellitus is a paradigmatic case of long-term care,
being one of the most prevalent diseases worldwide, with more than 380 million
patients with no cure [3].
The most common forms of diabetes are Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus (T1DM)
and Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus (T2DM). An impaired insulin secretion causes
T1DM, which leads to chronic hyperglycemia and accounts for 10% of all
diabetes cases. T2DM is caused by an inadequate insulin secretion and an
impaired insulin action, and accounts for almost 90% of all diabetes cases.
Generally, T1DM is caused by an autoimmune reaction in individuals under
20 years of age, while T2DM is associated with aging, lifestyle and genetic
predisposition among individuals over the age of 50. The clinical heterogeneity
of these patients challenges the process of care, which is focused on maintaining
blood glucose control [4]. It is paramount to involve both types of patients in
the management of the disease inside their living environments.This requires
taking medicines, following a proper diet, doing physical exercise and being
informed and trained about self-management and decision making. Moreover,
patients should be supported and followed-up by practice teams who check
adherence to care plans, perform therapy readjustment and mitigate the risk
of complications[4].
In this context, the Information Technology (IT) applications have con-
tributed to perform an eﬃcient and personalized follow-up of the disease [5].
These systems allow monitoring multi-parametric data and performing anal-
ysis of relevant parameters such as physiological measurements, laboratory
examinations, and lifestyle data, thus enabling more precise follow-up of pa-
tients through better quality and more comprehensive interpretation of data
and delivery of alerts, warnings, and support to decision making [5]. In or-
der to achieve this, the main challenge is to understand how to manage data
heterogeneity and train patients to successfully use such technology.
State of the art systems include new ways to register daily-based events
such as the quantiﬁcation of the ingested meal contents in carbohydrates, pro-
teins and fats, based on a picture of the meal to decompose the nutritional

User Centered Design to Improve Diabetes Care Through eHealth
3

value and calculate the insulin dose [6, 7]. Other types of systems try to inte-
grate real-time continuous glucose sensors, insulin pumps and a mobile-based
tele-medicine system to create a closed-loop of communications with the doc-
tor [8, 9].
Electronic Health Records (EHR)[10, 11], Personal Health Records (PHR)[12],
mHealth [13] and eHealth [14] shall improve the prevention and treatment at
the point of care through remote therapeutic decision-making and follow-up
relying on adherence to care plan and towards data insertion through apps
and sensors. These types of technologies have been assessed in several studies,
focused on deﬁning strategies to collect Observations on Daily Living (ODL)
to support behavioural monitoring [15], exploring how ODL can be displayed
to users in a meaningful manner[16, 17].
As regards platforms for the self-management of diabetes, one of the most
used systems is Bluestar by WellDoc [18], which allows patients to track and
record blood sugar levels oﬀering a real-time response and clinical basis. In
2011, the Salzburg statement conﬁrmed the potential of Decision Support
Systems (DSS) in the shared decision-making and self-management of diseases
[19, 20]. But, how patients and health professionals can use these technologies
in the long term remains an unanswered question [21]. Patients need to be
educated about the role they play in the process of care, the information they
need to manage, and the criteria for selecting tools that would help them
understanding the consequences of their decisions[22].
The work reported in this paper describes the design and implementation of
an application system for diabetes management integrating User Centred De-
sign (UCD) principles into the development cycle. Our hypothesis is that UCD
techniques allow identifying the most important elements for self-monitoring
of the diabetes disease and, in turn, creating solutions that can support ef-
fective, sustainable and useful adoption of PHRs. The application system was
tested in a small-scale pilot including 20 T1DM and T2DM patients for a pe-
riod of four weeks. Usage and compliance of the co-designed system show a
signiﬁcantly improved behaviour of patients towards the applications for each
of the modules, which enabled tailored decision-making actions.

2 Methods

2.1 Extraction of user requirements and system deﬁnition

The complexity of diabetes mechanisms does not allow deﬁning a single dia-
betic patient proﬁle and, in turn, a single scope for a disease management sys-
tem. It is under this assumption that the European research project METABO
started its activities: a consortium composed of biomedical and information
technology researchers, health technology industries, clinical engineers, HCI
experts, and research hospitals worked more than four years on the deﬁnition,
implementation and validation of a diabetes disease management platform[23].
UCD is a design methodology that aims at involving users in the design, de-

4

velopment and evaluation of systems and products[24, 25]. The methodology
of this study consisted in three iterative cycles: usage scenario deﬁnition, user
archetype deﬁnition and system development, as described in Fig. 1. UCD
provides a considerable amount of upfront research and analysis prior to de-
velopment.

Fig. 1 Implementation of the UCD methodology in 3 cycles

In the ﬁrst cycle we deﬁned a situation/problem-oriented representation
of the disease involving patients and clinicians. Scenarios were based on in-
ternational standards of care (by the National Health System in the UK [26]
and the American Diabetes Association [3]) and six speciﬁc needs: sudden
hypoglycemic events, changes in the environments, physical activity, lack of
motivation, co-morbidities, unstable diabetes control[27]. The second cycle in-
volved deﬁning technological factors to support these scenarios. We identiﬁed
four type of form factors: 1) sensors to allow physiological monitoring of blood
glucose, physical activity and weight, 2) tools for collecting ODL and integrat-
ing the sensed data from the patient side, 3) tools for treatment and follow
up from the practice team side, and 4) a system to allow exchange of data
and establish a communication channel between patients and careers. These
factors were used for the creation of mock-ups that were evaluated and re-
ﬁned through focus groups and face-to-face interviews with end-users. Results
were used for the deﬁnition of three main user archetypes, called PRIMARY
PERSONAs according to UCD theory: T1DM patient, T2DM patient, and the
Treating Professional (TP). A heuristic assessment of the mock-ups according
to Nielsens gold standard 10 Usability Heuristics for User Interface Design
[25] and the deﬁnition of scenarios based on the PERSONAs, led to the devel-
opment of the ﬁrst version of the prototypes (second cycle). The prototypes

User Centered Design to Improve Diabetes Care Through eHealth
5

were assessed in usability tests and interviews with patients representing the
diﬀerent PERSONAs, providing feedback and substantial changes in the ﬁnal
system development (third and ﬁnal cycle).

2.2 Study description and data analysis

The system was tested in a small-scale exploratory pilot study in four clinical
centers in Modena, Parma, Prague and Madrid from January 2015 to Septem-
ber 2015. The Medical Ethics Committee of each center approved the study
protocol, and all patients gave their informed consent in order to be enrolled in
the study. We recorded usage and compliance metrics of a group composed by
13 T1DM and 7 T2DM patients who used the PMDs during four consecutive
weeks (Table 1). A total of 24 care providers used the Control Panel (CP),
a desktop-based application designed for the treating professionals. However,
in each of the four centers there were one or two diabetes specialists assigned
as the main user of the CP. These specialists were assisted by other doctors,
nutritionists and nurses.
The applications were designed to record all the interactions of the users
with the system. To assess user behaviour, the number of accesses to each
module was recorded together with a timestamp. Moreover, to evaluate the
communication performance, the number of messages from each module (i.e.
packages) was also recorded. A package is the simplest representation of a
transaction of information regarding a speciﬁc module. For instance, an in-
sulin intake package would contain information about the type of insulin and
pumped dose. Records were compiled and analysed independently for T1DM
and T2DM PERSONAs. Due to the non-parametric distribution of the ob-
served variables, a Wilcoxon independence test was calculated to ﬁnd out if
the behaviour on the access to modules and communications had diﬀerences
not attributable to chances. The Wilcoxon test was chosen as a particularly
conservative method, sacriﬁcing test-power for accurateness under possibly
non-parametric conditions, and signiﬁcance level was accepted for p values
under 0.05 at 95% conﬁdence interval.
Moreover, two more indicators related to the user response to technology
and treatments were deﬁned. First we calculated the Usage parameter in Equa-
tion (1) which gives an approximation about the intensity of the subject’s use
of the system. It relates the number of days that a subject has to perform an
action (A) (monitoring blood glucose, insulin administration, eating a speciﬁc
meal, etc.) and the number of prescribed actions not reported by the subject
(B). Second, we measured the level of Compliance in Equation (2) by dividing
the number of recorded events (R) by the number of prescribed events (p).

Usage = (1 −B/A)%
(1)

Compliance = (R/p)%
(2)

6

T1DM (n=13)
T2DM (n=7)
p-value
Characteristic
n (%)
n (%)
Gender
0.68
Male
9 (69%)
5 (71%)
Female
4 (31%)
2 (29%)
Studies
0.21
Undergraduate
2 (15%)
2 (29%)
Secondary
3 (23%)
2 (29%)
University
8 (61%)
3 (43%)
PhD
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
Marital Status
0.40
Single
7 (54%)
2 (29%)
Married
5 (38%)
5 (71%)
Divorced
1 (8%)
0 (0%)
Widowed
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
Medical Variables
m ± sd
m ± sd
Age (years)
38.2±10.6
48.3±11.3
0.06
Duration of Diabetes (years)
15.5±10.6
9.1±6.7
0.17
BMI
24.3±3.6
31.3±3.8
<0.001
Waist/Hip
84.7±15.2
109.5±13.5
0.02
Hb1Ac
7.6±1.3
7.8±1.4
0.50
FPG
179.6±70.8
144.7±46.1
0.10
Lifestyle
Smoking
2 (15%)
2 (33%)
0.91
Alcohol
4 (31%)
3 (50%)
0.96
Limitations on Diet
1(8%)
1 (17%)
0.75
Physical Activity
Days per Week
3.3±2.7
4.3±3.3
0.46
Duration (min)
41.5±43.3
36.4±32.2
0.87
Intensity (METs)
2.9±2.6
2.7±2.3
0.79

Table 1 Demographic description of the study sample grouped by the PERSONA TYPE
and homogeneity test

The pilot study aimed at assessing the acceptance of the system in a real
world context. This was achieved by analysing the user satisfaction and the
usefulness perceived by its users and the user behaviour at the end of the
pilots:

– User satisfaction: we used the AttrakDiﬀquestionnaire [28]. The AttrakD-
iﬀis consists of 4 subordinate constructs, all of which are computed sepa-
rately: pragmatic quality, the two hedonic qualities stimulation and iden-
tiﬁcation, and attractiveness. Whereas pragmatic quality might be consid-
ered to be the best representation of user satisfaction, a product such as
METABO should neither disregard the other dimensions, which are rather
connected to the concept of user experience. Our quality criterion consisted
in having the conﬁdence interval of the collected measures mean value over
a score of 3.
– Perceived usefulness: we constructed a questionnaire for assessing the use-
fulness measure based on Davis questionnaire [29] and some additional
custom items. Cronbachs alpha was used to check results homogeneity.

User Centered Design to Improve Diabetes Care Through eHealth
7

The arithmetic mean value of all the remaining items was calculated and
the quality criterion consisted in ﬁnding the scales middle score outside the
conﬁdence interval of the collected measures mean value.

3 Results

3.1 Personas and Scenarios

The most frequent tasks that T1DM people perform are related to the daily
annotation of medical and lifestyle data. The user needs to understand in real
time how to deal with the multiple factors aﬀecting blood glucose levels, with-
out compromising their quality of life. Users demanded features to resemble as
much as possible the actions they usually perform, for instance ﬁlling in paper
diaries or notebooks where patients record their measurements and add com-
ments. Data reviewing was spotted as more time-consuming and less suitable
for doing on the move. However, it is an action that T1DM people may wish
to perform, possibly comparing diﬀerent sources of information to understand
what is compromising an optimal glucose control (typically glucose vs. food
intake vs. insulin injections).
In the case of T2DM, the main objective was on diabetes education, com-
munication with health care professionals and empowerment to adopt a health-
ier lifestyle. TD2M people will usually not be insulin dependent, but likely to
suﬀer from a number of co-morbidities, and probably have a complex medi-
cation regime. Empowering patients to change their routines and to adopt a
healthier lifestyle entails the provision of educational and motivational mate-
rials in combination with a behaviour change strategy. Although an interface
for recording measurements should still be present in the application, lifestyle
management and communications with health professionals should be consid-
ered as a key factor.
The Treating Professional (TP) is a diabetologist, an endocrinologist, or a
case manager who typically treats many patients per day (about 30 per day, as
extracted from interviews) and has 5-10 minutes for each of them. In this time
frame, they need to understand the patient proﬁle, the clinical status, as well
as the current treatment and, based on this, take decisions regarding changes
in the treatment and respective counselling. In addition, nurses, educators,
and nutritionists also participated in this provision of care schema. They need
access to the same kind of information but not to the entire set and not to
all the features with respect to the TP (they are deﬁned as SECONDARY
PERSONA).

3.2 The METABO Platform

The METABO platform (Fig. 2) is a system developed on the basis of the
requirements of the two ﬁrst iterative cycles. METABO is conceived by pa-
tients as an electronic diary, equipped with some intelligence which supports

8

them during their daily activities. This intelligence supported them in what
to do and when to do it, based on the treatment they agreed on with the
doctor, helping them to properly visualize their record and allowing them
to exchange messages with their caregivers. The modules, and consequently
the information categories in METABO were Food Intake (FI), Blood Glu-
cose (BG), Drug Intakes (MD), Physical Activity (PA), Education Module
(ED), and a Messaging module for the management of feedback from both the
system and doctor (MS). Data gathered and managed by the diﬀerent mod-
ules were consumed by the diﬀerent services (feedback, data synchronization
and ﬁltering, authentication and security mechanisms, etc.) running locally in
the applications and managed by a Central Server (CS). Patient interfaces,
named Patient Monitoring Devices (PMD), consisted of applications running
in Smartphones (HTC HD2 for T1DM and iPhone 4.0 for T2DM) and desktop
PCs (Asus Tablet PC, named Patient Panel, for both patient PERSONAs).
Smartphone applications were designed to provide better support for data in-
sertion activities, especially in mobility environments, while the Patient Panel
was conceived for sensor download and content visualization activities. The
Control Panel (CP)provided to the TP was a java client for desktop PCs. The
Central Server (CS) was installed on a host machine, managing the PMDs and
the CPs installed in all the centers, and executing registration, security, au-
thentication, data storage, synchronization, interoperability, scheduling, and
feedback services. Four type of sensors were provided to the patients (Fig. 2 -
orange rectangle). T1DM patients were equipped with a Continuous Glucose
Monitoring System and an activity holter. T2DM patients were equipped with
a strip blood glucose sensor and a pedometer. Further details on the type of
sensors and integration can be found in [9]. The system included an automatic
delivery of feedback messages based on a database of predeﬁned actions and
rule engine, which evaluated a set of metrics related to the compliance of the
patient and provided customized motivational messages. This automatic feed-
back component has been previously presented by co-authors [30]. The main
purpose of this smart feedback mechanism was to let patients not only record
data, but actively use and learn from it (which is the intended beneﬁt of a
PHR) and access information that may help them take better decisions.
The overall usage scenario was: 1) Treating Professional (TP) launches
the CP and creates a new instance for a patient, inserting clinical proﬁle and
lifestyle scenario. 2) TP makes the prescription in terms of what the patient
needs to annotate (FI, BG, PA, ED, MS), at which frequency (measurements
per day, per working day vs. weekend or per week) and sets up thresholds
where needed. 3) The Central Server (CS) transforms the prescription into
rules for the creation and the conﬁguration of the PMDs: modules were en-
abled or disabled, and parameters were transformed into rules for the feedback
services, analysing insertion frequency and adherence. 4) Patient is registered
into the system and is given the PMDs, and leaves after a training phase . 5)
Patient status and treatment adherence are periodically checked by the CS,
and feedback messages are delivered. 6) As soon as the TP opens the CP,
she could check which patients need to be analysed, based on number and

User Centered Design to Improve Diabetes Care Through eHealth
9

Fig. 2 System architecture

priorities of speciﬁed alerts, as well as according to the scheduled visits and
unread messages. Such alerts were conﬁgurable by the TP and related to the
metabolic control of the disease and the compliance to the prescriptions, e.g.,
Number of blood glucose tests per day, Number of blood glucose excursions
over a threshold, Time devoted performing physical activity, and Self-reporting
of meals and insulin intake (Fig. 3).

3.3 System evaluation

We measured how patients used the modules during the entire duration of the
study. Number of accesses to each module (sessions) and number of records
sent from each module (data packets) were recorded automatically. According
to the aggregated analysis (Fig. 4 and Fig. 5), the most frequently used mod-
ules were those for Food Intake and for Medication. With respect to the overall
access to the four modules, T1DM average usage decreased from more than 70
sessions during Week 1 to 50 sessions in week 3 and less than 10 during the last
week. While the ﬁrst decrease can be positively associated with the learning

10

Fig. 3 T1DM Graphics (up); T2DM Drug Intake, Goal Achievements and feedback modules
(bottom)

phase on the usage of the system, low values in the last week may be related
with the fact that T1DM were also sending sensor measurements through the
continuous glucose monitoring and physical activity sensors, without the needs
of accessing to these modules. This was not observed for T2DM, where the
usage was acceptable in all modules until the end of the trial. Table 2 shows
the results of the behaviour analysis based on Wilcoxon independence test for
the use and Table 3 for the communication of the modules. This test has also
been applied to the average indicators for the entire study duration (Table 4),
conﬁrming that the Medication module has a diﬀerent communicating pattern
among the two type of users, whereas, the rest of the modules have a similar
behaviour in the use and the communication.

In both cases, the prescribed usage (how many times the patients uploaded
information compared to how often they were expected to do so) and compli-
ance (how well the patients achieved what was prescribed) are above thresholds

User Centered Design to Improve Diabetes Care Through eHealth
11

Week 1
Week 2
Week 3
Week 4
-10

0

10

20

30

40

50

Sessions

T1DM: Access to the modules

Week 1
Week 2
Week 3
Week 4
-300

-200

-100

0

100

200

300

400

500

Data packets

T1DM: Communication of the modules

Physical Activity
Measurements
Drugs
Food Intake

Fig. 4 Evolution on the average use (number of sessions) and average communication (num-
ber of packets) for each of the modules in the applications for T1DM persona for each week.

Week 1
Week 2
Week 3
Week 4
-10

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

Sessions

T2DM: Access to the modules

Week 1
Week 2
Week 3
Week 4
-10

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

Data packets

T2DM:Communication of the modules

Physical Activity
Measurements
Drugs
Food Intake

Fig. 5 Evolution on the average use (number of sessions) and average communication (num-
ber of packets) for each of the modules in the applications for T2DM persona for each week

that were considered as acceptable by the clinical experts and did not decrease
substantially during the study.
A more active role was observed in T2DM patients on the usage of the
educational functionalities with respect to T1DM (70% out of the total number
of patients using the education modules were T2DM). As regards the messages

12

MODULE
Week 1
Week 2
Week 3
Week 4

Physical Act
.15
.16
<.001
.02
Measurements
.19
.40
.09
.04
Drugs
.94
.71
.51
.32
Food Intake
.14
.15
.04
.02

Table 2 Wilcoxon independence test P values for T1DM/T2DM for use

MODULE
Week 1
Week 2
Week 3
Week 4

Physical Act
.77
.19
<.001
.02
Measurements
.51
.80
.21
.12
Drugs
.15
.39
.49
.48
Food Intake
.91
.64
.19
.13

Table 3 Wilcoxon independence test P values for T1DM/T2DM for communication

MODULE
ACCESS
COMMUNICATION

Physical Act
.20
.34
Measurements
.20
.99
Drugs
.89
.03
Food Intake
.06
.43

Table 4 Wilcoxon independence test of overall records in access and communication of the
modules among T1DM and T2DM users

with the TP, T1DM exchanged an average of 4.9±3.9 messages, while T2DM
an average of 6.6±3.0. The messages sent by the system (reminders, alerts,
tips and recommendations) where 124.5±52.4 for T1DM and 188.3±57.4 for
T2DM. This also shows a diﬀerence between the two type of patients, being
T2DM more focused on education activities.
The compliance value represents the ﬁt between the measurement values
introduced by the patients and their prescription (Fig. 6). A Wilcoxon test
was calculated to check for any signiﬁcant diﬀerences between the ﬁrst two
weeks and the last two weeks. When taking the Bonferroni-correction into
account, none of the pairs showed a signiﬁcant diﬀerence, although the case
of drug intake was close to signiﬁcant with p =.01. In the last two weeks, the
patients recorded manually their blood glucose tests less close to the prescribed
intervals than in the ﬁrst two weeks. Compliance of T2DM patients on drugs
decreased in the last two weeks with respect to the compliance of the ﬁrst two.
The adherence to physical activity prescriptions and food prescriptions (in the
latter case concerning the number of meals entered) improved slightly. The
intake of calories did not change over the course of the trial. Mean compliance
was 65%.
Regarding the Control Panel, TP used the tool diﬀerently depending on the
type of patient. For instance, this manifested itself in the manner professionals
visualized the trends of patients clinical data: T1DM patients were supervised

User Centered Design to Improve Diabetes Care Through eHealth
13

Fig. 6 Usage and Compliance metrics for each module compared during W1-W2 and W3-
W4 periods for each type of patient

based on complex charts (meal-oriented charts, blood sugar progression after
meal charts, etc.) in 78% of the times. When monitoring T2DM patients, the
professionals relied less on the combination of complex charts (40%) than on
simple charts (60%).

3.4 System attractiveness and perceived usefulness

The eﬃcacy and the eﬃciency of both T1DM and T2DM applications was
measured using the AttrakDiﬀ, which allows measuring the level of easiness-
to-use interface. The user experience results for T1DM application are depicted
in Fig. 7.

Fig. 7 AttrakDiﬀresults per category

14

In the case of T1DM, the conﬁdence interval of the pragmatic quality
measure overlaps the middle point of the scale, even though the mean value
is situated above this critical level. Thus, our quality criterion is missed, even
though by the least extent possible. As the other values are far above the
middle, one may assume that the users saw the application very positively. A
hypothetical explanation could be that the T1DM participants were very used
to smartphones and might have considered the windows mobile platform as
inferior to iOS or Android based systems. Results from the Perceived Useful-
ness questionnaire were collected to assess the usefulness of the overall system
within the diabetes treatment. Results show a general good level of the patient
perceived usefulness (mean=4.60%; SD= 0.9).

4 Discussion

We designed a system that supports the health management of diabetic pa-
tients in their living environments. The frequency of use and the information
sent from the app remained similar among T1DM and T2DM patients; how-
ever T1DM patients were more likely to use less features of the app. The
PERSONAs deﬁnition supported the diﬀerentiation of user groups that ﬁ-
nally resulted in tailored PHR registries. Placing the patient at the centre of
the development process through UCD was the key.
Usage statistics show that the patients used the METABO system as much
as expected, even though both usage and compliance levels were not excellent,
they were acceptably high for such a new system. Both, patients and medical
doctors, learned to use the system over time, while increasing their eﬃciency.
T2DM users entered as many measurement values as T1DM ones. Initially, the
T2DM PERSONA had been deﬁned as an adult (over 60 years old) with a low
level of IT literacy compared to the T1DM PERSONA. Therefore, we thought
that T2DM PERSONA could be less capable and even reluctant to use the
PMD for the self-management of the disease. We did not collect measures of
IT literacy during the sampling procedure (Table 1). Results reject our initial
hypothesis, as T2DM participants achieved a comparable level of use and
communication metrics, and the diﬀerences between the ﬁrst and the second
half of the study on these indicators are smaller than the diﬀerences observed
in the T1DM group.
Access to and communications from the modules in the mobile applications
had diﬀerent trends, but show statistically independent behaviours (Table 2
and Table 3). Overall, the patients’ compliance ( Equation 2) related to the
modules decreased, but we observed a correlation in T1DM patients regarding
the drug prescription and also the food intake. The general compliance showed
dramatic changes among the second half of the study. A possible explanation is
that after the ﬁrst two weeks of use, patients started to change their treatments
to optimize the health outcomes. Fig. 6 shows how the usage of the modules
remained at similar levels, whereas the compliance was signiﬁcantly reduced.
The assessment of such indicators could be an interesting break-point to de-

User Centered Design to Improve Diabetes Care Through eHealth
15

termine whether a patient is showing adherence to treatments irrespectively
the short-term clinical outcome evolution. Stratiﬁcation of patients according
to their IT literacy and performance on communications, access and use ob-
jective metrics could lead to a better performance in terms of personalized
medicine [31].
Some features of the METABO system have been previously implemented
in diabetes management systems. Nevertheless, these implementations lacked
the necessary tailoring of electronic tools to the speciﬁc needs of each PER-
SONA. In our research, we have tried to identify the beneﬁts of user centered
design in order to design, deliver and test a tailored solution for diabetes
management. Furthermore, the integration of standard sensors for bio-signal
acquisition is an essential element in order to implement a reliable information
workﬂow, as conﬁrmed by [32]. The designed system ﬁlls the gap identiﬁed in
a recent review on T2DM mobile apps [13]: from the 89 apps analysed, a ma-
jority was of high quality with respect to a single dimension of the disease
but only 4 out of 89 apps integrated all six dimensions, and less than half
integrated at least four of them.
Even though our study had a limited duration, we were able to deter-
mine signiﬁcant diﬀerences in patient response with respect to therapeutic
and lifestyle prescriptions. The observation period of two cycles of two weeks
each was too short to assume any life-style changes, and moreover prevented
us of thinking that a behaviour change may be sustained in the long run.
We consider that a longer duration of the study would not have yielded any
diﬀerent ﬁndings in the observed metrics, and the diﬀerences on the use and
communication values would continue as the trends observed in week 4. Pa-
tients play a critical role in choices of lifestyles by, for example, exercising,
eating well, and learning about their diabetes and as Quinn and colleagues
concluded in the WellDoc Study, some medication intensiﬁcation strategies
may be not required if the patient shows lifestyle pattern shift [18]. The sys-
tem presented in this study would be capable of reducing the morbidities and
the appearance of critical events, such as sudden hypoglycaemia and hyper-
glycaemia by balancing the drug therapy in combination with diet, physical
exercise and learning aspects of the patients, but a larger clinical evaluation
is needed to conﬁrm these hypothesis. Further investigation needs to be done
correlating the technical results with the clinical and usability outcomes for
longer periods of usage.

5 Conclusion

User Centered Design enabled us to design and implement a customized system
for T1DM and T2DM diabetes management and support. This methodology
empowered patients to make their own decisions, choices and helped to expand
the concept of Personal Health Record as an addition to the Electronic Health
Record. Our analysis shows that after an initial period, T1DM patients were
more likely to use less features of the designed system, however the commu-

16

nications sent from the mobile application stood similar in T1DM and T2DM
patients. This indicates that less use is not associated with a low compliance
or adherence.