Original Paper

Integrating User-Centered Design and Behavioral Science to
Design a Mobile Intervention for Obesity and Binge Eating: Mixed
Methods Analysis

Andrea K Graham1,2, PhD; Sean A Munson3, PhD; Madhu Reddy1,4, PhD; Sarah W Neubert1,5, BA; Emilie A Green1,5,
BA; Angela Chang1,2, BA; Bonnie Spring6, PhD; David C Mohr1,6, PhD; Jennifer E Wildes7, PhD

1Center for Behavioral Intervention Technologies, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, United States
2Department of Medical Social Sciences, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, United States
3Department of Human Centered Design & Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States
4Department of Communication Studies, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, United States
5Weinberg College of Arts and Sciences, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, United States
6Department of Preventive Medicine, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, United States
7Department of Psychiatry & Behavioral Neuroscience, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, United States

Andrea K Graham, PhD
Center for Behavioral Intervention Technologies
Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine
750 N. Lake Shore Drive
10th Floor
Chicago, IL, 60611
United States
Phone: 1 312 503 5266

Abstract

Background: 
Accounting for how end users engage with technologies is imperative for designing an efficacious mobile
behavioral intervention.
Objective: This mixed methods analysis examined the translational potential of user-centered design and basic behavioral
science to inform the design of a new mobile intervention for obesity and binge eating.
Methods: A total of 22 adults (7/22, 32% non-Hispanic White; 8/22, 36% male) with self-reported obesity and recurrent binge
eating (≥12 episodes in 3 months) who were interested in losing weight and reducing binge eating completed a prototyping design
activity over 1 week. Leveraging evidence from behavioral economics on choice architecture, participants chose treatment
strategies from 20 options (aligned with treatment targets composing a theoretical model of the relation between binge eating
and weight) to demonstrate which strategies and treatment targets are relevant to end users. The process by which participants
selected and implemented strategies and their change in outcomes were analyzed.
Results: Although prompted to select one strategy, participants selected between 1 and 3 strategies, citing perceived achievability,
helpfulness, or relevance as selection reasons. Over the week, all practiced a strategy at least once; 82% (18/22) struggled with
implementation, and 23% (5/22) added a new strategy. Several themes emerged on successes and challenges with implementation,
yielding design implications for supporting users in behavior change. In postexperiment reflections, 82% (18/22) indicated the
strategy was helpful, and 86% (19/22) planned to continue use. One-week average within-subject changes in weight (–2.2 [SD
–5.0] pounds) and binge eating (–1.6 [SD –1.8] episodes) indicated small clinical improvement.
Conclusions: Applying user-centered design and basic behavioral science yielded design insights to incorporate personalization
through user choice with guidance, which may enhance engagement with and potential efficacy of digital health interventions.

(JMIR Form Res 2021;5(5):e23809) doi: 10.2196/23809

KEYWORDS
obesity; binge eating; user-centered design; mobile intervention; engagement; experimental therapeutics

JMIR Form Res 2021 | vol. 5 | iss. 5 | e23809 | p. 1

Introduction

Experimental therapeutics and the Science of Behavior Change
program at the National Institutes of Health focus on measuring
whether experimentally manipulated, hypothesized targets of
an intervention lead to behavior change and improved clinical
outcomes [1,2]. More specifically, experimental therapeutics
first evaluates an intervention effect on a hypothesized
mechanism (ie, target); an intervention that engages the target
mechanism is then tested to determine whether changes in the
target lead to changes in clinical symptoms [3]. To date, the
experimental therapeutics Research Domain Criteria framework,
defined by the National Institute of Mental Health, has focused
on individual-level constructs (eg, cognitive systems, positive
and negative valence systems) [4]. For digital (eg, online,
mobile) interventions, we have suggested that experimental
therapeutics also must account for user engagement as a
mediator of clinical outcomes [5] because even a clinically
potent intervention will fail to improve symptoms if users do
not engage with it. However, engagement is a common problem
for digital interventions [6], and digital behavioral interventions
have been criticized for using designs that tell users what to do,
which can limit considerations for user preferences that impact
engagement [7,8].

User-centered design provides a methodology for engaging
deeply with end users about their needs, goals, and preferences
to yield discoveries about the user experience and generate
evidence for designing interventions [5,9,10]. User-centered
design aims to make technologies and services engaging (eg,
useful, usable, satisfying) by working collaboratively and
iteratively with end users to ascertain their needs and the ways
in which they interact with devices that deliver interventions
[9]. As a result, digital tools achieve greater acceptability,
understanding, adoption, and engagement [11-14], as well as
potentially improved clinical outcomes [5,11], yet clinical
scientists in health care have greatly underused design methods
[15]. One reason for this underutilization may be that design
methods appear to threaten the goal of maintaining fidelity to
an evidence-based intervention (ie, delivering the intervention
as it is intended). More specifically, conducting design activities

to understand how to deliver a digital behavioral intervention
could indeed result in design decisions to modify how the
intervention is delivered.

However, the approach to date of simply translating an
evidence-based face-to-face intervention to a digital format has
not worked; the process relies on what clinicians think users
need, the way in which in-person services are delivered does
not align with how people engage with their phones [16,17],
and it fails to take advantage of the new affordances and
opportunities offered through mobile interventions [18]. Instead,
new methods are needed to help our field understand how to
increase engagement with digital interventions while preserving
the core psychological and behavioral principles that can achieve
changes in treatment targets.

This paper aims to demonstrate the application of user-centered
design and basic behavioral science to inform the design of a
new mobile behavioral intervention that addresses both obesity
and recurrent binge eating, an eating disorder behavior
characterized by eating a large amount of food while
experiencing a sense of loss of control over eating [19]. Binge
eating affects up to 30% of treatment-seeking adults with obesity
[20-22], and more than 75% of people with recurrent binge
eating have overweight or obesity [23]. The association between
binge eating and weight gain over time [24,25] makes tackling
these health outcomes simultaneously important. In line with
an experimental therapeutics approach [1-3], the mobile
intervention design focuses on addressing putative intervention
targets hypothesized as mechanisms that contribute to the cycle
of binge eating and changes in weight. The theoretical model,
depicted in Figure 1, integrates treatment targets in
evidence-based treatments for obesity or binge eating [26-28],
with the goal of delivering behavioral and cognitive strategies
associated with these targets within a standalone mobile
intervention. Yet intervening on these targets could be achieved
through several diverse behavioral and cognitive strategies.
Because of this, a design lens is needed to learn which strategies
are relevant to end users and identify ways to support end users
in engaging with these strategies via the planned mobile
intervention.

JMIR Form Res 2021 | vol. 5 | iss. 5 | e23809 | p. 2

Figure 1. Theoretical model depicting the relation between binge eating and weight gain. The model integrates treatment targets (white boxes) in
evidence-based treatments for obesity or binge eating [26-28]. Clinical outcomes are depicted in the gray boxes.

To this end, we applied user-centered design methods to
understand how end users select strategies that could address
the treatment targets and how they implement these strategies
over 1 week. Although this brief period may be insufficient for
an end user to determine if a strategy would work for them
longer term, it allowed users to answer design questions about
how to make strategies within an intervention relevant and
engaging without devoting substantial resources to intervention
development and deployment. To avoid the shortcomings of
prior, overly prescriptive digital interventions, we had users
choose their strategy from multiple options. Behavioral
economics suggests that leveraging choice architecture, such
as using active choice (ie, forced selection among relevant
options), may improve engagement and facilitate behavior
change [29,30]. Accordingly, using the active choice paradigm
enabled assessing if such a feature would be relevant for the
mobile intervention.

Taken together, this study employed a mixed methods approach
to understand how end users would select and implement a
strategy and where they would struggle in the implementation
process. Findings inform design implications to increase
intervention engagement and, in turn, clinical impact. This work
is an example of how user-centered design and basic behavioral
science can be leveraged to inform the design of a mobile
intervention within an overarching program of research to
establish an evidence-based intervention for obesity and binge
eating. Such efforts are imperative because few publications
have documented the use of design methods to evaluate digital
interventions for eating disorders [31], and to our knowledge,
we are the first to publish on the use of design methods to create
a new digital intervention for people with eating disorders [32].

Methods

Participants

Participants were recruited using dscout (dscout Inc), an
online/mobile qualitative and market research platform.
Although small for behavioral science research, this sample size
is consistent with research in the field of human-computer
interaction [33] and was assumed to be sufficient for achieving
saturation [34-36]. This size also enabled enrolling a
representative sample of target intervention users with diverse
perspectives while adhering to sample size constraints in dscout.

Interested individuals were invited to complete an online
screening questionnaire in dscout titled “Struggles with eating
and weight” that advertised a $100 reward and 25 openings for
participation and gave a brief study overview. The 15 screening
questions were developed for this study to confirm eligibility;
demographic data (ie, age, gender, race, city of residence) were
already captured in the profile of each dscout user. Eligible
participants screened positive for obesity (BMI ≥30, based on
self-reported height and weight) and self-reported recurrent
binge eating (≥12 episodes in the past 3 months). For reporting
weight, instructions stated, “What is your current weight? Please
tell us this number based on when you measure your weight
wearing light indoor clothing and without shoes.” For reporting
binge eating, instructions stated: “Binge eating is when someone
eats an unusually large amount of food and feels a sense of loss
of control while eating.” These instructions were written to align
with the definition of binge eating in the Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition [19].
Inclusion 
criteria 
required 
that 
participants 
were
English-speaking, nonpregnant adults (aged 18 years and older),
felt they weighed more than they ought to weigh (yes/no
question), struggled with their weight or were interested in

JMIR Form Res 2021 | vol. 5 | iss. 5 | e23809 | p. 3

losing weight (yes/no question), were interested in reducing
binge eating (yes/no question), and were willing to use an app
to address these problems (yes/no question). Among respondents
who met the criteria, the final cohort was selected to ensure
diversity based on race/ethnicity, gender, and age.

Procedure

Enrollment

This study was approved by the Northwestern University
Institutional Review Board. All enrolled participants provided
online informed consent. Of those eligible, all participants who
were invited (n=25) began the study. Participation was ended
early for 3 individuals who stopped completing study
procedures. No reasons for discontinuation were provided. Only
completers (n=22) were compensated, all of whom received the
$100 compensation.

Dscout

All study procedures occurred online via the diary study feature
of dscout [37]. Dscout has over 100,000 members who can
respond to advertisements and complete screeners to determine
eligibility for research opportunities. Users primarily engage
with dscout via their smartphones, which facilitates capturing
in-the-moment, in-context experiences over time. Multiple
research prompts can be included in each diary study. Further,
users can submit multiple entries to each research prompt to

assess experiences across contexts. Dscout has several response
formats (ie, users can upload videos that are automatically
transcribed, upload pictures, submit open-ended responses, and
respond to multiple-choice prompts) and has an easy-to-use
interface for the researcher to interact with users as needed (eg,
to send reminders).

Figure 2 presents a schematic of study activities. Participants
completed design research activities over 1 month using dscout.
The first 3 weeks comprised a needs assessment to learn about
participants’ experiences with obesity and binge eating,
strategies they have used to address these problems, and ideas
for managing weight and eating. This paper focuses on the
prototyping design activity that occurred in the final 1.5 weeks
when participants were asked to “try making one change” to
help with weight and binge eating by selecting and implementing
a strategy for 1 week. Prototyping is used to iteratively evaluate
design options conveyed through versions of a product
(prototypes) [38]. Prototypes may or may not closely resemble
the intended product, referred to as high- or low-fidelity
prototypes. In this study, dscout was leveraged as a low-fidelity
prototype to gain rapid insights for designing the delivery of
strategies in the mobile intervention. As shown in Figure 2, the
prototyping activity was administered via 3 research prompts.
All 22 participants who began the prototyping activity completed
it.

Figure 2. Schematic of participant flow through the study activities, including prototyping, the focus of this analysis, and the three research prompts
it comprises. Of the 25 participants who enrolled, 22 began and completed prototyping.

Prototyping Activity

Assessment Guide
An assessment guide was created that specified the research
prompts that would be administered to evaluate user experiences.
Questions were drafted by AKG with input from SAM, MR,
DCM, and JEW. These individuals are researchers with expertise
in the treatment of eating disorders and obesity, digital
interventions, and/or user-centered design. AKG and SWN (an
undergraduate student) then practiced answering the questions
by submitting mock entries in dscout for internal testing prior
to launch with participants. AKG oversaw study administration
and data collection with participants. Study procedures and

assessment items were consistent for all participants. After
participants’entries were submitted, SWN edited the transcribed
videorecordings for accuracy and deidentification.

Selecting a Strategy
At the start of the week, participants were prompted to submit
their first entry. In this entry, participants were asked to report
their weight and number of binge eating episodes in the previous
week and were then prompted to select one strategy from 20
options to practice for the week. The instructions did not indicate
a limit to how many strategies participants could select. The
strategies aligned with the putative intervention targets of the
intervention’s theoretical model (Figure 1) and were based on

JMIR Form Res 2021 | vol. 5 | iss. 5 | e23809 | p. 4

evidence-based behavioral and cognitive strategies in
interventions for obesity and binge eating [26-28]. Using the
“think aloud” design technique [9,39], participants recorded a
video while picking their strategy, talking aloud about their
thought process as they made their choice. Participants then
provided an open-ended response indicating their guess for how
the strategy would help them.

Implementing the Strategy
Over the next week, participants submitted 3 entries showing
moments in which they practiced or were struggling to practice
their strategy. For those struggling, participants were asked to
share what was getting in the way. For each entry, participants
submitted a video and an open-ended response describing the
experience.

Reflecting on Implementation
At the end of the week, participants were prompted to submit
their final entry. They recorded a video reflecting on how the
experience went, if it matched what they guessed would happen,
and the evidence they collected on whether the strategy was
helpful. Responses were coded as “planned,” “somewhat as
planned,” and “not as planned.” Participants answered a yes/no
question on whether they would continue using the strategy in
the future and reported their weight and number of binge eating
episodes over the past week.

Analyses

Analyses focused on the process by which participants selected
and implemented strategies and their change in outcomes.
Qualitative 
analyses 
were 
conducted 
using 
Dedoose
(SocioCultural Research Consultants), a qualitative data analysis
software. Qualitative data from the baseline strategy selection

process were coded separately from the weekly entries on
implementation. Qualitative data were analyzed using thematic
analysis based on the methodology of Braun and Clark [40],
which involved reviewing transcripts to become familiar with
the data, generating codes through open coding, iteratively
applying the codes to the transcripts, and organizing the codes
systematically into broader themes. AKG oversaw these analyses
with input and review by SWN, SAM, and MR. Quantitative
data were aggregated. The difference in weight and binge eating
between the start and end of the week was calculated for each
participant, the average of which was then calculated to explore
average within-subject 1-week changes in weight and binge
eating. Given the small sample size and exploratory nature of
the quantitative analyses, a significance test was not conducted.

Results

Sample Characteristics

A total of 22 participants completed all study procedures and
were included in the analyses. Table 1 shows demographic
information on study completers. Average age was 37.0 (SD
10.2) years; 64% (14/22) identified as female. Participants
identified as White (7/22, 32%), African American/Black (6/22,
27%), Hispanic/Latino (6/22, 27%), and Asian or Pacific
Islander (2/22, 9%); one participant (5%) did not report their
race/ethnicity. Participants reported living in 12 US states.

At screening, average BMI was 37.1 (SD 5.4, range 30.3 to
49.4), and average number of binge eating episodes over the
previous 3 months was 20.5 (SD 7.3, range 12 to 35). All
participants endorsed previous attempts to lose weight, and 91%
(20/22) endorsed previous attempts to stop binge eating.

JMIR Form Res 2021 | vol. 5 | iss. 5 | e23809 | p. 5

Table 1. Study participant demographics.

State of residence
Race/ethnicity
Age
Sex
ID

California
Asian or Pacific Islander
42
Male
1

Arizona
African American/Black
45
Female
3

California
Hispanic/Latino
27
Female
4

California
Hispanic/Latino
35
Female
5

Pennsylvania
Hispanic/Latino
42
Male
6

New York
African American/Black
43
Male
7

South Carolina
Prefer not to respond
43
Female
8

Illinois
Hispanic/Latino
45
Female
9

South Carolina
White
36
Female
10

Texas
White
47
Male
11

California
White
62
Female
12

Texas
White
30
Male
13

Illinois
Asian or Pacific Islander
39
Female
14

Illinois
White
20
Female
15

California
African American/Black
43
Female
16

California
Hispanic/Latino
30
Male
19

Virginia
White
30
Female
20

Illinois
African American/Black
22
Female
21

Florida
Hispanic/Latino
39
Male
22

Ohio
White
26
Female
23

North Carolina
African American/Black
22
Female
24

New Jersey
African American/Black
45
Male
25

Selecting a Strategy

Participants selected 15 unique strategies, shown in Table 2.
Although prompted to pick 1 strategy, participants selected
between 1 and 3 strategies. Most participants (15/22, 68%)
selected 1 strategy, 23% (5/22) of participants selected 2
strategies, and 9% (2/22) selected 3 strategies. The most
commonly selected strategy was to “plan for the meals you’ll

eat this week,” selected by 6 participants. The majority (25/31,
81%) of selected strategies were associated with the intervention
targets of dietary intake and physical activity, whereas only 6
selections were associated with overvaluation of weight and/or
shape, unhealthy weight control practices, and negative affect.
The 5 strategies no one selected were associated with these latter
3 intervention targets.

JMIR Form Res 2021 | vol. 5 | iss. 5 | e23809 | p. 6

Table 2. Selection of strategies.

Helpfula %
Went as planned?
Times selected
Putative intervention target and strategy

No
Some
Yes

Dietary intake

100
—b
✓
✓
2
Eat meals and snacks at the same time each day.

50
✓
—
✓
2
Avoid eating snacks that you didn’t plan to eat.

83
✓
✓✓✓✓
✓
6
Plan for the meals you’ll eat this week.

100
—
—
✓✓
2
Find a buddy who will help you eat more healthfully.

100
—
—
✓✓✓
3
Eat smaller portions.

50
✓✓
—
—
2
Eat more fruits and vegetables.

100
—
✓
✓
2
Eat less fast food.

—
—
—
—
19
Total selections of this target

Physical activity

100
—
✓✓
✓✓
4
Regularly (approximately 3 times per week) do physical activity like walking, riding
a bike, or going to the gym (unless a doctor has said it is not appropriate/healthy for
you to exercise right now).

100
—
—
✓
1
Have less screen time: watch less television and spend less time on your computer,
tablet, or phone.

100
—
✓
—
1
Find a buddy who will help you be more physically active.

—
—
—
—
6
Total selections of this target

Overvaluation of weight and/or shape

—
—
—
—
0
When you notice yourself criticizing something about your body, stop yourself. Ask
yourself: What is the evidence that the criticism is true or not true? Then think of a
more balanced conclusion you can draw about your body.

100
—
—
✓
1
List things you like and value about yourself as a person. Remind yourself of things
that are more important to you than how your body looks or how much you weigh.

100
—
✓
✓
2
Avoid spending time in front of the mirror pointing out what you think of as your
“flaws.”

—
—
—
—
0
Stop yourself when you dwell on “feeling fat.” Tell yourself that “fat” is not a feeling
and instead say something to yourself that is not self-blaming or self-shaming.

—
—
—
—
3
Total selections of this target

Unhealthy weight control practices

100
—
✓
—
1
Avoid skipping meals or going for long stretches of time without eating.

—
—
—
—
0
Avoid “dieting” and cutting out certain types of foods.

0
—
✓
—
1
Try eating one serving of a food that you’ve been avoiding because you consider it
a “trigger” food for binge eating.

—
—
—
—
2
Total selections of this target

Negative affect

—
—
—
—
0
Do activities that make you happy and do not involve food.

—
—
—
—
0
Notice times when you’re feeling down and find something that makes you feel a
bit better about the situation.

100
—
—
✓
1
Ask a friend or loved one to do something enjoyable together or repair a relationship
in which you had a disagreement or falling out.

—
—
—
—
1
Total selections of this target

aIndicates the percentage of participants who rated their selected strategy as helpful to them.
bNot applicable.

Participants gave a variety of reasons for selecting versus not
selecting strategies. Some participants indicated they selected
a strategy because it was something they already were pursuing,
whereas for others, this was the reason they did not select that

JMIR Form Res 2021 | vol. 5 | iss. 5 | e23809 | p. 7

strategy. Participants also indicated they selected strategies they
perceived to be attainable and easy to complete or adjust to
doing, that they perceived would be most helpful to them in
managing their eating or weight, or that were new to them and
therefore were perceived to be worth trying. Participants did
not select strategies that they described as having been unhelpful
in the past or that they believed would be unhelpful for achieving
their goals around weight and binge eating. Some said certain
strategies did not apply to them and thus would be challenging
to achieve. Finally, participants did not select strategies because
they thought they would fail in the implementation.

Participants who selected multiple strategies indicated their
selections were motivated by a desire to capitalize on recent
successes with those strategies or make progress with recently
planned goals or because the strategies were perceived as serving
a similar purpose. Two participants did not provide a rationale
for why they selected multiple strategies.

While selecting strategies, all but 2 participants set a plan and/or
identified ways to implement the strategy. Most participants
(19/22, 86%) listed the benefits of maintaining a plan.
Participants guessed their strategy would help them manage
binge eating or weight (21/22, 95%), address eating-related
triggers (17/22, 77%; eg, cravings, unplanned snacking, negative
self-talk), or improve a related area (10/22, 45%; eg, increase
self-esteem, happiness, or productivity; be more present with
children; or improve their immune system).

Implementing the Strategies

Over the week, all participants reported they practiced
implementing a strategy at least once; 82% (18/22) described
moments in which they struggled with implementation. A total
of 23% (5/22) of participants indicated they focused on a new
or additional strategy. Participants changed strategies for 2
reasons. One reason was because they realized they would be
unable to work on their originally selected choice (ie, scheduling
difficulties prevented exercising with a buddy). The other reason
was to address a more pressing and/or relevant problem area
that had presented (eg, reduce binge eating by avoiding eating
unplanned snacks, increase physical activity to avoid overeating,
plan for meals and snacks to reduce overeating when very
hungry, or eat less fast food after a recent increase in this
behavior).

Participants experienced successes and challenges with
implementation; overarching themes from these results are
described here, and specific details for each strategy are detailed
in Multimedia Appendix 1.

The ways in which participants were successful ranged from
using individually focused techniques (eg, changing a routine)
to collaborating (eg, using resources and others for support);
participants used techniques that best fit their needs. Participants
were successful when they planned in advance, including when
to eat (eg, setting a schedule), what to eat (eg, meal planning,
packing healthy snacks), or how much to eat (eg, ordering
smaller portions). Participants described ways they avoided
triggers and unhealthy behaviors, such as avoiding eating
unplanned snacks, reducing stress, or doing alternative activities
to avoid overeating or triggers for overeating (eg, engaging in

physical activity, referencing a list of alternative responses in
the face of triggers, or using flash cards with positive statements
to combat negative thoughts about their body). A total of 18%
(4/22) of participants described changing their routine to engage
in healthy behaviors; 18% (4/22) practiced moderation with
their strategy (eg, using smaller dishes, eating smaller amounts
more frequently, or eating unhealthy snacks in moderation);
23% (5/22) leveraged resources (eg, social media, commercial
entities like Weight Watchers) and other people for support;
9% (2/22) found new outlets for physical activity, like being
active with pets or doing chores; and 23% (5/22) described ways
they challenged negative thinking, engaged in positive self-talk,
and practiced motivation-enhancing techniques to support
progress. During the week, 9% of participants (2/22) reflected
on the results of implementing their strategy.

Participants 
also 
described 
challenges 
that 
affected
implementation. Participants faced challenges with integrating
healthy behaviors into their schedules. They had difficulties
practicing their strategy in unforeseen situations (eg, when away
from home or in unplanned circumstances) and challenges with
sufficient planning. A total of 32% (7/22) of participants
reported challenges associated with their home environment
(eg, others in the home do not support healthy eating, ordering
fast food is more convenient than cooking, or being at home
triggered binge eating); 27% (6/22) shared how preferences for
other behaviors (eg, low desire to eat healthy foods despite
planning to do so or using birthdays to justify unhealthy eating)
and changes in motivation affected implementation; and 14%
(3/22) described the impact of stress, low mood or energy, and
financial difficulties on implementation. Finally, 23% (5/22)
conveyed they misunderstood the strategy and how it should
be applied.

Reflecting on Implementation

In 
postimplementation 
reflections, 
41% 
(9/22) 
said
implementation went as planned, 41% (9/22) said it went
somewhat as planned, and 18% (4/22) said it did not go as
planned. A total of 82% (18/22) endorsed their strategy as
helpful. Table 2 shows these ratings relative to each strategy.
Of the participants who endorsed their strategy as not helpful,
75% (3/4) said implementation did not go as planned. Finally,
86% (19/22) of participants endorsed plans to continue using
their strategy.

One-Week Changes in Weight and Binge Eating

At the start of the week, participants reported an average weight
of 225.9 (SD 34.6, range 162 to 307) pounds and engaged in
an average of 3.4 (SD 2.1, range 0 to 8) binge eating episodes
over the prior week. After implementation, participants reported
an average weight of 223.7 (SD 36.8, range 159 to 320) pounds
and average of 1.7 (SD 1.2, range 1 to 5) binge eating episodes.
Average within-subject changes in weight and binge eating were
–2.2 (SD –5.0, range –11 to 13) pounds and –1.6 (SD –1.8,
range –6 to 1) episodes, respectively.

JMIR Form Res 2021 | vol. 5 | iss. 5 | e23809 | p. 8

Discussion

Principal Findings

User-centered design has the potential to improve engagement
with and efficacy of behavioral interventions [5,9,10]. This
study aimed to inform the design of a mobile intervention for
obesity and binge eating by applying user-centered design and
basic behavioral science to understand how end users would
select and implement strategies associated with putative
intervention targets for changing weight and binge eating.
Results offered useful implications for intervention design and
future research.

Design Implications

In this prototyping activity, offering a choice in selecting
strategies seemed to be successful given the variation of
strategies participants selected. Although we did not compare
active choice to no choice and therefore cannot conclude that
active choice is better than assigning strategies to participants,
evidence from behavioral economics shows that prompting
people to make choices from several options (ie, active choice
[29,30]) can spur behavior change. This may be because such
an approach capitalizes on user motivation to make a change;
on the whole in this study, participants selected strategies to
experience success. Helping users achieve early success could
make them more likely to sustain engagement; indeed, most
participants endorsed plans to continue using their strategy after
the week. Sustained engagement is especially important for
people with obesity as failed weight loss attempts predict
reduced success in future weight loss efforts [41,42]. Thus, the
first design implication is to incorporate ways to offer users
choices in selecting strategies and, more broadly, the areas they
want to address in treatment. Offering choices also overcomes
critiques of digital interventions for using designs that limit
autonomy; digital interventions often have preset curricula and
prescribed behavior change goals [7,8,43].

With that said, a second, complementary design implication is
to reduce or scaffold the number of strategies presented.
Research on decision making shows that offering too many
choices leads to choice overload [44,45]. For this study, 20
options were offered. However, several entries indicated that
some strategies could be collapsed, and 5 strategies were not
selected. For example, no one selected “avoid ‘dieting’ and
cutting out certain types of foods,” perhaps due to
misunderstanding what this strategy means and why it has
clinical relevance or because users may not want to follow this
recommendation. A challenge for behavior change interventions
is balancing what users want with what is clinically indicated
when these areas may not align. It is important to incorporate
designs that make less appealing but clinically necessary
strategies more enticing and relevant rather than have those
strategies disregarded. Designs promoting choice could be
achieved through guided customization, which facilitates user
choice within a defined array of options or via credible
suggestions [46]. For example, it may be beneficial to deliver
a distilled set of strategies [47], particularly early in the
intervention, that are appealing to end users while also aligned
with best clinical practices and design features that guide users

to appropriate strategies and provide a rationale for their
potential benefit to the user [48]. This distilled list or guided
recommendations could be based on users’ identified problem
areas or past progress, which could strengthen its perceived
relevance to the user. Strategy selection around commonly
avoided strategies also could be an area where guidance from
a coach may be useful. Determining the optimal number of
strategies presented at any one time remains to be tested, as
does testing whether allowing users to select multiple strategies
has benefits over selecting only single strategies at a time
[49,50].

The third design implication is to define strategies when they
are presented. Participants were not given definitions for the 20
options (to learn how users interpret the strategies) nor did they
receive feedback as they shared their experiences throughout
the week. As a result, seemingly straightforward strategies were
interpreted in multiple ways. The variation in how participants
interpreted strategies was particularly notable given that most
selected strategies focused on the main intervention targets of
behavioral weight loss treatment, changing dietary intake and
physical activity, and 100% of participants endorsed prior weight
loss attempts. This suggests that digital intervention designers
cannot make assumptions about what and how much users know
about eating and weight management; they need to educate
users about strategies so they are positioned for success. Further,
for nearly 60% of participants, implementation did not go as
planned, likely because the strategies lacked specificity in how
they should be implemented. Consequently, some participants
abandoned their strategy or reported feelings of failure,
disheartenment, and decreased willingness to practice that
strategy again in the future—opposite the intention of offering
choice to increase engagement. Based on these findings, an
intervention architecture may need to include descriptions of
what the strategy is, why the strategy is relevant to managing
eating and weight, and how the strategy could be implemented.
Presenting these details could help avoid misinterpretations,
make unfamiliar strategies seem less daunting, and offer
structure and scaffolding for their implementation.

However, delivering only instructional content on how to
implement a strategy is likely insufficient. A challenge for
technology-mediated services is moving users from qualitative,
often distant goals to something concrete and actionable [51].
Thus, the fourth design implication is to provide support for
implementing the strategy over time, something that was missing
from the prototyping activity. Although results showed that
participants already had some tacit understanding of
evidence-based behavior change techniques (eg, planning for
when, what, or how much to eat reflects action planning;
avoiding eating unplanned snacks because doing so triggers
overeating reflects information about antecedents) [52], many
participants still struggled. Accordingly, findings suggest there
would be utility in incorporating guidance and support as users
implement their strategies.

Guidance and support could be delivered through coaching and
content or app designs that model how to implement strategies.
Throughout implementation, timely feedback on progress would
be helpful, too, as this is an important component of
health-related behavior change strategies [53,54] and

JMIR Form Res 2021 | vol. 5 | iss. 5 | e23809 | p. 9

measurement-based care more broadly [55]. Because allowing
participants to implement their strategy for 1 week without
feedback was problematic for some, delivering feedback soon
after users begin implementation may enable users to
course-correct more quickly. To balance against overly
prescriptive intervention designs, corrective feedback could
focus on problematic implementation (eg, when the user
misunderstands the strategy). Another challenge was planning
how to implement strategies, including across contexts, and
executing those plans. Thus, when a strategy is presented,
guidance should include designs that help users plan for
implementation. At the same time, participants used existing
resources to support implementation, like finding recipes and
physical activity videos online. Such insights suggest it can be
helpful to direct users to existing resources or help users
creatively harness resources in their everyday environment,
which could also save the time and costs of building app-specific
versions of these resources in the intervention.

Application of User-Centered Design to Behavioral
Science

Much can be learned from this study in terms of applying
user-centered design to drive progress for health-related
behavioral interventions. This low-fidelity prototyping activity
used qualitative and quantitative data to understand why and
how users engage with aspects of an intervention—in this case,
selecting and implementing strategies. The data collection
platform and design methods enabled gathering in-the-moment
perspectives from diverse participants who were matched to
intended intervention users. End user perspectives were rapidly
gathered with low participant burden, given that each entry
required only a few minutes to complete and could be submitted
from participants’ smartphones. Researcher burden was also
minimized through the use of remote recruitment, remote data
collection with multiple response types, and automatic video
transcription. The design methods generated insights for
intervention design without spending time or money developing
a mobile intervention or creating high-fidelity prototypes.
Further, these insights were gleaned from relatively few
participants.

Limitations

However, limitations should be noted. First, because procedures
occurred remotely using an existing platform (ie, dscout), the

research team was unable to ask clarifying or follow-up
questions about participant entries, which may have limited the
number and depth of insights generated. Second, the lack of
definitions for each of the strategies may have influenced
strategy selection and adherence and therefore generalizability
and clinical relevance of the findings. Third, the study design
makes it difficult to disentangle how participant improvements
in the implementation process were affected by having to submit
multiple entries about their progress, as longitudinal design
research itself can affect behavior [56]. Also, despite asking
participants to submit 3 entries showing their progress over the
week, we did not ask participants to report the total number of
times they implemented their strategy over the week. Fourth,
although a 1-week observation period was used to gain rapid
insights into strategy selection and implementation, this
timeframe may have been too short for users to confidently
assess the strategy’s efficacy. Fifth, the study cannot inform
how users will iterate on their experiences implementing
strategies or whether they will sustain engagement with
implementing self-selected strategies over a longer duration.
Since behavior change must occur over the long term, future
design research could explore how to support users’ iterative
learning over time [57]. Going forward, design recommendations
should be evaluated for their impact on longer term engagement
and clinical improvement. Last, although participants had small
average improvements in weight and binge eating, these findings
should be interpreted with caution given the brief observation
period and small sample size, as achieving clinical change was
not the objective of the prototyping activity. Moreover, use of
self-report to assess weight and binge eating can be flawed and
subject to recall biases.

Conclusions

Results of this study highlight the translational potential of
applying user-centered design and basic behavioral science to
inform the design of a mobile behavioral intervention for obesity
and binge eating. Discovering ways to make digital technologies
relevant to end users is imperative to ensure these tools fit into
the fabric of users’ lives and therefore are used in the moments
and contexts when they are needed most. Such efforts can
substantially improve engagement with and potential efficacy
of digital health-related behavioral interventions.