Original Paper

Digital Health Equity and Tailored Health Care Service for People
With Disability: User-Centered Design and Usability Study

Sandeul Ha1, RN; Seung Hee Ho2, PhD; Young-Hyeon Bae2, PhD; Minyoung Lee3, PhD; Ju Hee Kim2, MPH; Ju Han
Kim4, MD, PhD; Jisan Lee5, RN, PhD

1Department of Nursing, Kyung-Hee University Medical Center, Seoul, Republic of Korea
2Rehabilitation Research Institute, Korea National Rehabilitation Center, Seoul, Republic of Korea
3Department of Holistic Integrative Healing Studies, Seoul Cyber University, Seoul, Republic of Korea
4College of Medicine, Seoul National University, Seoul, Republic of Korea
5Department of Nursing, Gangneung-Wonju National University, Wonju, Gangwon State, Republic of Korea

Jisan Lee, RN, PhD
Department of Nursing
Gangneung-Wonju National University
402 W5 Department of Nursing, Gangneung-Wonju National University,
150 Namwon-ro, Heungeop-myeon
Wonju, Gangwon State, 26403
Republic of Korea
Phone: 82 33 760 8646

Abstract

Background: As digital health services advance, digital health equity has become a significant concern. However, people with
disability and older adults still face health management limitations, particularly in the COVID-19 pandemic. An essential area
of investigation is proposing a patient-centered design strategy that uses patient-generated health data (PGHD) to facilitate optimal
communication with caregivers and health care service providers.
Objective: This study aims to conceptualize, develop, and validate a digitally integrated health care service platform for people
with disability, caregivers, and health care professionals, using Internet of Things devices and PGHD to contribute to improving
digital health equity.
Methods: The methodology consists of 5 stages. First, a collaborative review of the previous app, Daily Healthcare 1.0, was
conducted with individuals with disabilities, caregivers, and health care professionals. Secondly, user needs were identified via
personas, scenarios, and user interface sketches to shape a user-centered service design. The third stage created an enhanced app
that integrated these specifications. In the fourth stage, heuristic evaluations by clinical and app experts paved the way for Daily
Healthcare 2.0, now featuring Internet of Things device integration. Conclusively, in the fifth stage, an extensive 2-month usability
evaluation was executed with user groups comprising individuals with disabilities using the app and their caregivers.
Results: Among the participants, “disability welfare information and related institutional linkage” was the highest priority.
Three of the 14 user interface sketches the participants created were related to “providing educational content.” The 11 heuristic
evaluation experts identified “focusing on a single task” as a crucial issue and advocated redesigning the home menu to simplify
it and integrate detailed menus. Subsequently, the app Daily Healthcare 2.0 was developed, incorporating wearable devices for
collecting PGHD and connecting individuals with disabilities, caregivers, and health care professionals. After the 2-month usability
evaluation with 27 participants, all participants showed an increase in eHealth literacy, particularly those who used the caregiver
app. Relatively older users demonstrated improved scores in health IT usability and smartphone self-efficacy. All users’satisfaction
and willingness to recommend increased, although their willingness to pay decreased.
Conclusions: In this study, we underscore the significance of incorporating the distinct needs of individuals with disabilities,
caregivers, and health care professionals from the design phase of a digital health care service, highlighting its potential to advance
digital health equity. Our findings also elucidate the potential benefits of fostering partnerships between health consumers and
providers, thereby attenuating the vulnerability of marginalized groups, even amid crises such as the COVID-19 pandemic.

J Med Internet Res 2023 | vol. 25 | e50029 | p. 1

Emphasizing this imperative, we advocate for sustained endeavors to bolster the digital literacy of individuals with disabilities
and champion collaborative cocreation, aiming to uphold the collective ethos of health and digital health equity.

(J Med Internet Res 2023;25:e50029) doi: 10.2196/50029

KEYWORDS
digital health equity; digital health care service; COVID-19; mobile health; mHealth; mobile apps; needs assessments; heuristic;
people with disability; caregivers; health personnel; mobile phone

Introduction

Background

According to the definition provided by the World Health
Organization, health equity is the absence of unfair, avoidable,
and remediable differences in health status among people and
is achieved when everyone can attain their full health potential
[1]. A subset of this, digital health equity is the readiness of all
individuals to access digital health, regardless of age, race,
income, or technology access, ensuring that no one is left behind
due to a lack of connectivity or literacy [2]. In this era of digital
proliferation, discrepancies in the accessibility, capacity, and
quality of health information technology pose significant
challenges. Researchers, including UNICEF, have advocated
literacy-related studies and education targeting vulnerable
populations to overcome the digital divide [3,4]. However, the
digital divide persists. The imperative to overcome this digital
divide and enhance digital health equity arises from its
contribution to health inequity, posing a threat to overall health
equity. To promote an inclusive digital society, digital health
interventions should prioritize health equity and accessibility
for those with disabilities, ensuring that they do not exacerbate
inequalities while leveraging technology’s potential to overcome
physical barriers and enhance health equity [5].

People with disability require more focused and continuous
symptom management. According to the American Association
on Health and Disability’s COVID-19 and Disability Survey,
which assessed the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on access
to health care for people with disability, 56% (n=1375) of
respondents reported that regular treatment (eg, physical therapy,
dialysis, blood tests) was discontinued owing to the COVID-19
pandemic [6]. Since the outbreak of COVID-19, the rate of
emerging health problems and deteriorating health conditions
has increased among people with disability (14.7%) to a greater
extent than among those without disability (9.9%) [7]. However,
the percentage of people with disability (36.8%) receiving
medical treatment because of health problems was lower than
those without disability (52.5%), and it was found that people
with disability had difficulty accessing medical care and using
medical services [7]. Especially in the context of the COVID-19
pandemic, individuals with disabilities faced exacerbation of
challenges that already existed, encountering barriers such as
access to information, communication difficulties, and
educational hurdles; however, through the advent of new
innovations and strengthened social and familial support,
positive transformations are achievable amid the pandemic [8,9].
Therefore, it is essential to provide the latest and easy-to-obtain
information on COVID-19 and public health, which is changing

rapidly, in a way that suits users [10] and to provide
self-management tools using digital health care services.

Mobile apps have emerged as a prevalent modality in personal
health care management. As evidenced by 2022 data,
approximately 67.1% of the global population engages with
mobile phone technology [11]. In the specific context of
individuals with disability, a significant surge in smartphone
use has been reported, increasing from 54% in the 2012 to 2013
period to a substantial 88% between 2017 and 2018 [12]. A
Pew Research Center study revealed that 72% of the population
with disability in the United States used smartphones in 2021
[13]. A survey by the National Information Society Agency
indicated a slightly lower smartphone use rate of 83.6% in the
population with disability in Korea, which is somewhat less
than the general population’s 93.5%. However, this still suggests
that a significant majority (8 of 10) of individuals with disability
use smartphones [14]. At the same time, the number of health
management apps that overtake wellness-focused apps has been
increasing [15].

Patient-generated health data (PGHD), predominantly sourced
from patients via smartphone apps and Internet of Things (IoT)
devices, represent an accessible and expansive data collection
modality. These apps harness PGHD, enhance health literacy,
and position patients as central participants in their health
management, thereby catalyzing improved health outcomes
[16,17]. From a clinical perspective, PGHD provide unique
insights into patients’day-to-day activities, information typically
beyond the purview of standard hospital data acquisition. This
additional layer of data offers health care professionals the
potential to bolster patient-centric health care strategies and
facilitates informed clinical decision-making processes [18].
The growing recognition of PGHD’s importance within health
care necessitates expanding digital health services using PGHD.
This expansion is crucial for enhancing health equity and
ensuring consistent health care access for individuals with
disabilities. This study seeks to bolster health care engagement
for users with disability by using IoT devices capable of
integrating with mobile apps and gathering PGHD, thereby
further enhancing health care outcomes.

Cooperation between caregivers and health care professionals
is essential for the health care of people with disability. Primary
caregiving, often undertaken by families or trusted friends,
includes managing daily activities and complex health tasks
[19]. Given their roles, caregivers significantly influence the
health status of those with disability but also endure physical
and mental burdens [20]. The other essential stakeholders are
health care professionals. It has been verified that if a patient’s
health information is shared through the system, it increases the
patient’s understanding and participation, and efficient

J Med Internet Res 2023 | vol. 25 | e50029 | p. 2

management is possible [21]. Consequently, this study
developed an app- and web-based digital health care service
platform that connects with health care professionals not only
for people with disability but also for caregivers, promoting
mutual health awareness and customized self-care.

Diversity in health apps helps increase access to health care.
However, their designs often fail to consider individuals with
disability [22]. It is necessary to design and verify a
corresponding health care app after identifying the priority needs
of people with disability for app development [23]. In the past,
the National Rehabilitation Center developed a wellness care
mobile app called Daily Healthcare 1.0 for the health care of
people with disability [24]. In previous usability evaluations of
Daily Healthcare 1.0, there was a high level of interest and
curiosity toward the app; however, the overall satisfaction and
actual use rates were low. Suggestions such as user-friendly
improvement and content supplementation were raised as
limitations and complementary points of Daily Healthcare 1.0.
This study attempted to design a service based on the user’s
needs. In addition, Daily Healthcare 2.0 developed into a
platform where people with disability, caregivers, and health
care professionals can communicate. Caregivers act as
companions for users with disabilities, jointly using the same
mobile app integrated with IoT devices for health management.

Health care professionals monitor the health outcomes of both
individuals with disability and their caregivers via a web system.
If necessary, providers can transmit relevant information through
the app.

Aim of This Study

This study ultimately aims to increase health care accessibility
and digital health equity for people with disability and their
caregivers and to connect with health care professionals for
personalized self-care. For this, we intend to reflect the users’
needs from the design and develop a digital health care service
platform based on PGHD collected through an app and wearable
devices to verify its effectiveness.

Methods

Overview

The progress of this study is illustrated in Figure 1. The Digital
Health Equity Framework and Health Equity Impact Assessment
emphasize the importance of including vulnerable populations
in co-design and evaluation to address their needs in service
design for improved digital health equity [25,26]. Therefore,
this study began by deriving the needs of people with disability
and their caregivers in step 1.

Figure 1. The process of this study. Health-ITUES: Health Information Technology Usability Evaluation Scale; KeHEALS: Korean eHealth Literacy
Scale; SMART: smartphone heuristics; uMARS: user version of the Mobile Application Rating Scale.

Step 1: Deriving User Needs

The participants in this study are people with mild physical
disability or cerebral lesions such as orthopedic impairment or
traumatic brain injury. This was chosen because, as of 2022,
out of the 2.65 million people with disability in the country,
53.6% are represented by this group. In this step, people with
disability, their caregivers, and health care professionals were
recruited from 2 central health and medical centers for people
with disability. The recruitment process for research participants

was initiated by sending formal documents outlining the study’s
objectives to relevant departments across 2 centers within the
National Rehabilitation Institute. In response, health care
professionals who expressed interest in participating aided in
recruiting people with disability and their caregivers.

The importance (1-4 points), validity (1-4 points), and
preference (preference: 1; nonpreference: 0) of each app feature
in Daily Healthcare 1.0 were evaluated. The highest-scoring

J Med Internet Res 2023 | vol. 25 | e50029 | p. 3

features were derived by adding the evaluation scores for each
need.

User needs were derived using the following stages:
brainstorming and mind mapping, persona and scenario, and
developing a user needs list [27,28]. Persona and scenario
techniques are the methodologies used to create virtual users
of apps developed in this study. These techniques help identify
the needs of service users and predict their behavior when
implementing the service [29]. First, 2 people were formed into
a team for each group (people with disability, caregivers, and
health care professionals). Brainstorming and mind maps were
conducted on the theme “IoT-connected health care app for
those with disability.” Subsequently, through discussion, 1
persona was set up for each team, and a scenario in which the
persona uses the health care app was written. The participants
then listed the persona’s needs and added them to the checklist.
Up to 3 needs were identified through sharing and discussion.
When drawing the user interface (UI), the 3 selected user’s
needs were included and presented on the UI screen.

Step 2: Designing Daily Healthcare 2.0

After reviewing the app feature evaluation scores and UI drawn
based on the user needs of Daily Healthcare 1.0 in step 1, the
priority of app features to be included in Daily Healthcare 2.0
was set. Reflecting on this priority, the content to be included
in the Daily Healthcare 2.0 app was planned. Subsequently, the
mobile app UI designer composed the menu within the app and
designed the UI for the Daily Healthcare 2.0 app.

Step 3: Heuristic Evaluation for Experts

To identify the expected problems in advance, 11 experts (5
app experts and 6 clinical experts) were recruited. Clinical
experts include physicians, nurses, and physical therapists with
experience in research or treatment related to people with
disability. App experts are app designers or developers with
experience in designing or developing health-related apps.
Convenience and snowball sampling were used as the
recruitment methods [30].

The heuristic evaluation was conducted, assuming that Daily
Healthcare 2.0 was implemented. Focusing on the app’s core
functions, a link to a 3-minute and 17-second video recording
app screen was distributed, and the experts evaluated the app

after watching the video guide. Experts who had already been
recruited and voluntarily expressed their willingness to
participate were sent an email containing links to a video guide
and web-based survey. The open web-based survey was created
using Survey Monkey (Momentive Global Inc), a specialized
web service for web-based questionnaires. Experts who
participated in the evaluation were remunerated with an
honorarium. Moreover, consultation with an assistive technology
expert was conducted to make the app easy to use for persons
with disability, along with heuristic evaluations. On the basis
of the consultation, the Daily Healthcare 2.0 designer and
developer discussed selected factors that should be considered
in the development of Daily Healthcare 2.0 for a people with
disability–friendly platform.

This study used a short heuristic evaluation tool with 12
questions by Joyce et al [31]. This is the latest heuristic tool,
published in 2016, although previous health care app research
has used heuristic evaluation tools by Nielsen and Molich [32]
or Bertini et al [33], and these traditional tools could be helpful
for comparison. In the Joyce et al [31] tool, the top of each item
was marked with the word SMART (smartphone heuristics) to
differentiate it from other heuristic evaluation tools. The severity
rating, which evaluates the severity of the problem for each
item, was a 3-point scale (1-3 points) that used the evaluation
rating developed by Sauro [34]. It consisted of a 3-point scale
to reduce confusion over “0 points” and to collect positive
feedback through the “other” item (1: minor; 2: moderate; 3:
critical; other: suggestion). The higher the score, the more
functional the problem and the more the problem interfered
with app use.

Step 4: Developing Daily Healthcare 2.0

The structure of the Daily Healthcare 2.0 service system is
shown in Figure 2. The system was developed into a platform
where people with disability, caregivers, and health care
professionals can communicate. Caregivers act as companions
to users with disabilities, jointly using the Daily Healthcare 2.0
app integrated with IoT devices for their health management.
Health care professionals could monitor the health outcomes
of both individuals with disabilities and their caregivers via a
web system. If necessary, providers can transmit relevant
information through the app.

Figure 2. Development of Daily Healthcare 2.0. DB: database; IoT: Internet of Things.

J Med Internet Res 2023 | vol. 25 | e50029 | p. 4

The Daily Healthcare 2.0 app used the Android 12 software
development kit and Google Fit application programming
interface in the Java environment to collect the PGHD generated
during the daily lives of people with disability and their
caregivers. An activity tracker (Xiaomi Mi Band 6) and
Bluetooth weight scale (Xiaomi Mi-Scale 2) were selected as
IoT devices and developed to be connected with the app. Mi
Band 6 was used to collect data such as daily walking rate, daily
sleep time, and heart rate, and Mi-Scale 2 was used to collect
body weight data. PGHD collected by IoT devices were
transmitted to Android mobile devices with the Mi Fitness app
installed through Bluetooth pairing using the Mi Fitness app.
Mi Fitness and Google Fit were linked to the user’s Google
account, and finally, PGHD generated by the IoT device were
sent to the Google Fit database connected to the user’s Google
account. The implemented Daily Healthcare 2.0 app receives
PGHD from the Google Fit database to which the user’s Google
account is connected through the Google Fit application
programming interface, which could be shared and verified by
people with disability and their caregivers.

The UI design of the app was modified according to the
evaluation results of step 3. In addition, an instructional manual
created in PDF and MP4 format was meticulously engineered
to augment proficiency in app operation and IoT device
integration among people with disability and their caregivers.

Step 5: Usability Evaluation for App Users

Overview

UI or user experience guidelines on mobile app or web
accessibility for individuals with disabilities and considerations
for development [35,36] emphasize that the UI or user
experience design should not necessarily be exclusive to
individuals with disabilities. Instead, the design should be
universally accessible and usable, including for older people,
irrespective of the degree of disability. Hence, this study
conducted usability evaluations on the Daily Healthcare 2.0 app
not strictly with individuals with disabilities and their caregivers
but with a broader demographic to gather meaningful initial
feedback.

Daily Healthcare 2.0, strategically designed to enable health
information sharing between users with disabilities and
caregivers, has attracted user pairs with similar relational
dynamics and health management needs. These pairs, including
older adult parents with an adult daughter or son, couples,
relatives, and friends, exhibited varying degrees of familiarity
with the app and IoT device use. For example, parents aged 50
to 70 years requiring technical assistance evaluated the app for
people with disability, whereas their tech-savvy offspring (aged
30-40 years) appraised the app for caregivers.

The participants engaged with the IoT devices integrated with
the app for 2 months. Usability evaluation was performed 3
times: before, during, and after the intervention. Participants
who had already been recruited and expressed their willingness
to participate in the study underwent 3 usability evaluations
administered through web-based surveys. The open web-based
surveys were created using Survey Monkey, a specialized web
service for web-based questionnaires. Each time a usability

evaluation was conducted, a link to the web-based survey was
sent to the participants’email addresses, encouraging voluntary
participation. Upon completing the survey, participants were
compensated with a nominal participation fee. All questionnaires
were consistent in their composition. After the questionnaire,
the participants were checked for their consent to the in-depth
interview. The interview was conducted as a 1:1 semistructured
interview over the phone by organizing questions based on the
questionnaire used in the usability evaluation and about their
experience (Multimedia Appendix 1). No usability evaluation
has been conducted on the web interface, designated
“Wellnesscare,” developed for health care professionals. This
interface merely represents an upgrade intended for
interoperability with the previously implemented disability
management system [37] and Daily Healthcare 2.0 app.
Wellnesscare allows health care professionals to register the
individuals with disability they supervise, allowing them to
monitor their activity records effectively.

To enhance digital health equity, improvements in technology
and internet access, as well as literacy related to the technology,
are required [2]. This study measured app improvements using
the Korean Health Information Technology Usability Evaluation
Scale (Health-ITUES), and literacy was assessed using the
Korean eHealth Literacy Scale (KeHEALS). Smartphone
self-efficacy and satisfaction with app use were also measured.
The questionnaire contained 36 items. There were 20 items on
health IT usability, 4 on smartphone self-efficacy, 8 on eHealth
literacy, and 4 on satisfaction. Each item was evaluated using
a Likert scale with responses ranging from “strongly agree” (5
points) to “strongly disagree” (1 point).

Health IT Usability

The Health-ITUES, previously deployed among adult users and
medical professionals [38], was used in its Korean adaptation,
the Korean Health-ITUES, as translated by Lee and Schnall
[39]. The Health-ITUES is structured around four subdomains:
(1) impact, (2) perceived usefulness, (3) perceived ease of use,
and (4) user control. In the research conducted by Lee and
Schnall [39], Cronbach α coefficient was determined to be .951,
whereas in this study, it was found to be .967.

Smartphone Self-Efficacy

In this study, the measure of smartphone self-efficacy was
adapted from the digital media literacy assessment instrument
developed by Kim [40] and modified to fulfill our research
objectives. In the investigation by Kim [40], the reported
Cronbach α value was .901, whereas in this study, it was .906.

KeHEALS Evaluation

Digital literacy was measured in this study as a key factor in
reducing the digital divide and improving digital health equity.
KeHEALS was used to measure the participants’ ability to
search for, comprehend, and evaluate desired health information
from the internet, enabling them to address health issues.
KeHEALS leverages a culturally adapted Korean version of the
eHealth Literacy Scale [41], which was initially devised by
Norman and Skinner [42]. In the research by Chang et al [41],
the reported Cronbach αvalue was .89, whereas in this study,
it was .958.

J Med Internet Res 2023 | vol. 25 | e50029 | p. 5

Satisfaction

In this study, satisfaction was assessed using subjective
evaluation items from the user version of the Mobile Application
Rating Scale [43], a tool developed to evaluate the quality of
apps [44].

This tool includes questions pertaining to anticipated future use
frequency, willingness to recommend, and willingness to pay
alongside satisfaction measurements. The inquiries for this
assessment were used in their Korean-translated version [45]
to ensure relevance and comprehension in the target
demographic. In the research by Stoyanov et al [43], the reported
Cronbach α value was .78; in this study, it was .743.

Ethical Considerations

The study design was approved by the institutional review board
of Seoul National University Hospital (C-2109-136-1257).
Before conducting the study, all participants were provided with
an explanatory document, and after obtaining their informed
consent, needs were derived and evaluations were performed.

All research-related data were collected solely for this study.
All information gathered from the participants was securely
stored in encrypted files, accessible only to the principal
investigator and authorized research team members. The
converted research data files are stored in a cloud database held
by the principal investigator, and access is restricted to approved
research team members.

Data Analysis

Health IT usability, smartphone self-efficacy, KeHEALS, and
satisfaction were evaluated using a Likert scale ranging from 1
to 5. This study used descriptive statistics to assess the
significance of variations in the measured values before, during,
and after the usability evaluation, using mean and SD as the
metrics of interest. During the focus group interviews,
significant points were noted down by the research team.
Themes were used to categorize the collected interview data
through discussions among the researchers.

Results

Funding was provided for research for 8 months in 2021, and
49 individuals with disabilities, caregivers, health care
professionals, and informatics experts participated until

November 2021. In addition, data analysis was conducted until
May 2022.

Step 1: Deriving User Needs

A total of 11 participants (3 individuals with disability, 2
caregivers, and 6 health care professionals) were evaluated on
19 app features in Daily Healthcare 1.0 according to their needs.
As a result, “guide to welfare benefits for the disabled” received
the highest score with 76 points, followed by “provide
information on health behavior guidelines for the disabled in
national disaster situation (COVID-19)” and “information on
health examination methods and institutions for the disabled”
with 72 points, and “provide educational contents” with 71
points. These 4 needs items were “favored” by 10 of 11
participants.

Two teams comprised individuals with disability (among the 3
people with disability, 1 individual had difficulty with the speed
of conversation and using their hands, so with the assistance of
a researcher, needs were derived for that individual alone), 1
team of caregivers, and 3 teams of health care professionals
engaged in brainstorming and mind mapping regarding the
Disability IoT App. Following the sessions, each team created
one persona and a corresponding use scenario for the app.

Four common needs were identified from the persona’s
scenarios of the people with disability team: “guide to welfare
benefits for the people with disability,” “provide educational
content,” “provide information on health behavior guidelines
for the people with disability in national disaster situations
(COVID-19),” and “telemedicine.” Furthermore, additional
needs were identified, including “link to first aid services in
case of an emergency,” “creating a community,” “guide to health
examination institutions for the people with disability,” and
“booking means of transportation.” In the caregiver team’s
persona scenario, a need for “training content related to exercise
or nutrition” was identified. For the health care professional
team, needs such as “institution/service linkage and monitoring,”
“guide to welfare benefits for the disabled,” “provide
information on health behavior guidelines for the people with
disability in national disaster situations (COVID-19),” “provide
health monitoring and feedback,” and “provide a PGHD sharing
platform for the people with disability and caregivers” were
derived. Examples of the identified personas and scenarios are
presented in Textbox 1.

J Med Internet Res 2023 | vol. 25 | e50029 | p. 6

Textbox 1. Examples of the identified personas and scenarios.

Persona: people with disability team A

• Occupation: employee at a disability center

• Education level: graduate of a vocational college

• Annual salary: 30 million KRW (US $22,188)

• Persona quote: “Let’s live without being subservient. Let’s not give up!”

• Web-based activity: actively engaged

• Offline activity: frequently meets friends who are colleagues at work, gradually meets fewer past friends due to changes in lifestyle, participates in
disability-related rallies

• Entry point: easily obtains health management app information at the disability center

• Social media proficiency: uses social media 1 to 2 times a day, frequently uses Facebook, utilizes YouTube for video consumption

• Smartphone proficiency: high

• Technological proficiency: high, adept at using a laptop

• Customer goals: acquiring information, sharing with others, utilizing disability-related information for work purposes at the disability center

• Desired information or features: welfare benefits, health check-ups, medication-related information, etc.

Scenario: health care professionals team A

• Sumi is responsible for the health management of an intellectually disabled individual with diabetes who is caring for a newborn. She arrived at the
office of Health Center in the morning and powered on her computer. An alert notified her that the individual did not attend their outpatient visit for
diabetes management yesterday. Sumi contacted the individual to inquire about the reason but realized they lacked a clear understanding of the
importance of diabetes management. Through the Wellnesscare system, Sumi sent a link to the individual’s disability-specific app, containing a video
titled “Understanding Diabetes and Health Management,” to enhance their understanding of diabetes. Additionally, she adjusted the upcoming outpatient
schedule and informed the individual about the revised schedule. Sumi also uploaded the outpatient schedule information to an information-sharing
application to enable mutual information exchange.

Participants created app UIs implementing high-priority needs
identified from the personas’scenarios. Six UIs were developed
in the disabled team, 6 UIs were developed, including 2 for
“welfare benefits information,” 2 for “remote consultations,” 1
for “educational content,” and 1 for “examination methods and
facility guidance.” The caregiver team designed 3 UIs associated
with 
“educational 
content,” 
“accessing 
nutrition/diet
information,” and “health monitoring and feedback.” The health

care professional teams produced 5 UIs related to “welfare
benefits information,” “educational content,” “health information
sharing,” “remote services,” and “disability health behavior
guidelines during disasters.” Among the total of 14 UIs, the
most frequently depicted needs were “disability welfare benefit
information” (3 UIs) and “provision of educational content” (3
UIs). Examples of the UIs created by the participants are
illustrated in Figure 3.

J Med Internet Res 2023 | vol. 25 | e50029 | p. 7

Figure 3. App user interface created by the participants.

Step 2: Designing Daily Healthcare 2.0

In step 1, the feasibility of developing the UI and high-priority
needs derived from the personas were assessed, and alternative
methods of providing information were considered if
development was not feasible. Consequently, the Daily
Healthcare 2.0 app features were organized as follows: home,
profile, health records, health record review, wellness assistant
(educational content and information provision), health together
(information sharing with caregivers), and community. In
addition, the app incorporated the visualization of PGHD
collected from IoT devices in graphs and included a feature for
users to self-record meals and medication information
separately. Furthermore, the app allowed users to set goals for
healthy activities such as alcohol consumption, smoking, and
exercise, and track the progress toward achieving those goals.
The design process prioritized the app’s development for users
with disabilities, which served as the foundation for designing
the app for caregivers.

Step 3: Heuristic Evaluation for Experts

The heuristic evaluation, conducted with 11 experts (6 clinical
experts and 5 app experts), revealed that usability issues within
the app were assessed to be minor, closely approaching a score
of 1 on a severity scale (12 items: mean 1.37, SD 0.31). Among
these items, the “SMART 3: prevent problems and resolve
problems immediately” item received the highest average score
of 1.91 (SD 0.79), whereas the “SMART 5: focus on one task”
category received the lowest average score of 1.09 (SD 0.29).

The opinions of 11 expert evaluators are presented in Table 1.
The following features have been added and improved for users
with disabilities or older people: high-contrast color design, text
size enlargement function, automatic log-in features, detailed
color specifications for each function, and insertion of the main
menu at the top of the menu tree. In addition, the health records
and health record verification menus were integrated to
streamline the main menu.

J Med Internet Res 2023 | vol. 25 | e50029 | p. 8

Table 1. Opinions gathered through expert-targeted heuristic evaluation (n=11).

Whether to apply
Opinions
SMARTa items

Apply
SMART 1: Provides imme-
diate notification of status
•
App push notifications limited to a maximum of 2 times
•
Send a reminder immediately that must be checked
•
Extended duration of error message pop-ups considering users with disability or
older adults
•
Message alert for log-in failures

Apply
SMART 2: Use consistent
terms with familiar rules
and standards

•
Auto-refresh feature needed when scrolling up or down for convenience
•
Adjust spacing between main buttons at the bottom
•
Need a concise layout for the main screen
•
Simplify menu names

Apply
SMART 3: Prevent prob-
lems and resolve problems
immediately

•
Automatic detection and connection of IoTb devices via Bluetooth
•
In-app inquiry feature or connection to available inquiry channels

Partially apply (tutorial en-
hancement needed)
SMART 4: Show overlay
for key features
•
Need for implementation of coaching marks considering disabilities and older adults
•
Addition of the mentioned feature to the basic guide or tutorial section

Apply
SMART 5: Focus on 1 task
•
Suggested application of visual feedback for task performance in apps for individuals
with disability

Apply
SMART 6: Visual inter-
face design
•
Notification of inconvenience when optimization for various resolutions is not ap-
plicable
•
Maintaining consistency through uniformity of button and top bar colors
•
Design modifications for individual items to prevent confusion

Apply
SMART 7: Intuitive inter-
face
•
Displaying pictorial icons to enhance UIc accessibility

Apply
SMART 8: Clear path to
search
•
Clear guidance on the process of integrating with IoT devices is necessary

Partially apply (home screen
enhancement needed)
SMART 9: Allow configu-
ration options and short-
cuts

•
Addition of a feature to allow users to customize the placement of their most relevant
feature at the top of the home screen
•
Enhanced visibility and emphasis on the crucial Add Disabled Individual/Caregiver
Account button across various pages

Do not apply (planned)
SMART 10: Support for a
wide range of mobile envi-
ronments

•
Implementation outside of Android

Partially apply (discussion
on alternative access)
SMART 11: Ease of input
•
Clear separation of dropdown and text areas
•
Increase ease with text prediction
•
Enhanced usability through features such as text prediction
•
Necessity for the consideration of adaptive access for facilitating app accessibility
for users with disabilities
•
Clear distinction between dropdown and text fields
•
Need to think about alternative input (adaptive access) for individuals with disability
to access apps

Do not apply (discussion on
the app)
SMART 12: Use of cam-
eras, microphones, and
sensors

•
Currently, the app does not implement the features

aSMART: smartphone heuristics.
bIoT: Internet of Things.
cUI: user interface.

Step 4: Developing Daily Healthcare 2.0

The Daily Healthcare 2.0 app was developed by integrating not
only the results of expert-oriented heuristic evaluations but also
perspectives from various fields, including guidelines for app
development targeting individuals with disabilities, as well as
app developers and UI designers. The Wellnesscare website for

healthcare professionals has been updated to recommend
personalized health management content based on the user’s
health data. On the website, they can access health records and
educational content, including the PGHD of users with disability
and their caregivers, to provide comprehensive evaluations of
weekly health behaviors. The screens of the Daily Healthcare
2.0 app and Wellnesscare website are illustrated in Figure 4.

J Med Internet Res 2023 | vol. 25 | e50029 | p. 9

Figure 4. Screens of (A) Daily Healthcare 2.0 app and (B) Wellnesscare web.

To enhance app usability and user compliance, user manuals
for both the app designed for individuals with disability and the
app designed for caregivers were developed. The manuals were
created in 2 formats: PDF and MP4. They provide step-by-step
instructions, accompanied by illustrations and written guidance

for all app functionalities, including app installation, IoT device
integration, self-recording and verification of PGHD, and access
to health information for individuals with disabilities and
caregivers. Figure 5 shows a section of the manual.

Figure 5. Screens of Daily Healthcare 2.0 user manual: (A) PDF version and (B) MP4 version.

J Med Internet Res 2023 | vol. 25 | e50029 | p. 10

Step 5: Usability Evaluation for App Users

Overview

A total of 27 participants (15 app users of people with disability
and 12 caregiver app users) completed the usability evaluation.

Although we initially recruited 15 participants for the app for
people with disability and 15 participants for the caregiver app,
3 caregiver app participants who did not actively engage in the
program for more than 5 days were excluded from the analysis
of the results (Tables 2 and 3).

Table 2. General characteristics of usability evaluation (n=27).

App for caregivers
App for people with disability
Characteristics

41.3 (12.4)
50.7 (14.0)
Age (years), mean (SD)

Age group (years), n (%)

8 (67)
6 (40)
20-39

2 (17)
1 (7)
40-59

2 (17)
8 (53)
≥60

Sex, n (%)

5 (42)
8 (53)
Male

7 (58)
7 (47)
Female

Table 3. Scores for usability evaluation (n=27).

Scores, mean (SD)
Usability evaluation

Postquestionnaire
Midquestion-
naire
Prequestionnaire
Postquestionnaire
Midquestionnaire
Prequestionnaire

3.8 (0.7)
3.5 (0.7)
2.2 (1.1)
3.7 (0.7)
3.5 (0.6)
3.7 (0.7)
Health IT usability

4.4 (0.6)
3.6 (0.8)
2.8 (1.7)
3.8 (0.5)
3.6 (0.8)
3.7 (0.8)
Smartphone self-effica-
cy

3.9 (1.1)
3.7 (1.1)
2.9 (1.7)
3.7 (0.7)
3.6 (0.7)
3.5 (0.6)
eHealth literacy

4.0 (0.9)
3.1 (1.1)
3.4 (0.8)
3.9 (1.2)
2.9 (0.8)
2.5 (0.8)
Satisfaction

3.7 (1.2)
3.5 (0.9)
3.1 (0.9)
3.7 (0.8)
3.4 (1.2)
3.2 (1.1)
Willingness to recom-
mend

2.2 (1.3)
4.0 (0.9)
2.0 (1.0)
2.9 (1.2)
3.8 (1.3)
3.9 (1.4)
Willingness to pay

After using the Daily Healthcare 2.0 app, both users of the app
for people with disability and users of the app for caregivers
experienced an increase in health IT usability, smartphone
self-efficacy, eHealth literacy, and satisfaction. The willingness
to recommend also increased. However, the willingness to pay

decreased (Table 2). Furthermore, an additional analysis was
conducted to examine the impact of age on app use by dividing
the participants into groups based on age, with 60 years as the
cutoff point (Figure 6).

J Med Internet Res 2023 | vol. 25 | e50029 | p. 11

Figure 6. Results of usability evaluation: (A) health IT usability, (B) smartphone self-efficacy, (C) eHealth literacy, (D) satisfaction, (E) willingness
to recommend, and (F) willingness to pay.

The results of in-depth interviews conducted with 13 participants
who agreed to participate (6 users of app for people with
disability and 7 caregiver app users) and representative quotes
are shown below.

UI and Health Graphs

The participants said the health graphs were very helpful.

[With the app], my health data is visually displayed
in graphs, showing the trends over time. Using the
app made me more conscious about my health. Seeing
these health issues visually on the app made me
realize that I need to be cautious. [User A of app for
people with disability]
To be honest, I tend to forget records as time passes.
However, the app accumulates all the records and
presents them in graphs, which I find beneficial in
showing the trends. [User D of app for people with
disability]
The app’s intuitive and streamlined design allowed
for easy familiarization with its features, even for
first-time users. [User C of caregiver app]

Providing Health Information and Exercise Video
Content

Three users mentioned that health information and exercise
video content was useful.

Information 
related 
to 
diabetes 
or 
blood
pressure-related conditions was found to be most
helpful. Specifically, information on how to manage
meals was highly beneficial. [User B of app for people
with disability]
It is difficult for me to distinguish which exercise
videos, like those on YouTube, are helpful. However,
in this app, experts recommend them, which increases
my trust in their reliability. [User A of caregiver app]
Since experts recommend the exercise videos, I think
they will be particularly helpful for people like me

who are new to exercising. [User C of app for people
with disability]

Caregiver Integration Function

One user said the caregiver integration function was beneficial.

Caregiver app user A: “Since there is no guarantee that the
caregiver and the disabled individual living in the same
household, the data integration feature is beneficial. It would
also be good to know the health status of the disabled individual.
Having the alarm function to the caregiver would be even
better.”

User Manual

Having two types of manuals was useful.

The availability of a manual proved beneficial in
acquiring proficiency with the functions. Particularly
for elderly users, who may find reading text
challenging, providing accompanying videos of
appropriate duration (approximately 7 minutes) was
helpful. [User F of caregiver app]

Willingness to Pay (Additional Question)

In assessing the willingness to pay for the app’s services, several
users shared their perspectives on the value proposition and
potential improvements.

Most users’concept of value does not seem to include
information. However, I would be willing to pay a fee
if the service had national-level and highly
trustworthy expert management. However, since this
app is currently in its early stages, I am unwilling to
pay for it. [User A of app for people with disability]
While it is great that it is an app from the National
Rehabilitation Center for the health of the citizens, I
believe there should be experts who review my data
and provide feedback to justify the cost. [User A of
caregiver app]

J Med Internet Res 2023 | vol. 25 | e50029 | p. 12

Currently, I perceive this app as managing daily life
rather than addressing health discomfort, so I am
unwilling to pay. However, I would be willing to pay
for it if the app had the effect (such as digital
therapeutics), such as medication or clinical
treatment. [User F of caregiver app]

Discussion

Principal Findings

In this study, we developed a digital health care service platform
that connects individuals with disability, caregivers, and health
care professionals to enhance digital health equity. To
accomplish our objectives, we developed the Daily Healthcare
2.0 app, tailored for individuals with disability and their
caregivers. This app was designed based on user needs and
facilitated the sharing of PGHD via both the app and IoT
devices. Concurrently, the Wellnesscare web platform allows
health care professionals to monitor user data. Following a
heuristic evaluation and subsequent usability evaluation, our
integrated health care service platform, encompassing both
Daily Healthcare 2.0 and Wellnesscare, demonstrated
enhancements in users’
eHealth literacy, smartphone
self-efficacy, satisfaction, and propensity to recommend.
However, there was a noted decline in their willingness to pay.

Comparison With Prior Work

The findings of this study align with those of previous research
that highlights the correlation between enhanced digital literacy
and the ability of patients and caregivers to perform role-specific
functions in a digital environment, exchange health information
with health care professionals through web-based platforms,
and actively engage in the co-design and delivery of health care
services [46]. Furthermore, digital literacy signifies the capacity
to provide health promotion services within a digitally inclusive
environment that ensures equitable and nondiscriminatory health
care access based on patient needs [47]. This means that users
with increased literacy scores will contribute to digital health
equity and facilitate the transition toward a human-centered
approach in delivering health services. Given that a national
rehabilitation center led this platform research, it is crucial to
continue efforts to enhance the capabilities of individuals with
disability in exploring digital health care environments and to
foster collaborative cocreation to promote the shared values of
health and digital health equity [48].

Active user involvement in the design phase positively affects
system success and user satisfaction [49]. Moreover, it also
contributes to enhancing users’ eHealth literacy [50]. In this
study, incorporating diverse user needs from the design phase
was identified as one of the strategies that positively evaluated
the platform’s effectiveness. The needs of users with disability,
caregivers, and health care professionals prioritized providing
welfare benefits information and educational content related to
disability. This was likely due to the difficulty in finding
information on specific steps, such as selecting suitable benefits
and reliable information, even though national disability welfare
information websites exist. Health care professionals also
reported the lack of appropriate communication channels,
excluding face-to-face interactions, to deliver welfare benefits

or educational materials to individuals with disabilities and the
caregivers they are responsible for. Especially recently,
face-to-face communication has become even more challenging
owing to the COVID-19 pandemic. As a result, the need for
information channels applicable during national emergencies
(such as the COVID-19 pandemic) and the provision of health
behavior guidelines for individuals with disability have emerged
as high priorities. These findings indicate that users desire
communication channels to exchange reliable information
related to health, going beyond simply recording and monitoring
the current health status in digital health care services, reflecting
the current social situation (the COVID-19 pandemic). The
Daily Healthcare 2.0 and Wellnesscare systems are significant
as they connect individuals with disability requiring health care
management, caregivers, and health care professionals,
providing a convenient platform for suitable and reliable health
information. This enables individuals to receive professional
assistance through mobile apps, even at home.

The service system developed in this study attempted to establish
connections among individuals with disability, caregivers who
play a crucial role in their health care management, and health
care professionals as active users. Various studies have focused
on health care management apps with a clinical focus, such as
medication scheduling and skin integrity education programs,
aiming to alleviate caregiver burden [51], connect individuals
with disability and caregivers [52,53], or develop platforms that
connect individuals with disabilities, caregivers, and health care
professionals. However, these studies primarily focused on
clinical support or system development [54]. In contrast, in our
study, all 3 groups were actively involved as users, and the
platform was designed to establish a bilateral linkage of PGHD
between individuals with disability and caregivers. This
approach is highly valuable, as stated by 1 participant, as Daily
Healthcare 2.0 can serve as a partner, allowing individuals with
disability and caregivers to manage their health together, even
if they do not reside together. Furthermore, the Daily Health
care 2.0 system has positively improved digital health equity
by assisting users with disability and their caregivers in health
care management, particularly in nonhospital settings where
health care management may be neglected.

Interestingly, although the service platform received mostly
positive evaluations, willingness to pay for the service
decreased. Additional interviews were conducted to investigate
the reasons for this. The results revealed that users cited several
reasons for their lack of willingness to pay. They mentioned
that the service did not provide personalized feedback, only
offered monitoring without tailored recommendations, and
lacked credibility because it was in the early development stage.
These findings align with previous research indicating that the
involvement of health care professionals enhances user health
care management effectiveness and that health care app users
desire feedback from professionals [55,56]. In addition, the
involvement of health care professionals improves user
engagement and loyalty to health care apps [49].

Strengths and Limitations

PGHD from individuals with disability and caregivers were
used to motivate and enhance the effectiveness of health care

J Med Internet Res 2023 | vol. 25 | e50029 | p. 13

management. PGHD promote self-management outside of health
care settings and communication with health care professionals
[57]. The need for a platform to share PGHD among users with
disabilities and their caregivers was identified through the needs
assessment conducted in this study. To facilitate a diverse PGHD
collection, we used user-friendly and highly functional wearable
devices, such as wristbands and Bluetooth-enabled weighing
scales. The PGHD generated from individuals with disabilities
and their caregivers through these IoT devices were designed
to be integrated with the mobile app and shared not only between
users but also with health care professionals who can provide
advice on health matters. Therefore, this study serves as a
significant validation of the use of PGHD from not only mobile
devices but also popular IoT devices in community-based health
management of individuals with disability.

Despite the significant findings of this study, there are several
limitations. First, this study involved participants without
disability in the usability evaluation, although the platform was
designed for individuals with disability and their caregivers. To
address this limitation and adhere to the Guidelines for
Development for Persons with Disabilities, which state that
apps should apply to all users, including individuals with
disabilities, users with relatively lower mobile familiarity or

literacy were assigned as the user group for the disability app.
Nonetheless, it is recommended that future studies be conducted
with actual individuals with disability and caregivers for further
robust evidence. Second, technical improvements are necessary.
The Daily Healthcare 2.0 app shares all user-generated PGHD
without any screening. However, considering privacy protection
and preferences, it is proposed to incorporate a feature that
allows users to activate information sharing for each PGHD
item selectively. Third, it is essential to note that the Daily
Healthcare 2.0 app was developed for the Android platform,
and the use of IoT devices was limited. Therefore, these
limitations must be overcome to fully use this system in
real-world community settings.

Future Directions

In this study, users expressed high satisfaction with the structure
of the platform, particularly the Wellnesscare web features that
allow health care professionals to monitor users’health records.
However, users also expressed a desire for more personalized
and immediate feedback from experts, beyond just monitoring.
Future research should consider incorporating personalized
exercise videos or welfare benefits information recommended
by algorithms based on expert reviews and users’ PGHD.