RESEARCH AND 

THEORY

Co-designing an Integrated 
Health and Social Care 
Hub With and for Families 
Experiencing Adversity

TERESA HALL 

SARAH LOVEDAY 

SANDIE PULLEN

HAYLEY LOFTUS 

LEANNE CONSTABLE

KATE PATON 

HARRIET HISCOCK 

ABSTRACT

Introduction: Integrated care research often fails to adequately describe co-design 
methods. This article outlines the process, principles and tools to co-design an 
integrated health and social care Hub for families experiencing adversity.

Research methods: The Child and Family Hub was co-designed in four stages: 
(1) partnership building and stakeholder engagement, (2) formative research, 
(3) persona development and (4) co-design workshops and consultations. Local 
families, community members and intersectoral practitioners were engaged at each 
stage. The co-design workshops employed a human-centred design process and were 
evaluated using the Public and Patient Engagement Evaluation Tool (PEET).

Results: 121 family participants and 80 practitioners were engaged in the Hub’s co-
design. The PEET highlighted the co-design team’s satisfaction achieved by community 
members working alongside practitioners to generate mutual learning. Resourcing 
was a key challenge.

Discussion: Human-centred design offered a systematic process and tools for 
integrating formative evidence with lived and professional experience in the Hub’s co-
design. Applying community engagement principles meant that a diverse range of 
stakeholders were engaged across all stages of the project which built trust in and 
local ownership of the Hub model.

Conclusion: Co-design research with families experiencing adversity should attend to 
language, engagement methods, team composition and resourcing decisions.

Teresa Hall

Honorary Fellow, Centre 
for Research Excellence in 
Childhood Adversity and 
Mental Health, Centre for 
Community Child Health, 
Murdoch Children’s Research 
Institute, Royal Children’s 
Hospital, 50 Flemington Rd, 
Parkville VIC 3052, AU

KEYWORDS:
co-design; family adversity; 
integration; hub models

TO CITE THIS ARTICLE:
Hall T, Loveday S, Pullen S, 
Loftus H, Constable L, Paton 
K, Hiscock H. Co-designing an 
Integrated Health and Social 
Care Hub With and for Families 
Experiencing Adversity. 
International Journal of 
Integrated Care, 2023; 23(2): 
3, 1–14. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.5334/ijic.6975

*Author affiliations can be found in the back matter of this article

2

INTRODUCTION

BACKGROUND
Participatory approaches to health service research and 
development are now ubiquitous [1–3]. Participation is 
best viewed as a continuum of approaches to promote 
the active and meaningful involvement of people in 
decisions affecting their health and health care [4–9]. Co-
design is one method for enabling people with lived and 
professional experience of health services to participate 
in the design, delivery and evaluation of these services 
[4]. 

Co-design methods are increasingly used to solve 
complex problems in health care and health system 
management in Australia and globally [7, 10, 11]. 
Co-design is advanced as a way of enhancing the 
substantive (i.e., quality of research), instrumental (i.e., 
translation to practice), normative (i.e., intrinsic value) 
and political (i.e., social change) agendas of research 
and practice [4, 8, 12–14]. An emerging body of evidence 
has shown that the participation of service users in the 
development and delivery of health services can improve 
users’ health outcomes, health behaviours, experiences 
of care and foster a sense of empowerment [6, 15–17]. 
In Australia – the setting for this study – recent policy 
directives including the Mental Health Productivity 
Commission and the Victorian government’s commission 
into mental health position people with lived experience 
at the heart of responses to mental health and child 
health inequity [18–20], mobilising these normative and 
political rationales to co-design.

PROBLEM STATEMENT
Co-design is a term used to describe a wide range 
of processes and practices with varying degrees of 
stakeholder engagement [10, 16]. This is problematic for 
several reasons. First, this lack of standardised definition 
does not distinguish between extensive, involved co-
design processes and cursory, tokenistic stakeholder 
engagement which means that “almost everyone seems 
to be doing [co-design]” [7]. This lack of specificity is 
particularly problematic in an integrated care context 
when service users are encountering complex health 
and social challenges that require integrated responses 
from practitioners across sectors and professional 
backgrounds. Active and meaningful engagement of 
these varied stakeholders requires a systematic strategy, 
resourcing and time that is often not undertaken with 
more cursory forms of ‘co-design’. 

Second, few research reports have sufficient detail 
on the co-design methods adopted for large health 
innovations to enable them to be replicated. A critical 
missing detail is how research evidence, practice 
knowledge and lived experience are merged in the co-
design process. This is an important oversight because 
of the inherent tension between design processes that 

embrace iteration, ambiguity and rapid prototyping and 
the requirement of health service research to specify the 
project design in detail when applying for project funding 
[10]. This ideological tension has been consistently 
identified as a challenge to effective co-design processes 
involving diverse stakeholder groups [12, 16].

Third, there is a lack of research about co-designing 
with families experiencing adversity. Family adversity 
includes a range of experiences such as childhood 
maltreatment (e.g., physical, verbal or sexual abuse), 
household dysfunction (e.g., parental mental illness, 
family substance abuse), community dysfunction (e.g., 
witnessing physical violence, discrimination), peer 
dysfunction (e.g., stealing, bullying) and socio-economic 
deprivation [21]. Families experiencing adversities may 
require integrated care because adversities tend to 
cluster and cannot be managed by single sectors alone. 
Further, these families remain a priority group for many 
health research and innovation projects despite well-
documented social, psychological and physical barriers 
to their engagement in research and design processes 
[22, 23]. Previous co-design research with adults 
experiencing adversity (i.e., mental health challenges, 
housing insecurity) underscores the need for continuous 
reflection on and countering of power imbalances that 
manifest in the process [12, 13, 24]. A recent integrated 
care study examined co-design principles for adults 
returning to the community from jail [25]. However, this 
study did not detail the methods of co-design. Specific 
co-design methods that incorporate the needs and 
preferences of both the child and family into integrated 
care initiatives are crucial for achieving family-centred 
care [26].

Hence, there is a need for integrated care research 
to clearly articulate its co-design methods with families 
experiencing adversity. This paper fills this gap by detailing 
the methodological “process, principles and practical 
tools” [7] employed to co-design an integrated health 
and social care Hub in Wyndham Vale in Melbourne, 
Australia. We define co-design as the “active involvement 
of a diverse range of participants in exploring, developing, 
and testing responses to shared challenges” [7]. We 
define the Hub as a centralised service that offers a range 
of co-located, integrated services from multiple sectors, 
with linkages to external services for community-based 
supports [27, 28].

RESEARCH METHODS

OVERVIEW
We employed mixed methods across four project stages 
to undertake the co-design of the Child and Family Hub 
from February 2020 to November 2021 (see Figure 1). 
Co-design was operationalised as an iterative series of 
processes, core principles and design tools implemented

3

across the planning, governance, implementation, and 
evaluation stages of the project [4, 7]. Human-centred 
design was employed as an overarching framework for the 
project. Human-centred design is an approach to solving 
complex problems in which products or experiences 
are designed and continuously reiterated based on the 
perspectives, needs and preferences of the people who 
use them [29]. This study was approved by the Royal 
Children’s Hospital Human Research Ethics Committee 
(HREC/62129/RCHM-2020 and HREC/62866/RCHM-2020.  

STUDY SETTING
This study was conducted as part of a broader research 
project aiming to co-design, test and evaluate two 

integrated Child and Family Hub models to detect and 
respond to children aged 0–8 years and their families 
experiencing adversity in Victoria, and New South Wales 
in Australia [30]. This paper describes the co-design 
process of the Hub in Wyndham Vale, Victoria. The City 
of Wyndham is in the outer South-Western suburbs of 
Greater Melbourne and has one of Melbourne’s most 
culturally diverse and rapidly growing populations. More 
than half of Wyndham’s children aged 0–4 years have 
two parents who were born overseas [31]. Supporting 
Wyndham families is critical because approximately 25% 
of Wyndham’s children starting school are vulnerable in 
at least one development domain, compared with less 
than 20% children Victoria-wide [31].

Figure 1 Overview of project stages supporting the co-design of the Hub.

4

STAGE 1: GOVERNANCE, PARTNERSHIPS AND 
STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT
The first stage was to establish the governance 
mechanisms and partnerships to oversee the co-design, 
implementation and evaluation of the Hub. Two key 
local partners were engaged from the outset: IPC Health, 
a community health service provider, and Wyndham 
City Council (WCC), a local government partner. The IPC 
Health Wyndham Vale GP Super Clinic was selected as 
the Hub site because it hosts a range of primary and 
allied health practitioners and social services including 
financial counselling. While fostering these partnerships, 
KP mapped and approached more than 30 organisations 
working with families of young children in and around 
Wyndham Vale. Specifically, member organisations of the 
WCC Early Years network, WCC Child and Family Alliance 
and WCC Vulnerable Children’s Strategic network.  

The key output of this stage was a local project advisory 
group with representation from health, community and 
education service provider organisations, local government, 
and a community representative with lived experience. 
These partnerships ensured that the project had the 
requisite institutional support, resources and community 
linkages, and was responsive to local priorities [24].

During this phase, we also established our interdisciplinary 
team. Our team has a mix of expertise in public health, 
research, health practitioner (i.e., paediatrics and nursing), 
lived experience of adversity, project management, design 
facilitation and community engagement.

Identification of and engagement with families 
experiencing adversity 
Our starting point was to identify and overcome barriers to 
meaningful participation by families experiencing adversity 
[22, 23]. Lived experience was prioritised as a type of 
expertise central to the project in all communications and 
research activities [7]. Valuing lived experience meant that 
we were reflexive about why and how much disclosure 
of adversity was necessary for families to engage [24]. 
Recruitment materials for community members specified 
that we were interested in engaging with caregivers 
experiencing adversity but would not require them to 
disclose their specific experiences. This approach was 
appropriate because we were interested in understanding 
and learning from families’ experiences of services rather 
than their personal experiences of adversity. We recruited 
through social media (i.e., Facebook) and known local 
service networks (i.e., by posting a project summary and 
call for participants to the WCC online project Hub), which 
has been shown to be effective for recruiting hard-to-
reach populations [22].

Language and framing of the project
Creating a shared language and framing of the core 
project concepts (i.e., co-design and adversity) was 
important for these partnerships. We positioned co-

design as a point on a spectrum of participatory 
approaches: our project involved more than a one-off 
consultation, but its defined scope precluded it from 
being fully community-led [4, 7, 8]. We framed the Hub 
co-design as comprising fixed and flexible inputs (see 
Table 1). The fixed inputs were those specified in the 
project funding agreement based on evidence reviews 
and program theories of integrated care for families 
experiencing adversity [32–34]. The flexible components 
concerned the client experience of the Hub. Early in 
the engagement process, we adopted lay language 
to describe the study. For example, ‘life challenges’ 
was adopted instead of ‘adversity’ and ‘conversation’ 
replaced ‘research or discussion’ [23].

STAGE 2: FORMATIVE RESEARCH TO 
UNDERSTAND SERVICE AND COMMUNITY 
SETTING IN WYNDHAM
The second stage involved extensive formative research 
to understand the service delivery and community 
contexts in which care is provided for families experiencing 
adversity in Wyndham [35]. We used a suite of methods 
to increase the participation of community members 
and practitioners that included individual and group 
interviews, observation and an online consensus study.

The practitioner interviews explored how health and 
social care practitioners identified children experiencing 
adversity and the barriers they encountered in linking 
families to appropriate community resources. The family 
interviews focused on the challenges families experienced 
in getting help for life challenges. The observations at 
IPC Health Wyndham Vale focused on the challenges 
families faced as expressed during a normal clinical 
encounter and the typical journey of these families for 
getting support. All interviews and observations were 
guided by interview/observation guides formulated to 
capture experiences of the challenges and opportunities 
in accessing and/or providing support for families 
in Wyndham. Interviews were audio recorded and 
transcribed by a transcription service. Thematic analysis 
was used to analyse the interview and observation data. 

We also conducted an online consensus study 
[36] in which practitioners and families prioritised 
interventions for children experiencing adversity in 
Wyndham based on our prior evidence review [34]. 
This formative qualitative research provided depth to 
our understanding of local needs, preferences and 
contextual factors to ensure that the co-design built 
upon what was already known about and had worked 
before in Wyndham [37].

STAGE 3: DEVELOPMENT OF PERSONAS AND 
CLIENT JOURNEYS BASED ON FORMATIVE 
RESEARCH
In human-centered design, a persona is a fictional 
character containing a composite of different accounts

5

and experiences, created to represent the typical 
client’s interactions with the service or product [37, 
38]. Personas help to identify assumptions about users 
and to keep decision making and service development 
client focused. SL created three archetypal personas of 
child clients and their families through a combination 
of clinical observations and thematic analysis of 
qualitative interviews with particular attention to types 
of clients that were utilising the service (see example 
in Figure 2). The thematic analysis focused on the 
barriers for children and their family in accessing help 
for adversity. Different types of clients had different 
barriers, and this was used to inform and develop 
different personas that represented these different 
types of clients.   The persona narratives and key quotes 
focused on physical attributes, background, attitudes 
towards the service and personal traits [39]. We also 
charted the key barriers to service access across a 
commonly used product design framework entitled the 
5 Es of the client journey: entice, enter, engage, exit 
and extend [40]. These client personas and journeys 
acted as a launching pad for co-designing solutions and 
components of the Hub.

STAGE 4: CO-DESIGN WORKSHOPS AND 
CONSULTATIONS
The Child and Family Hub was co-designed through 
a 
series 
of 
workshops 
and 
consultations 
with 
intersectoral practitioners and families. A co-design 
team undertook seven full-day co-design workshops 
over 10 weeks focused on the client journey through 
the Hub. The workforce consultations focused on the 
workforce capacities and infrastructure required for the 
Hub’s implementation. Two community conversation 
sessions in a local shopping centre and a community 
centre were also held. Table 1 displays the topics, format 
and processes of the workshops and consultations.

CO-DESIGN WORKSHOPS
Team members (participants)
The 
co-design 
team 
of 
seven 
comprised 
two 
community members and five practitioners who lived 
in Wyndham Vale and/or worked in local health, family 
services, community and early childhood services (see 
Table 2). The practitioners held service delivery and 
strategic positions within their organisations and were 
those who responded to a flyer emailed by the local 
service networks (approx. n =35 organisations). Five 
practitioners in total applied for, and were selected, to 
participate. The two community representatives were 
parents with children aged 0–8 years who responded to 
an advertisement on the local council website inviting 
‘families living with life challenges’ to join the team as 
community representatives. We selected the community 
members from a sample of 10 potential community 
members based on their experience of services in 
Wyndham and availability to attend all workshops in 
person. All team members provided informed written 
consent prior to the first workshop.

Structure
The workshops were structured thematically around the 
5 Es framework of the client journey: entice (workshops 1 
and 2), enter (workshops 3 and 4), and engage, exit and 
extend (workshops 5, 6 and 7; see Table 1 and Figure 3). 
The co-design team had a one-week rest break between 
each E theme. During the workshops, each E theme was 
developed using a human-centred design process and 
tools: empathize, define the problem, ideate, prototype 
and test (see Figure 3) [40].

Preparatory scope setting and team building
Before the workshops, the two facilitators (TH, SP) 
provided the team members with a welcome booklet 
and had a one-on-one phone or virtual meeting to orient 

Figure 2 Persona and client journey map.

6

each team member to the project. The booklet specified 
what was in and outside of project scope, the workshop 
structure, the design process, and preparing to adopt 
a curious and flexible mindset. This content was then 
revisited in the first co-design workshop as a team. The 
team also agreed upon ways of working including being 
respectful and curious, and valuing diversity.

Empathise
Each E theme began by using the three personas and 
their respective client journey maps to understand the 
service touch points and empathise with typical family 
Hub clients. Using Post-it notes, the team worked together 

to map the key challenges across multiple levels of the 
service ecosystem (i.e., family, practitioner and system 
levels) at each E theme of the client journey. This mapping 
was important for visually representing the different 
stakeholder and system constraints impacting on services 
and in doing so generated empathy for both families and 
practitioners. We returned to these personas and journey 
maps for each E theme to ensure that generated solutions 
were needs-driven and feasible. In addition, guest 
speakers joined a session to provide detail on the current 
‘entry’ process. The community representatives and 
practitioners also shared their/their clients’ experiences of 
navigating each step of the client journey.

TOPIC
INPUT 
TYPE

FOCUS AREA
ENGAGEMENT 
FORMAT

USER TESTING
STAKEHOLDERS

Client journey

Entice
Flexible
How families first become aware of 
the Hub

Workshops 1 
and 2

Core team testing, 
community 
conversation at 
shopping centre

Families experiencing 
adversity; Wyndham 
community members; 
health, social, family service 
and education practitioners

Enter
Flexible
How families first enter the Hub 
including the appeal of the physical 
space

Workshops 3 
and 4

Core team testing, 
community 
conversation at 
shopping centre

Families experiencing 
adversity; Wyndham 
community members; 
health, social, family service 
and education practitioners

Engage, Exit 
and Extend

Flexible
How to create a trusted and holistic 
Wellbeing Coordination program at 
the Hub 

Workshops 5, 
6, and 7

Core team testing, 
community 
conversation 
at community 
centre

Families experiencing 
adversity; Wyndham 
community members; 
health, social, family service 
and education practitioners

Workforce capabilities and infrastructure

Workforce 
training and 
development 

Fixed
Preferences for delivery of 
practitioner training. Development of 
new practitioner roles within the Hub 
including child speech pathologist. 

Workforce 
consultations

n/a
Health, social, family service 
practitioners

Learning 
collaboratives

Fixed
Preference of timing and structure of 
monthly learning collaboratives

Workforce 
consultations

n/a
Health, social, family service 
practitioners

Community 
directory

Fixed
Preference for presentation of 
community directory i.e., online or in 
a physical folder

Workforce 
consultations

n/a
Health, social, family service 
practitioners

Table 1 Thematic inputs, format and engagement strategy for co-design workshops and consultations.

Figure 3 Co-design workshop structure.

7

Define the problem
The next step in the design process was to define the 
problem area through generation of problem statements 
(diverging process) followed by condensing and focusing 
on a shared understanding of the challenges to be 
addressed at each E theme (converging process) [29]. 
The ‘How Might We’ tool was used to transform the 
access challenges into problem definition statements. 
For example, the entice challenge of lack of awareness 
of available services became ‘How Might We raise 
awareness of the Hub in the community?’. The team 
independently generated numerous How Might We 
statements, displayed these on post-it notes, and team 
members independently voted on the most important/
resonant statements to take forward into ideation. After 
voting, the facilitators worked with the team to cluster 
these problem statements thematically.

Ideate
The ideation step similarly involved diverging and 
converging independent and group processes using a 
round robin approach [29]. The team independently 
generated ideas for solutions to the problem statement 
themes, presented their ideas to the group which were 
strengthened through peer feedback and voted on these 
independently. The team then worked in smaller groups 
to create a detailed storyboard of the prioritised ideas on 
butchers paper or on Microsoft PowerPoint, i.e., a visual 
sequence of the steps and assumptions required to 
actualise the idea [40]. 

Prototype
The prototype step involved the team members working 
in small groups to create an early sample or model (e.g., 
videos, flyers, hardcopy materials, sketches) of each of 
the ideas developed for the 5Es of the client journey. The 
tangible physical or digital prototype is a design tool for 
increasing inclusivity by expressing insights that might 
not be captured in word descriptions alone [24].

Test
The final step of the design process involved testing 
the prototypes and storyboards with community 
members and practitioners. Between the workshops, 
team members were asked to present the prototypes 
to five or more of their family members, clients and/
or colleagues who cared for children aged 0–8 years 
or worked with families with children this age.  The co-
design team members asked these stakeholders for their 
feedback on each prototype i.e., what they understood 
the prototype to be, what they liked, what could be 
improved. Microsoft Teams housed all outputs so that 
the team could collaborate between sessions and type 
the feedback they received into a standard feedback 
template. We also held two community conversations 

to engage the broader community. We created a pop-up 
stall at the local shopping centre over two days and a 
one-day stall at the community centre to meet families 
in familiar places. At each community conversation, 
team members tested the prototypes with caregivers 
while their children did a colouring-in activity and 
described how they would design the Hub’s ‘welcoming 
physical environment’. The drawings were retained by the 
research team with permission from the child and parents 
for analysis of the general components across drawings 
e.g., colourful setting, toys and activities, smiling staff, 
etc. Team members then relayed the user feedback on 
each prototype and reached consensus through group 
discussion on how to consolidate the prototypes. 

WORKFORCE CONSULTATION PROCESS
In parallel, we conducted consultations with 27 health, 
social and family service practitioners of the service to 
elaborate and tailor the three fixed workforce elements 
of the Hub: workforce training and development, learning 
collaboratives and the community directory (see 
Table 1). During each consultation, SL presented the three 
fixed workforce elements and asked for feedback into the 
delivery and content of each element. The consultations 
were conducted with each practitioner group separately, 
mainly during team meetings when most staff were 
present. Practitioners had a strong preference for the 
training to occur over one day due to service constraints, 
so we adjusted the training accordingly. Consultations 
were also used to develop the new practitioner roles in 
the Hub and ensure that these roles met the expressed 
needs. When there was a range of preferences (i.e., the 
format and content of the community directory), we 
developed several user options.

REFLECTIONS AND OUTPUTS FROM THE CO-
DESIGN WORKSHOPS AND CONSULTATIONS 
HL and SL typed anonymised, detailed notes of each 
co-design workshop and consultation which included 
reflections by the team and the facilitators. The co-design 
workshops were evaluated using the 21-item Public and 
Patient Engagement Evaluation Tool (PPEET) [41]. The 
PPEET asked team members to rate the extent to which 
the workshops promoted a participatory culture and 
fostered collaboration. We commissioned a design agency 
to produce two journey maps illustrating how the personas 
moved through each prototype in the Hub. The team 
members also provided a short video or text response 
about their experience of the co-design process, which 
we compiled to place the team’s voices at the centre of 
future presentations. All digital data (i.e., audio recordings, 
detailed notes, digital prototypes) and hardcopy data (i.e., 
hardcopy prototypes, hand-written storyboards, etc) are 
stored securely at Murdoch Children’s Research Institute 
and will be destroyed at the end of the study period.

8

RESULTS 

We present our key reflections on the process, principles, 
tools and challenges from the four project stages to co-
design the Hub. 

PARTICIPANTS ACROSS ALL STAGES
In total, we engaged 121 family participants and 
80 practitioners (see Table 2). Our sample was 
disproportionately female, spoke English as a main 
language and were aged 25 to 44 years old. Fewer family 
participants of interviews, the online consensus study 
and the co-design team (n=16, 76.2%) spoke English as 
their main language than practitioner participants of the 
same activities (n= 50, 95%).

PROCESSES
Trust building 
Processes to engender trust were important across 
all stages. We conscientiously worked to build trust 
with community and service stakeholders during the 
governance and partnerships stage by transparently 
discussing the project scope (i.e., fixed and flexible 
inputs). Families’ mistrust of services emerged as a 
barrier to service engagement in the formative research. 
This meant that the co-design workshops focused 
on developing prototypes to build trust between 
the Hub and the broader community. Trust building 
was also crucial between team members in the co-
design workshops to promote open expression in the 
creative process.

Team forming and building
Strategic team forming and building processes were 
necessary for creating a cohesive co-design experience. We 
reimbursed community representatives of the co-design 
team and advisory group to enable their participation 
and recognise their contribution. All practitioners but one 
contributed their time in-kind to the co-design workshop 
and consultations, and one organization took up our offer 
to backpay for a practitioner team member. We recruited 
co-design team members with a wide range of experiences, 
knowledge of Wyndham, and an openness to learn. As 
facilitators, we strove to foster a welcoming, inclusive space 
by acknowledging that the design process was a new way 
of working and uncomfortable at times. Team reflections 
on the co-design workshops explained how the design 
process helped to build a safe team dynamic:

“When everyone is united around the cause and 
a safe platform is provided, the team forms just 
dynamically” (Community #2, video) 

“[The strengths of the workshops were] clear goals 
and objectives for each workshop, openness to 
different ideas and perspectives” (Practitioner #2, 
evaluation survey)

PRINCIPLES
Inclusion and diversity 
All co-design team members rated all 21-items on the 
PPEET as ‘high’ or ‘very high’ agreement, indicating a 

PARTICIPANT TYPE
n
MEDIAN 
AGE IN 
YEARS 

GENDER: 
FEMALE
n (%)

ENGLISH MAIN 
LANGUAGE 
SPOKEN AT 
HOME n (%)

ABORIGINAL AND 
TORRES STRAIT 
ISLANDER 
STATUS n (%)

FAMILY

Interviews
17
35-44
17 (100)
15 (88.2)
2 (11.8)

Online consensus study 
2
25–34
2 (100)
0 (0)
0

Co-design workshops
2
25-34
2 (100)
1 (50)
0

User testing in 
community conversations

100
*
*
*
*

TOTAL
121
*
*
*
*

PRACTITIONER

Interviews
26
35–44 
25 (96) 
26 (100) 
0 

Online consensus study 
17
35–44
17 (100)
15 (88)
1 (5)

Observation 
5 
35-44 
5 (100) 
5 (100) 
0 

Co-design workshops
5
35–44
5 (100)
4 (80)
0

Workforce consultation 
27
*
23 (85.2)
*
*

TOTAL
80
*
75(93.8)
*
*

Table 2 Demographics of participants across all project stages.

* Not recorded.

9

strong satisfaction with the participatory culture of the 
workshops. This satisfaction was reflected in comments 
by the team members about the power of bringing 
community and practitioners together to generate 
mutual learning and provide diverse perspectives. 
Practitioner members described how the co-design 
workshops had improved their understanding of families: 

“One of the best things… was being able to work with 
different organisations in the community and also the 
community members. It was really valuable to hear 
the lived experiences from the community members 
and be able to work together in a really collaborative 
and friendly setting” (Practitioner #2, video) 

Several practitioners said the co-design process changed 
their practice to work more closely with families: 
“personally, this process has now influenced the way I 
work in the future” (Practitioner #1, evaluation survey). 
Community representatives also explained that it was 
helpful for them to understand the system constraints 
impacting on practitioners. 

Working in a mixed stakeholder team added complexity. 
One community representative said it was difficult to 
express critical views of services despite facilitation 
encouraging this. Likewise, despite the improvement focus 
of the design process, some practitioners were threatened 
by the critique brought about through the ‘emphasise’ 
phase. In addition, several practitioners disclosed their 
lived experiences during the process. Hence, we followed 
up with all members after sessions.

Meet people where they are
Upon the recommendation of the co-design  team, we 
undertook user testing in the local shopping centre and 
community centre instead of at the Hub. This was to meet 
families in places familiar to them, particularly given their 
barriers to health service access. The co-design team 
members also designed the colouring-in activity for 
children to “capture the children’s voice” (Practitioner #5, 
workshop notes). Our advisory group also recommended 
using existing local government networks to connect 
with practitioners and families.

TOOLS
We used a range of design tools in our co-design process 
i.e., personas, How Might We statements, round robin 
ideation, storyboards, prototypes and user testing. 
Personas were an effective tool for building empathy 
for the Hub clients and integrating evidence into the 
design process. After some initial hesitation with using 
these tools for the first time, the co-design team 
easily transitioned from How Might We statements to 
prototypes in one day in the later workshops. Several 
team members said they liked the “hands-on” aspect 
of the design tools. One community member described 
how the structure afforded by these tools enabled her 

participation: “It was very structured and non-confronting 
environment which made sharing my views easier.” 
(Community #2, evaluation survey)

CHALLENGES 
Resourcing (i.e., time, human resources) was a challenge 
to the co-design process. Stakeholder engagement was 
negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic because 
Wyndham was a ‘hot spot’ for COVID-19 transmission 
and experienced increased family employment stress 
(102% increase compared to pre-COVID-19) [42]. This 
meant that families and practitioners were stretched, 
fatigued and had other priorities. We also had to 
exclusively engage stakeholders online which limited our 
engagement with community members in the early part 
of the project because we could not rely on ‘hanging out’ 
at community services or warm face-to-face connections 
with clients through Hub practitioners. 

A substantial time investment was required to plan 
and execute the workshops and consultations. The 
facilitators met for half a day before and after each 
workshop for the 10-week period to plan and iterate 
the co-design workshop materials and process. All co-
design team members said it was difficult to juggle their 
commitment to the project with other priorities (i.e., work 
and caregiving). 

“It was very intensive and I felt like I was neglecting 
my work. The turnaround times were a bit short to do 
the prototyping.” (Practitioner #3, workshop notes)

“I felt it was too long and it was a big commitment 
to lock yourself in to every session. Would have like 
to be able to drop in and drop out although I also 
see the value of being present for the whole thing” 
(Community #1, workshop notes)

DISCUSSION 

This paper fills an important methodological gap in co-
design research with families experiencing adversity by 
describing the process, principles and tools used to co-
design an integrated health and social care Hub.

PROCESSES AND TOOLS
Human-centred design offered a systematic process 
and tools for integrating formative evidence with lived 
and professional experience in the Hub’s co-design. We 
clearly specified how multiple forms of knowledge were 
merged in our co-design – both in this paper and to 
stakeholders during the process – to establish a shared 
understanding of the parameters and constraints of 
family and practitioner engagement. We did this by 
framing the co-design as comprising flexible and fixed 
inputs, and by defining ‘adversity’ and ‘co-design’ in 
the context of this project. This transparency around

10

knowledge integration created the enabling environment 
for the project to accommodate innovation while also 
mitigating ‘scope creep’ in which attempts to address 
important but tangential community issues would have 
made the project unfeasible [24, 43]. These findings 
have important bearings for future research and practice 
that aims to actualise Australian and international 
commitments to centre lived experience in mental health 
system reform [18, 19]. Our study also demonstrates 
how co-design methods of engagement can bridge 
the research-practice gap through direct translation of 
evidence into service development [44].  

The relational focus of the human-centred design 
process 
meant 
that 
community 
members 
and 
practitioners engaged on equal footing as team members 
[45]. As in previous co-design projects, we needed to 
iteratively negotiate the power differentials between our 
mixed stakeholder co-design team [13, 46]. We reduced 
information asymmetry between practitioner and 
community members by focusing on the practitioner and 
system level barriers (i.e., the practitioner experience) 
alongside the client journeys [11]. Client personas 
were particularly effective as a storytelling device 
for generating empathy for Hub clients based on the 
formative qualitative research [13]. Personas were also 
key in adopting a family-centred approach to the Hub’s 
co-design i.e., our use of child personas placed children 
at the centre of the design process to acknowledge 
that we were working directly with caregivers. We also 
directly engaged children during the testing phase. 

Hence, our study adds methodologically to the literature 
of integrated care for families with young children which 
is crucial for achieving family-centred care [26]. 

PRINCIPLES
The co-design principles in this study align with eight 
guiding principles for effective community engagement 
that De Weger identified in a recent rapid realist review 
[47]. Table 3 maps our methods and strategies against 
these principles. In summary, we provided multiple 
avenues of participation to engage a diverse range of 
practitioners and community members that included 
children. This flexibility overcame differences in people’s 
preferences and abilities to participate. Reaching 
families in familiar places and through known networks 
acknowledged the importance of trust building processes 
with marginalized communities [22, 48]. Hosting 
community conversations at the local shopping centre 
and community centre was also effective for garnering a 
large amount of user feedback in a relatively short period 
of time. Engaging these local stakeholders promoted 
ownership of the project and meant we avoided 
reliance on “super users” i.e., service users who become 
socialised to research processes through their repeated 
participation but whose perspectives may not reflect 
those of the most vulnerable families [24]. Hence, our 
project suggests that co-design research with families 
experiencing adversity in an integrated care context is 
best approached as a suite of resources rather than a 
“single off-the-shelf framework” [14].

PRINCIPLES FOR EFFECTIVE 
COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT

OPERATIONALISATION IN CO-DESIGN OF CHILD AND FAMILY HUB

(1) Ensure staff provide 
supportive and facilitative 
leadership to citizens based 
on transparency

• Transparent articulation of project scope (i.e., fixed and flexible inputs) and core project concepts (i.e., 

co-design and adversity)
• Transparent processes for progressing ideations to storyboards to prototypes using group decision 

making and independent voting

(2) Foster a safe and trusting 
environment enabling 
citizens to provide input

• Use of existing community platforms for community members to find out about the project
• Recruitment of community representatives and participants in advisory group, formative research and 

co-design workshops through trusted community platforms

(3) Ensure citizens’ early 
involvement

• Community members engaged from outset of the project during stakeholder engagement phase and 

later formative research phase preceding the active co-design workshops and consultations

(4) Share decision-making and 
governance control with citizens

• Community members and community organisations represented on advisory group and co-design team
• Peer researcher member of research team

(5) Acknowledge and address 
citizens’ experiences of 
power imbalances between 
citizens and professionals

• Iterative negotiation of power differentials between our mixed stakeholder co-design team
• Design process and tools engaged stakeholders on equal footing as team members
• Hands on, practical aspect of design tools enabled participation

(6) Invest in citizens who 
feel they lack the skills and 
confidence to engage

• Preparatory scope setting and team building to support community members to meaningfully 

participate in the co-design workshops.
• Iterative checking in with community representatives on advisory group and co-design team to 

promote confidence and problem solve barriers to participation 

(7) Create quick and tangible 
wins

• Tangible prototypes rapidly developed and tested
• Rapid feedback on desirable and viable Hub prototypes

(8) Take into account both 
citizens’ and organisations’ 
motivations

• Multiple avenues for participation to account for different levels of motivation and ability to participate 

in the project
• Personas captured child and family motivations for service usage
• Mapping of service and system barriers included practitioner motivations and experience of care provision

Table 3 Rapid realist review identified eight guiding principles for effective community engagement in an integrated care setting [47].

11

ORGANISATIONAL CONTEXT AND RESOURCES
The 
community 
health 
partner’s 
(IPC 
Health) 
organisational capacity and focus on innovation was a 
key driver for the project. This created an authorising 
environment for service managers to carve out space 
for their staff members to participate and invest in 
facilitation. Such authorising environments have the 
power to catalyse co-design efforts in healthcare settings 
[13, 49], or hinder progress when they are absent 
[24, 45]. Even with supportive managers, however, 
practitioners on the design team still felt they needed 
to complete their routine workload, which is a barrier 
reported across studies [11, 45]. Balancing the time 
commitment of co-design team members with the need 
to undertake additional user testing is a challenge in co-
design projects [43]. Future research should investigate 
how different stakeholders can design different points 
of the client journey (to minimise the burden on co-
design team members) whilst ensuring continuity of the 
design concept.

A significant investment was required to implement 
the co-design process. We allocated considerable 
time and project resources to ensure that the requisite 
project infrastructure (i.e., governance) and stakeholder 
engagement (i.e., local ownership of the project) 
was in place before we embarked on the active co-
design workshop and consultation [45]. Resourcing our 
facilitators to manage, develop and implement the co-
design process was also an important enabler, as has 
been shown in other studies [11, 13, 45]. Facilitation 
was important to avoid the loudest voices dominating 
the process and ensuring that there was respectful and 
psychologically safe conduct for members with lived 
experience (including both community members and 
practitioners) [17]. This resourcing decision recognised 
the “emotional labour of working collaboratively” [8].

STRENGTHS AND LIMITATIONS
The co-designed Hub may not adequately meet the 
needs of male caregivers and diverse communities 
because we primarily engaged with females who spoke 
English. User testing with male caregivers and through 
our team members who spoke languages other than 
English went some way to rectifying this gap. A second 
limitation is that we did not record detailed demographics 
of user testing; an oversight partly because we did not 
expect this tool to be so effective. Future research should 
explore platforms to effectively engage with male and 
diverse caregivers in user testing. 

A key strength of this study was the detailed 
specification of the processes, principles and tools we 
employed, which allows for replication and learnings 
across contexts in accordance with principles of good 
community development and place-based approaches 
to integrated care [47]. Our study is also strengthened 
by the extensive engagement process of a range of 

stakeholders undertaken prior to commencing the 
co-design process. We also incorporated a validated 
participant evaluation using a standardised survey 
[50].

CONCLUSION

The Child and Family Hub model was co-designed in 
partnership with families, intersectoral practitioners and 
community members. Human-centred design offered a 
systematic process and tools for integrating formative 
evidence with lived and professional experience in the 
Hub’s co-design. Applying community engagement 
principles meant that a diverse range of stakeholders 
were engaged across all stages of the project which built 
trust in and local ownership of the Hub model. Future co-
design projects with families experiencing adversity in 
an integrated care context should develop strategies for 
language, stakeholder engagement, team composition 
and resourcing.