3 
 

Contributing to Planning for 
Sustainability: Advancing User 
Involvement for User-Centred 
Geoparticipation Applications 

 
GI_Forum 2022, Issue 1  

Page: 3 - 16 

Full Paper 

DOI: 10.1553/giscience2022_01_s3 

 

Sabine Hennig1 

1Salzburg University, Austria 

Abstract 

Public participation, including the use of geospatial technologies, is pivotal in planning for 
sustainability. Contributory participation initiatives, however, face challenges, such as the 
quantity and quality of the data provided by the public. User-centred applications can 
address these issues, but since developers often lack understanding of public users, 
appropriate user involvement in application development processes is crucial. Despite the 
manifold practices that exist, there is a need to further support user involvement in 
development processes. This paper contributes to this through findings from three projects 
aimed at developing applications tailored to the public.  

Analysing and comparing user involvement in the three projects, several key results 
emerged. In order to increase developers’ knowledge about public users and to deliver 
particularly user-centred applications, (i) user involvement should be considered not only in 
development activities such as requirement-gathering, evaluation and testing, but also in 
design and implementation; (ii) user involvement can vary in type and extent (i.e. ranging 
from informative and consultative to participative), allowing user integration in the different 
development phases; (iii) the combination of process models and design approach, which 
delivers project-specific development workflows, is suitable for involving users in a project-
appropriate and structured manner in development activities. 

Keywords: 

participatory design, process model, user-centred design, planning for sustainability, 
geospatial technologies 

1 
Introduction and research questions 

Planning for sustainability covers a variety of topics related to sustainable and liveable 
communities. Public participation and the use of geospatial technologies play an important 
role here (UN Habitat 2020, Wheeler 2013). Examples that underline this by combining both 
aspects are smart city projects (Clarinval 2021), spatial planning initiatives (Ahern 2005), and 
green infrastructure approaches (Vaňo et al. 2021). 

Public participation can be at different levels. The so-called ‘ladder of participation’ refers to 
informing, consulting (i.e. community input, including data contribution), involving,

4 
 

collaborating and empowering. For participation, traditional (i.e. analogue) and web-based 
tools, including geospatial technologies, are used (Steinmann et al. 2004). The current focus is 
on informative and consultative participation (Haklay 2021; UN Habitat 2020), and the use of 
geodata and geospatial technologies, also referred to as geoparticipation. Forms of 
geoparticipation include public participation GIS (PPGIS), participatory GIS (PGIS), and 
volunteered geographic information (VGI).  

Geoparticipation brings several advantages for planning for sustainability. The use of geodata 
and geospatial tools contributes to proactive and innovative planning because structuring is 
supported, and planning processes are further inspired (Ahern 2005). Involving the public in 
participatory projects brings benefits such as transparency, increasing interest in public and 
policy issues, and an increase in the amount and scale of available data (UN Habitat 2020; 
Hecker et al. 2019). But participatory initiatives also face challenges in terms of the quantity 
and quality of the data contributed, and the sufficient involvement of the intended target group 
(Hennig 2020). This is because the public, who include laypeople with some degree of 
competence in information and communication technologies (ICT) and geoinformatics (GI), 
often find applications (too) complex, (too) non-intuitive, or (too) unsuitable. Tools must be 
(more) centred on the public, their requirements, preferences, knowledge and skills. This is 
described as one of the success factors for participatory approaches (Haltofová 2019). Despite 
the many possibilities of involving users in application development processes, there is still a 
need for approaches that allow a better understanding of users and combine the best elements 
of various promising techniques (Damodaran 1996; Kujala et al. 2005).  

The development of user-centred applications, including geoparticipation tools intended for 
the public, is challenging. One reason for this is that the public is very diverse, and less known 
to developers than traditional GI users regarding their needs and barriers when using ICT and 
GI tools (Tsou & Curran 2010). To counter this situation, sufficient consideration of users 
and their participation in development processes (including requirements specification, 
application design and implementation, and testing) is key (Hickey & Davis 2004; Kujala et al. 
2005).  

Comparable to the ladder of participation, various concepts exist to capture user involvement 
in development processes. Damodaran (1996) explains that the level of user involvement can 
vary between informative (users provide and/or receive information), consultative (users 
comment on predefined services or facilities), and participative (users influence decisions 
relating to the whole system). François et al. (2017) distinguish between informative (user 
involvement in requirement specification), consultative (user involvement in requirement 
specification, testing/assessment), and participative user involvement (user involvement in 
requirement specification, design including implementation, testing/assessment).  

But how can participatory applications be developed that do in fact meet the needs of users 
who are members of the general public? Which aspects of application development are suitable 
for supporting user involvement? These questions are answered based on findings from the 
projects YouthMap 5020 (Hennig & Vogler 2016), citizenMorph (Hennig et al. 2020; Hennig 
et al. 2021), and Covid-19 Impressions. Among other things, these projects aimed to develop 
user-centred applications that rely on the use of geospatial technologies, and which are related 
to planning for sustainability in different ways (Table 1).

5 
 

Descriptions and references to the three projects throughout this paper are always based on 
the literature cited above, without this being explicitly cited again in each case. 

Table 1: Background to the YouthMap 5020, citizenMorph and Covid-19 Impressions projects 

In all projects, the use of methods that are usually applied in the development of applications 
in the context of user involvement allowed learning about the intended users and their needs. 
The use of qualitative research approaches, such as focus groups, observation and content 
analysis (Frechtling & Sharp 1997), resulted in information that was relevant not only for the 
development of the respective applications but also regarding the possibilities created by the 
development frameworks for delivering user-centred tools. 

To answer the questions above, the three projects were analysed and compared. This related 
to the underlying development workflow (including process models and design approaches), 
the methods used, the artefacts and solutions delivered, and the type and extent of user 
involvement. The findings were discussed in the context of the existing literature, 
differentiating between phase- and activity-related user involvement with reference to the 
concepts of Damodaran (1996) and François et al. (2017) mentioned above.

6 
 

2 
Project-specific development workflows 

The application development processes within the three projects followed individual 
workflows. Each workflow was developed to appropriately involve users in development 
activities, for all of which easy-to-handle off-the-shelf tools were used (e.g., ESRI ecosystem 
tools: ArcGIS online, Survey123 for ArcGIS online, Operations Dashboard). The three 
workflows encompass the common tasks of application development (i.e. requirement 
specification), application design and implementation, and testing (Sommerville 2012); they 
are characterized by a project-specific combination of a development process model and a 
particular design approach. Development process models and design approaches are briefly 
described below.  

Application development comprises the above tasks, but the focus and order of these tasks 
may vary, according to the specific development process model used. Within these models, 
the activities related to requirement specification, design, implementation and testing are 
organized into different phases, which also assign varying degrees of importance to the 
activities. Examples of process models include the waterfall model, the incremental model, 
and the prototyping model (Mohammed et al. 2010; Munassar & Govardhan 2010; Stoica et 
al. 2013; Subbarayudu et al. 2017). Process models are widely used in application development, 
including GI tool development (Kujala et al. 2005; Mwangi et al. 2019). They structure the 
development process, help coordinate and communicate the tasks needed to achieve the 
product as effectively as possible, and deliver a comprehensive picture of the development 
process to the people involved in the development activities (Mohammed et al. 2010; Stoica et 
al. 2013). 

In design approaches the users are at the centre of the development process. Examples of 
design approaches, which are also related to the field of human-computer interaction, include 
user-centred design and participatory design (Baek et al. 2007; Mithun & Yafooz 2018; 
Wilkinson & De Angeli 2014). User-centred design aims for early and repeated user feedback 
during application design and implementation. This allows for the iterative refinement of the 
design and implementation, including the requirement specification. ‘User-centred design’ 
refers to methods and tasks (depending on the project) to enable users to assess a tool for its 
usability. User-centred design can be integrated into a process model (Roth et al. 2015). 
Participatory design aims to design with, rather than for, users. Users take part in all activities 
of the development process (Baek et al. 2007; Wilkinson & De Angeli 2014). A distinction is 
made between strong and weak participatory design. In strong participatory design, users 
participate throughout the entire development process and in decision-making. In weak 
participatory design, user input is solicited, but decision-making is undertaken by the 
developers (Baek et al. 2007; Kensing & Blomberg 1998). The use of development process 
models is considered helpful in meeting and supporting the demand for appropriate ways to 
involve users in the different development tasks (Peris et al. 2011; Sanders 2002).

7 
 

2.1 YouthMap 5020 web map application development 

The workflow for developing the YouthMap 5020 web map application followed a modified 
waterfall model. The traditional waterfall model was the first process model to be introduced; 
it is the classic description of an application development process. It refers to an easy-to-
understand, linear-sequential process model in which each phase (requirement specification, 
design, implementation and testing) must be completed before the next phase can begin, with 
no overlap (Stoica et al. 2013). The modified waterfall model uses the same phases as the 
traditional waterfall model, but the phases may overlap. Tasks can be performed in parallel, 
and feedback loops exist. This introduces flexibility into the development process (Munassar 
& Govardhan 2010). To fit the needs of the YouthMap 5020 project, the modified waterfall 
model was adapted. As shown in Figure 1, the YouthMap 5020 development process consisted 
of four phases: (i) gathering user requirements; (ii) realizing a database on youth-relevant urban 
infrastructure; (iii) designing and implementing the city web map application; (iv) testing and 
optimizing it. In each phase, different school classes were involved. In addition, the YouthMap 
5020 web map application development process was shaped using strong participatory design. 
Thus users (i.e., young people) took part in all development phases and activities, including 
decision-making. Various methods, as presented in Figure 1, were used. 

 

Figure 1: Schematic and simplified workflow for the development of the Youthmap 5020 web map 
application 

2.2 citizenMorph system development 

The development process of the citizenMorph system followed the prototyping model. This 
model is characterized by its iterative nature. Starting from an initial specification, further 
requirements for the application are identified and continuously refined until the stakeholders, 
including the end-users, are satisfied. This relies on several loops, including the design and 
implementation of prototypes, their discussion, and evolution. The model allows for the 
comprehensive learning of requirements and the specification of the final user requirements,

8 
 

which form the basis for the design, implementation and testing of the final product (Agarwal 
et al. 2010; Kumar 2021).  

To develop the citizenMorph system, the weak participatory design approach was used in 
addition to the prototyping model: user input was solicited, but decisions were made by the 
developers. The involvement of the users, that is citizens, in the development relied on the use 
of various methods (Figure 2). Here, not all groups of citizens were integrated in all 
development activities. 

 

Figure 2: Schematic and simplified workflow for the development of the citizenMorph system 

2.3 Covid-19 Impressions platform development 

The workflow for developing the Covid-19 Impressions platform is shaped by the use of the 
incremental model (Figure 3). In this process model, the requirements are divided into subsets; 
standalone increments are developed based on the respective requirements. The development 
of each increment includes requirement specification, design, implementation and testing 
(Stoica et al. 2013). The development process of the Covid-19 Impressions platform consists 
of three increments that reflect the different phases of participation and their aims (West & 
Pateman 2016): pre-participation (e.g., information), initial participation (e.g., data 
contribution), and ongoing participation (e.g., feedback).

9 
 

 

Figure 3: Schematic and simplified workflow for the development of the Covid-19 Impressions platform  

A user-centred design approach was also used. While users’ requirements were identified by 
the developers through document-centric techniques and Analysis of Similar Systems (AoSS), 
citizen representatives were involved in the development process in several rounds of 
discussion. 

3 
Project-specific development results 

Through project-specific user involvement, based on different methods (Figure 1, Figure 2, 
and Figure 3), insights into users’ backgrounds, requirements and preferences were gained. 
This is reflected in the three applications, each of which has a particular structure, design and 
content. Examples are briefly outlined below and summarized in Table 2. 

Cooperating with young people in developing the YouthMap 5020 web map application, it 
was confirmed that young people form a very heterogeneous and complex user group (e.g., 
with an age range of 12 to 20; different skills and knowledge levels) and that they have 
particular characteristics regarding ICT use, namely low patience levels, quickness to judge 
applications, and low willingness to read instructions and explore tools. In focus groups and 
workshops, the young people outlined design preferences and needs regarding the map 
content, which differ from what developers (i.e. adults) consider relevant to young people. 
Accordingly, the YouthMap 5020 web map application was developed with a youth-specific 
interface and map design, and youth-relevant map content. 

The citizenMorph project, the aim of which is to collect data on landforms, is related to 
geomorphology, a topic that the public is less aware of, as communicated by the citizens who 
participated in the development process (e.g. in citizen surveys and workshops). Taking this

10 
 

into account, the solution created considers people’s personal resources related to the topic 
and the data contribution tasks – i.e. their motivations, and their knowledge and skills to 
observe, map and report landforms. To meet these demands, the system consists of three 
components: a data contribution component, a content management system (CMS) project 
website, and aspects contributing to community building. These components encompass 
numerous elements related to project-related information, feedback, and instructions for 
contributing landform data; they are also characterized by a design tailored to the preferences 
and needs of the citizen representatives. 

During the development of the Covid-19 Impressions platform, repeated user feedback was 
given on the three increments. Several critical issues were identified and discussed by the 
citizens involved, thanks to which the products developed in the context of the different 
increments were improved. The ‘information increment’ was created to provide relevant 
information and to support smooth user-onboarding. The ‘feedback increment’ focuses on 
using various feedback possibilities (e.g., web hook, dashboard). 

Table 1: Selected aspects of the YouthMap 5020 web map application, the citizenMorph system and 
the Covid-19 Impressions platform

11 
 

* Support materials associated with the data contribution app meeting citizens’ motivation and 
skills to take part in the project 

4 
Results and discussion of phase- and activity-related user 
involvement 

Analysing and comparing the three projects (taking into account the particular development 
workflow, including development process and design approaches, the methods used, the 
artefacts and solutions delivered, and the type and extent of user involvement) resulted in 
distinguishing phase- and activity-related user involvement of different types and extents. This 
and the related benefits are discussed below. 

User involvement in the development workflows of the three projects can be characterized 
using the concepts of Damodaran (1996) and François et al. (2017). This allows the 
characterization not only of the development processes per se, but also of the individual phases 
with regard to user involvement (informative, consultative or participatory) (Figure 4). There 
are benefits to be derived from considering different types and levels of user involvement in 
the contexts of requirement specification, design, implementation and testing (i.e. assessment).

12 
 

 

Figure 4: Types and levels of user involvement in the requirement specification, design, implementation 
and testing/assessment (adapted from Damodaran (1996) and François et al. (2017)), as well as findings 
from the YouthMap 5020, citizenMorph and Covid-19 Impressions project 

4.1 User involvement in requirement specification 

There are a variety of methods to collect requirements. Several were used in each project, since 
a combination of different requirement-gathering methods gives the best results (Spath et al. 
2012). Because users are good primary sources of information (Kujala 2003), the use of 
methods related to informative user involvement was essential for the YouthMap 5020 and 
citizenMorph projects. The information gained through methods such as questionnaires, focus 
groups and prototyping provided knowledge about the specific user groups (Table 2): 
regarding the citizenMorph project, this referred to understanding and addressing people’s 
motivation and interest in geomorphology, and their skills to contribute landform data; 
regarding the YouthMap 5020 project, this related to knowing youth-centred urban 
infrastructure. Through collaborating with the users in the elaboration and application of the 
requirement-collection methods (i.e., participative user involvement), additional information 
about the users and their needs was revealed. This follows Kujala et al. (2005) and Steen et al. 
(2007), who highlight that users must be effectively integrated into application development 
because they are experts in their own requirements. For instance, questionnaires realized 
together with the users were more tailored to the people being surveyed by asking the right 
questions, using appropriate language, and avoiding technical terms. In AoSS, users 
participated in the identification of the systems to be analysed, the elaboration of the list of 
criteria to analyse the systems, and the analysis of the systems. In this way, the developers 
learned which applications are used by the public, which assessment criteria are important to 
them, and how they rate applications.

13 
 

4.2 User involvement in design and implementation 

With user involvement in the design and implementation, users are in a ‘making’ situation. 
Participatory user involvement ensures that developers can learn about users’ tacit and latent 
needs, which is not possible by simply listening to or watching users. It also ensures that the 
information about the users gained during the requirements phase is actually used in the 
implementation of the tool, which is not always the case. This leads to solutions that allow 
users do whatever they aim to do in a better way, and delivers a better user experience (François 
et al. 2017; Sanders 2002; Steen et al. 2007). Against this background, the participatory 
involvement of the users in the YouthMap 5020 and citizenMorph projects took place in 
different ways and to different extents. While users participated in the design and 
implementation of the entire system in the YouthMap 5020 project, in the citizenMorph 
project they did so only with regard to selected materials. Other elements (e.g., the survey 
form) were inspired by participants’ ideas revealed during the discussion of the prototypes. 
This is where the benefits of using the prototyping model and its influence on the requirements 
analysis become clear. Following Agarwal et al. (2010) and Kumar (2021), the prototyping 
model is suitable if the demands of the future users of an application are relatively unknown 
at the beginning of the development process, or if developers are dealing with a new issue. 
This was the case with the citizenMorph project, where citizens’ motivations and skills for 
landform data collection were largely unknown. 

4.3 User involvement in testing 

Testing refers to checking applications not only for errors but also for whether they meet the 
requirements of the users (i.e. user assessment, usability testing). Users are requested to provide 
feedback on a product, and they might be observed using a product. Based on this, applications 
can be adapted and improved (François et al. 2017; Roth et al. 2015). Testing and user 
assessment took place in all three projects. Unlike the citizenMorph and Covid-19 Impressions 
projects, the YouthMap 5020 project used consultative user involvement supported by 
participative user involvement. The users participated in the elaboration of the questionnaire 
to obtain feedback from the testers. This allowed the questionnaire to be better tailored to the 
young people testing the city web map (Section 4.1). In the Covid-19 Impressions project, the 
products resulting from the three increments were repeatedly assessed and discussed. The use 
of the incremental model proved beneficial here: it is useful when user feedback on the 
components of an application is important, when developers have little experience of the topic 
or user group, or when a quick release of the product, with its crucial aspects, is required 
(Sommerville 2012; Stoica et al. 2013). 

5 
Conclusion 

User-centred solutions are a success factor for geoparticipation initiatives, and user 
involvement is key for their development. Despite the manifold practices that exist to involve 
users in development processes, there is a need to further support user involvement in 
development processes. Experiences gained from the YouthMap 5020, citizenMorph and

14 
 

Covid-19 Impressions projects contributed to answer how, by involving users in a suitable 
manner, participatory applications can be developed that in fact meet the needs of users from 
among the public.  

The findings showed that the use of a process model in combination with a design approach 
is promising in the development of people-centred applications. While design approaches 
relate to ways of putting the users at the centre of a development process, process models 
determine the order of the development phases and focus on the individual tasks differently. 
Thus, using a process model and design approach together defines the development 
framework and allows the integration of different types and levels of user involvement in the 
development of an application, in the contexts of requirement specification, application design, 
implementation and testing, with the levels of user involvement ranging from informative and 
consultative to participative. Involving users in different ways and to different extents in 
development tasks and activities has several benefits for the development process and the final 
product. For instance, participatory user involvement in requirement-gathering and product 
assessment together with having them collaborate on the design and implementation of 
materials such as questionnaires provides additional understanding of users’ needs; preferences 
come to light (e.g. use of language) which do not emerge when user involvement is purely 
informative.  

This hybrid approach of combining process model and design approach – with the use of 
informative, consultative or participative user involvement (with or without decision-making 
by the users) in the context of the different development phases and activities – is clearly 
applicable to other projects. It is important, however, that the following should be taken into 
account: (i) the benefits and challenges of the particular process model and design approaches 
to be used; (ii) the appropriateness of the process model and design approach selected 
regarding the project topic, aims and resources, and the background of the users to be involved 
in the development process; (iii) the need to compose a multidisciplinary project team 
comprising, among others, domain experts, developers, moderators and mediators, and (most 
importantly) skilled and motivated people from the public to act as peer-tutors; (iv) provision 
of suitable tools, materials and methods for public users to participate in the various activities; 
(v) the possibility to recruit a sufficient number of users from the target group to be involved 
in the application development process.