Original Paper

A Tailored mHealth App for Improving Health and Well-Being
Behavioral Transformation in UK Police Workers: Usability Testing
via a Mixed Methods Study

Richa Mehra1, BPT, PGDHHM, MSc; Andy Pulman2, MA, PhD; Huseyin Dogan1, BSc (Hons), PG Cert, EngD, MSc;
Jane Murphy2, BSc (Hons), PhD; Fiona Bitters3, BSc (Hons), MSt

1Bournemouth University, Faculty of Science and Technology, Bournemouth, United Kingdom
2Bournemouth University, Faculty of Health and Social Sciences, Bournemouth, United Kingdom
3Hampshire Constabulary, Southampton, United Kingdom

Andy Pulman, MA, PhD
Bournemouth University, Faculty of Health and Social Sciences
Bournemouth Gateway Building
Lansdowne Campus, St. Pauls Lane, Bournemouth
Bournemouth, BH8 8GP
United Kingdom
Phone: 44 1202 961047

Methods

Preliminary Design Cycle

Preparatory work coincided with the first period of the UK
lockdown for COVID-19. Web-based surveys were used to

gather feedback and information from the user base. Survey
data were gathered from 213 participants of the UK
commissioning 
force 
[15]. 
Data 
highlighted 
that 
a
multifunctional tool would be more beneficial than focusing on
a single element. Key features and 4 domains were identified
for initial app coverage. In order of importance—prioritized by
participant response—these were: food and diet (76/213, 35.6%),
activity (68/213, 31.9%), sleep (27/213, 12.6%), and fluid intake
(27/213, 12.6%). Participants also identified a need for the new
app to consider that a user was on shift—this is important
because many issues and problems with elements of their health
and well-being involved shift work. For example, shift work
and fatigue have been shown to interfere with sleep and impair
cognitive function [16,17].

Secondary Design Cycle

Initial requirements were categorized using the MoSCoW (Must
Have, Should Have, Could Have, Won’t Have) framework [18],
with findings from the web-based questionnaire and client
meetings informing initial draft requirements. Paper designs
were sketched leading to the creation of low-fidelity wireframes
[15]. These were shown to the client for feedback before
high-fidelity designs were created. These were then shown to
interviewees during semistructured interviews (n=10), to gather
feedback about requirements and preferences for the app. On
the basis of their feedback, the second set of design prototypes
was created. A good mental health section was added as the
fifth domain, including the ability to complete an optional mood
diary and track and set alcohol goals. Given the emerging
evidence about the impacts of COVID-19 on police staff’s
mental well-being before [10,19] and during the pandemic
[13,14], the suggested expansion to incorporate a section
regarding mental health and well-being seemed to be a valuable
addition, especially in light of potential challenges broaching
these topics within a culture where discussing mental health
difficulties have sometimes been viewed as an undesirable
discussion topic [20]. Considerations and concerns of financial
nature [21-23] inspired the inclusion of the sixth domain, to
cover holistic wellness. It was highlighted that information
regarding financial planning, pension policies, and budget and
saving advice would be helpful and give control to those who
were nearing retirement. Overall wellness is something achieved
by taking care of mental, physical, and financial well-being.
The suggestion to include financial well-being was incorporated
late into the second development cycle.

Testing Version

Further development using the revised high-fidelity designs as
an initial foundation was undertaken with an external developer
to produce a prototype for pilot testing. The app—created in
Android and Apple iPhone Operating System—was developed
using an agile approach. Coding was conducted between October
2021 and April 2022. Several revised versions were developed
to include all MoSCoW requirements identified as “must” and

JMIR Hum Factors 2023 | vol. 10 | e42912 | p. 2

“should” have [18]. The process of developing the app to this
point was highly iterative and agile.

Study Design

The purpose of this study was to create a health and well-being
app for police officers and staff, which considered the unique
requirements of the users throughout the designing, building,
prototyping, and testing stages and helped the researchers
understand the users and their requirements. The study involved
quantitative approaches (demographic web-based survey
questions and the System Usability Scale [SUS] [24]) and
qualitative approaches (open web-based survey questions and
semistructured interviews). We used a human-centered approach
to optimize the understanding and accommodate the perspectives
of potential users [25]. The methods chosen were considered
with the participants in mind—those that could be completed
in 1 session, where time could be set aside when they were free.
The methods used in this study acknowledged and catered to
the logistical and operational pressures that the participants
might be under, while allowing them to provide the project team
with detailed feedback.

Participants, Recruitment, and Consent

Participants were recruited via a gatekeeper from the
commissioning client. The gatekeeper’s role was to initiate

communication between the researcher and police officers and
staff who wished to participate—via distribution of study
literature—without compromising anonymity or affecting the
veracity of web-based responses. Participation was voluntary,
and participants remained anonymous to both the gatekeeper
and the organization. Consent for completing the web-based
survey was requested before allowing participants to proceed.
Before each interview began, the researcher answered any
questions they had, checked if they were willing to be audio
recorded, and explained the consent process before recording
began.

Procedures and Measures

This study involved unsupervised usability testing of a prototype
app by members of the commissioning client using their
smartphones. The version of the app supplied for testing
contained draft versions of all 6 sectional domains previously
identified—food and diet, activity, sleep, fluid intake, good
mental health, and financial well-being—accessible from the
home screen (Figure 1). An additional feature provided the
opportunity to add forthcoming shift pattern details to the app,
which could then be cross-referenced with other parts of the
app. The testing version concentrated on implementing basic
operational functionality, which could then be expanded or
altered as required based on user feedback.

Figure 1. Screenshot of home screen.

JMIR Hum Factors 2023 | vol. 10 | e42912 | p. 3

Initially, an email was sent to police officers and staff describing
the study and asking about their interest. After completing a
preregistration application for screening purposes, participants
were emailed a link to allow them to download the trial app. A
task guide was also sent, giving them 10 days of time for testing.
The guide suggested task scenarios of different complexity
levels and covered the core functionalities of the app: shift
manager, fluid intake, sleep, mood diary, alcohol consumption
tracker, financial well-being, and activity. Participants were
then asked to complete a web-based questionnaire after 10 days
of testing. Demographic details, information about use of the
app, likes and dislikes, and feedback about specific features
were collected through open-ended questions. The questionnaire
was completed by 48 participants.

A subsample of participants (9/48, 19%) who provided consent
to a follow-up telephone interview via a questionnaire subsection
were interviewed after they had completed the given tasks.
Topic guides were used for the semistructured interviews, to
ensure that areas of interest (such as aspects related to delivery
mode and format) were covered, while still allowing flexibility.
Participants were asked several follow-up questions about the
content, design, and functionalities of the app and to rate their
experience. Throughout the session, the interviewer encouraged
the participants to speak aloud about their actions, which helped
to understand the emotions of the user while using the
functionalities of the app. They were encouraged to share the
issues faced while performing a task or give suggestions for
improving the design. Interviews were audio recorded and
transcribed verbatim. Notetaking was also used to collect data
during the usability sessions.

Sample Size

As the intended audience for the final product was a UK police
force, the work force value supplied by the client organization
was rounded to the nearest 1000 and used to calculate an ideal
sample size. The value used for the work force was 5000 [26].
The actual number of participants was 48, which was above the
lower threshold for an acceptable number for the sample size.
With this number of participants and the estimated population
size, there is a 95% confidence level, with a final margin of
error of 14%. This sample size was considered to be adequate
because of restrictions in accessing participants—for
downloading and testing the app, completing the survey, and
possibly participating in an interview—owing to logistical and
operational pressures.

Analysis

Recordings were transcribed and thematically analyzed using
a deductive approach that focused on the domains covered in
the topic guide (focusing on design, functionalities, and content).
A generic qualitative approach to thematic analysis was used
[27], with interresearcher interpretation.

Ethics Approval

Ethics approval was obtained from Bournemouth University
(39100).

Results

Participant Characteristics

We recruited 33% (16/48) male and 67% (32/48) female
participants. The “other” or “prefer not to say” option was also
included within the survey question—no responses were
received. (Table 1).

JMIR Hum Factors 2023 | vol. 10 | e42912 | p. 4

Table 1. Self-reported descriptions about participants (N=48).

Participants
Characteristic

Sex, n (%)

16 (33)
Male

32 (67)
Female

Age group (years), n (%)

0 (0)
<18

4 (8)
18-30

20 (42)
31-40

15 (31)
41-50

8 (17)
51-60

1 (2)
61-70

0 (0)
>70

Job role, n (%)

20 (42)
Police officer

28 (58)
Police worker

Shift worker, n (%)

40 (83)
Yes

8 (17)
No

System Usability Scale

73.8 (30-100)
Score, median (range)

70.9 (14.1; 66.9-74.9)
Score, mean (SD; 95% CI)

Adjective rating (Sauro-Lewis), n (%)

11 (23)
A or A+

13 (27)
B

12 (25)
C

5 (10)
D

7 (15)
E

Summary Statistics for the SUS

Summary statistics for the SUS scores are presented in Table
1. Frequencies of ratings for each of the 10 SUS items are shown
in Figure 2. Overall, the median SUS score for the toolkit was
73.8 and the mean was 70.9 (SD 14.1; range 30-100; 95% CI
66.9-74.9). This equates to an adjective rating of “OK” [24] and
a “C” (41st to 59th percentile range) on the Sauro-Lewis curved

grading scale [28]. Most participants (23/48, 48%) thought they
“would like to use this toolkit frequently” (the version of the
prototype they tested; SUS question 1). Most (40/48, 83%)
considered the toolkit “easy to use” (SUS question 3), with 88%
(42/48) believing that most people would “learn to use it
quickly” (SUS question 7). More than half (28/48, 58%)
considered the toolkit’s functionality to be well integrated (SUS
question 5).

JMIR Hum Factors 2023 | vol. 10 | e42912 | p. 5

Figure 2. Frequency of responses for the System Usability Scale items.

App Feedback—Domains

Feedback from survey data and interviews—encompassing
themes of design, functionality, and content—was organized
into the previously mapped areas of the app. Suggestions made
for additional functionality were considered and included any
relevant feedback elicited during interviews.

Food and Diet

Police personnel wanted to have a tracker on the app to monitor
the food that they consumed daily. Most of the users interviewed
(6/9, 67%) found the supporting information under this section
to be quite relevant and informative. During interviews, 22%
(2/9) of the participants mentioned that they liked the detailed
information provided about immunity support:

One really good to see the immunity support page.not a lot of
people know how different foods can affect you and stuff.
[Participant 527]

Additional suggestions were the ability to view a summary of
how changing shifts could affect healthy food consumption.

Activity

The activity section (Figure 3) is currently incomplete without
a fully developed tracker, and information provision is not going

to help in maintaining good fitness levels in isolation. However,
most participants (7/9, 78%) thought that the information
provided was relevant, helpful, and comprehensive. They
especially mentioned that “Cycle2Work”—a UK government
tax exemption scheme, introduced to promote healthy journeys
to work—and other sections were good to have on an app as
they enabled easy access to all the required wellness material
from home. Older participants appreciated the information
displayed on posters and found it easy to read. During
interviews, participants also mentioned that they would like to
track all the physical activities they were doing, including
linking the app to their step counter:

Ability to linking with step counter. Idea is to have
everything at one place. [Participant 517]

Another suggestion was the ability to share information within
teams to act as a motivator:

It definitely doesn’t need to rival Strava or
MyFitnessPal to be useful but in the activity section
a means of tracking exercise [only basic - not pace,
incline etc] to perhaps make teams or share stats
within or across shifts. To set up a Contact
Management leader board of which shift is taking the
most steps for example. [Participant 617]

JMIR Hum Factors 2023 | vol. 10 | e42912 | p. 6

Figure 3. Screenshot of activity section.

Fluid Intake

Feedback regarding the fluid intake section (Figure 4) included
the calendar feature associated with the trackers not working
properly to input fluid and alcohol; it displayed units of fluid
or alcohol drunk on the current day, even if the entry was made
for previous days. Overall, 22% (2/9) of the interviewed
participants did not find the fluid tracker to be user-friendly and
requested a more detailed help section to guide the user through
this section. Participants wanted to have reminders set for fluid
intake and record old entries for those that might have been

missed. However, catch-up cards (refer to the App
Feedback—Other Features section) that give reminders to drink
water should ideally direct users immediately to the fluid intake
tracker for a smooth transition. During interviews, 44% (4/9)
of the participants mentioned the desirability of viewing a
summary:

So you were making entries every day, but if one day
if you would like to see the pattern of your fluid intake,
you should get the kind of graph or some. [Participant
527]

JMIR Hum Factors 2023 | vol. 10 | e42912 | p. 7

Figure 4. Screenshot of fluid intake section.

Sleep

Interviewed participants (8/9, 89%) described the information
provided about sleep as useful and quite vast. There were some
comments about the consistent formatting of the content, and
users gave their preference in the web-based survey to style as
type 1, which was not only easy on the eyes but also more
user-friendly.

During interviews, 56% (5/9) of the participants recommended
having the ability to log sleep:

...Load loads of nice information. Yeah, but it would
have been nice to have been able to have as a log.
[Participant 530]

Good Mental Health

Alcohol tracker, mood diary, employee assistance information,
and recognizing stress were some of the features that the
participants tested. Only some could test all the subsections
during the testing period. Regarding the alcohol tracker, some
participants (2/9, 22%) did not expect this tracker to be located
under this section. For them, it made more sense if it was moved
to the fluid intake section. The tracker offers the ability to track
how many units of alcohol a user has drunk that day, and in
addition to this feature, interviewed participants (4/9, 44%)
wanted to see an overall summary in relation to their shift, to
understand the alcohol consumption and success in meeting the
goal.

The interviewed participants (4/9, 44%) appreciated the National
Health Service (NHS) information on feelings and symptoms
that can be common with mental health concerns, linked from
within the app to recognize the level of stress [29], because for
some job roles that required working on the front line, operating
at unsocial hours and occasionally experiencing traumatic events
increased stress levels. Low mood is an indicator of poor mental
health [30], and it is possible to track and compare with the
previous days using this feature. Participants mentioned that
the mood diary was something they would like to use in the
future, as it helped to track changes in mood daily and compare
them with previous days. It was viewed by some as being
extremely important to keep checking this aspect of their health:

And you can kind of almost pull off reports. Maybe
it’s a PDF report or something that shows that
actually they may be able to identify that on those two
days after a set of three lates. They’re moods quite
low or their fluid intake’s really bad or do you know
what I mean? So that people may utilize the app
more... [Participant 532]
However, there was also some apprehension noted in using the
mood diary. Concerns were whether the data might be monitored
by senior management and that they might be viewed differently
as a result.

JMIR Hum Factors 2023 | vol. 10 | e42912 | p. 8

Financial Well-Being

Participants liked the amount and types of information included
in this section:

I there was some really useful stuff on there that was
sort of flicking through with them, particularly around
sort of the money saving. I read a lot about the police
mutual bit and that was really good. And again gave
me more stuff to think about and it’s got all the links
for stuff that I use anyway, like the HPL bit and the
blue Light card section and all that sort of stuff.
[Participant 517]
Having all the information easily available on the app was
appreciated. Participants wanted to see the search function when
the reading list was long and screen scrolling was required.

App Feedback—Other Features

Dashboard and Visualization

Survey respondents (27/48, 56%) appreciated the clean look of
the app and the fact that the home page was divided into
subheadings, which not only eased navigation but also made it
easy to use:

...Layout was quite visually appealing so the
subheadings. So, you kind of, you knew what you were
gonna get when you went into those subheadings,

they were specific, they weren’t vague. [Participant
523]
They emphasized that they would like to see the summary
dashboard in a graphical form for each domain in correlation
with the shifts attended. It is always helpful to see the progress
made to maintain the motivation levels high, which is crucial
during self-monitoring.

Shift Manager

The shift manager (Figure 5) received positive feedback. A few
different iterations were trialed to make this feature more
user-friendly. The most common officer and staff shifts were
made available to users, so that they could choose the one that
suited their pattern best. In addition, the user can make
modifications and customize the shift patterns if there were any
last-minute changes.

However, there were some challenges. Some participants (18/48,
38%) suggested that the ability to view and edit the entire pattern
of the shift in one go would save them manual input time. They
also suggested replicating the edited pattern for future use:

I couldn’t figure out a way to put in like a six week
shift pattern and then repeat it. I could only figure
out how to do it manually day by day. you could do
like a six week Pan and start it on a specific date and
then it repeats itself, then obviously I could do it that
way and it’ll be a lot easier. [Participant 517]

Figure 5. Screenshot of shift manager section.

JMIR Hum Factors 2023 | vol. 10 | e42912 | p. 9

Goal Setting and Catch-Up Cards

Participants mentioned that the goal-setting feature was useful
when using it within the fluid intake section. There were
suggestions to include this feature in other domains.

In the test version, a new functionality—catch-up cards (Figure
6)—was introduced in association with shift management
improvements. These cards help to remind the users about
certain tasks and popped up based on the shift chosen.

Participants wanted to use catch-up cards as reminders to meet
the set goals. The ability to change the frequency of catch-up
cards on an individual basis was something that participants
wanted to see in a future release. To have prompts to make
increments in their goals was another area identified in which
the app could be improved. In addition, if the cards were linked
to trackers, they could work as reminders to drink more water
or perform some more exercise.

Figure 6. Screenshot of catch-up card - wellbeing walks.

Some would have liked to see the catch-up cards made more
interactive, to increase the usability of the cards. In the survey
data, 33% (16/48) of the participants could not test this
functionality because they were not able to locate it within the
app once these were missed as notifications. Users were not
able to search for them again if the cards for that day had already
been opened and seen once.

Many participants (16/48, 33%) could not understand the timing
pattern of the card—at what time of the day cards
appeared—and were unable to find the cards later in the app.
Notifications were designed to appear 1 hour before the end of
a scheduled shift and at 5 PM on a rest day. Currently, the cards
are populated to enable appropriate notifications for the shift.
For example, during a night shift, it might be focused on sleep,
hydration, and relaxation. On a rest day, it might be focused on
financial savings and family activity ideas.

Discussion

Principal Findings

Overview

To meet the study objectives, where possible, user suggestions
were implemented for improvements during the development
process. The current app is designed to focus on the individual
domains that comprise overall wellness—physical, mental, and
financial well-being—of police personnel. Consideration of the
shifts undertaken was at its center, as shift work patterns make
tracking more difficult for this profession. Overall, feedback
about the app was positive based on the SUS score received.
Users particularly liked the shift manager, mood diary, trackers
to log fluid intake and alcohol consumption, and the relevant
supporting information made available for easy access.
Approximately half (24/48, 50%) of the users thought that the
app was easy to use, and this was considered to be the main
reason for liking the app. However, there are still various
improvements that need to be actioned. Some of these are
improvements in shift manager, giving the ability to create
bespoke shift patterns, functioning of the calendar feature of
the existing trackers, and display of information to make it easy
on the eye. Moreover, there are additional requests by
participants to add new features to the app such as trackers to
record activity and food intake and reminders to prompt them
regarding fluid intake, sleep, and taking rest breaks.

Limitations

Although the authors believe that the results from this study
can be generalized to other police forces across the country, we
acknowledge that there is a limitation of only accessing data
from a subsection of 1 regional UK police force, which might
have inherent organizational biases toward health and
well-being. However, this approach can be expanded to cover
more regions in due course. Regarding bias with purposeful
sampling—where the belief is that qualitative research should
be describing the medium or the norm—the point to underline
is that new phenomena are being described; therefore, we needed
to purposively select the best examples of what we were
interested in. This gave us the clearest cases with the least
“noise” or extraneous errors and allowed for the identification
of characteristics and boundaries [55]. A further limitation of
the study was the greater number of responses from women
(32/48, 67%) than those from men when compared with regional
UK police workforce numbers as of March 2022, which noted
that the gender split was 48% women and 52% men [56].

Future Studies

The wellness app for the commissioning force has now been
subsequently soft launched with funding for the bespoke pattern
design agreed upon. The findings from this study are being
shared with the developers to analyze the possibilities of
implementing them in the next release of the app and have the
improved version of the app trialed before its final launch for
a wide police population.

Organizational Support

In addition to a well-designed mobile app, suitable scaffolded
organizational support implemented alongside the eventual
release of the app, together with an evaluation of how the app
is being used, offers the best chance of producing positive
results. This could include encouraging the use of more

JMIR Hum Factors 2023 | vol. 10 | e42912 | p. 13

health-oriented leadership—a style of leadership associated
with more well-being and low levels of burnout, depression,
and physical complaints among police officers [57].

Voice Integration

Emergent technological enhancements (such as Google Voice
and Google Assistant) offer opportunities for improved
personalized eHealth solutions [58] and increased engagement
[59] and adherence [60]. In the area of nutrition, projects are
already being conducted, such as the design, development, and
evaluation of an Alexa Skill on food and nutrition management
for native American patients with diabetes [61]. Similarly,
regarding fitness, TandemTrack combines a mobile app and an
Alexa skill to support exercise regimens, data capture, feedback,
and reminders [62]. Members of this team have previously
explored the tentative use of voice-activated speakers or
assistants such as Google’s Assistant or Amazon’s Alexa to
enable the input of information via voice rather than keyboard
[63], which might also assist in making this type of innovation
quick to use and therefore more user-friendly.

Investigating Other ESP Pathways

These unique issues, the continuing long-term effects of the
pandemic on employee health and well-being, and the
highlighted gaps in solutions available at present are not only
applicable to police staff and officers but also to other
ESP—such as firefighters [64,65], paramedics [66,67], and
health care professionals [68,69]—and other shift workers.
Therefore, the project team is seeking further funding, to explore
the development and expansion of this approach to health and
well-being issues in other sectors, in addition to the police.

Conclusions

This study highlights the importance of coparticipation with
officers and staff across the entire development cycle, to
coproduce a human-centered design methodology to enable the
development of a considered and user-centered solution. It
demonstrates the need for producing a multifunctional tool
rather than focusing purely on an individual element for this
user group. It also highlights how linking and being able to track
optional, personalized elements of health data against each other,
cross-referenced to individual shift patterns, might help to
inform and provide users with a chance for reflection and
therefore influence behavior change.