Protocol

Promoting Employees’ Recovery During Shift Work: Protocol for
a Workplace Intervention Study

Irene MW Niks, PhD; Alwin van Drongelen, PhD; Elsbeth M de Korte, MSc

The Netherlands Organization for Applied Scientific Research (TNO), Leiden, Netherlands

Irene MW Niks, PhD
The Netherlands Organization for Applied Scientific Research (TNO)
Schipholweg 77
Leiden, 2316 ZL
Netherlands
Phone: 31 61 129 79 41

Methods

Ethical Approval and Consent to Participate

This study protocol and materials have been approved by the
Netherlands Organization for Applied Scientific Research’s

review board, which is an internal ethics committee that assesses
the ethical aspects of working with participants in experiments.
In addition, both the higher and lower management of the shift
work organization provided their consent for the execution of
the research plan. Employees will be extensively informed about
the study purpose and the protocols and asked to sign an
informed consent form before participation. The confidentiality
of the research data will be guaranteed and participation will
strictly happen on a voluntary basis; thus, participants can
withdraw from the study at any moment.

Quasi-Experimental Field Study

A randomized controlled trial is generally considered as the
gold standard in evaluative health-related research, as causal
inferences about the therapy under study can be drawn [27].
However, in this project, there are several practical and ethical
issues that do not allow for such a design. Most importantly, a
precondition set by the participating organization was that their
management would select 2 preexisting departmental units for
the study and that both units would receive the intervention.
However, a control group is needed to distinguish between the
change in the outcome over time due to the planned intervention
or to evaluate the changes over time due to unmeasured or
unknown factors [27]. Therefore, this study was designed as a
quasi-experimental field study with a waiting list control group
and pretest-posttest design. This means that one part of the
experimental group (ie, unit A) will receive the intervention
first, while another part of the group (ie, unit B) waits for an
additional 3 months before they can make use of the
intervention. Thus, the second unit acts as a temporary control
group.

Three types of research methods can be distinguished in this
study: (1) a longitudinal web-based survey study, (2) an
ecological momentary assessment (EMA) study, and (3) a
process evaluation. After the baseline measures (T0) of the
web-based survey study are recorded, the yet-to-be-developed
intervention aimed at recovery during work will be implemented
within the experimental group.

Figure 1 presents a flowchart of the study design and the
measurement moments. To analyze the effectiveness of the
intervention, follow-up measurements will be performed at 3
months (T1) and at 6 months (T2) after the implementation of
the intervention. This timeline seems adequate as the primary
study outcomes (recovery during work and short-term negative
effects of shift work) are expected to change over a relatively
short period of time. In addition, an EMA study will be carried
out shortly after the implementation of the intervention to
provide insight into the short-term within-person intervention
effects. Finally, a process evaluation will be performed to
determine the factors that may have either enhanced or mitigated
the effectiveness of the intervention.

Setting and Study Population

This study is performed at the logistics department of a
multinational steel company. This department consists of 160
employees in rotating shift work who are predominantly men,
and they are divided into 2 units. These units do not share
physical workspaces and are managed separately, thereby
minimizing the chance of potential crossover effects. With
respect to the demographics and the workload, the units are
highly comparable. The typical job positions in both the units
are machine operators and logistics coordinators. Open air
working conditions are limited for both the participating units.
One of the units will be selected to serve as the waiting list
control group. This selection will be made in close consultation
with the management, considering factors such as organizational
planning, expected availability of time, and resources available
for each unit.

Inclusion Criteria

All questionnaires used during the study will be distributed
using an app. Therefore, the only inclusion criteria are that
employees have to work for one of the 2 participating units and
they need to possess their own personal smartphone to be able
to participate in the study.

Intervention Development and Implementation

The current protocol for intervention development and
implementation is based on close alignment between the
researchers and human resource (HR)/occupational health
representatives of the respective multinational steel company.
Before the start of the participatory process (phase 1: needs
assessment), the company already signaled issues with respect
to fatigue and recovery on the basis of the internal employee
surveys. However, as mentioned before, for recovery
interventions to be effective, it is essential that employees have
a sense of autonomy and control with regard to choosing their
recovery activities [11,12]. To provide this sense of control, it
seems vital to actively involve the target group in the

intervention design and implementation process. In fact, Nielsen
et al [28] argued that the effect of occupational health–promoting
interventions heavily depends on the participation of the various
organizational stakeholders. Therefore, in this study, a
bottom-up participatory action research (PAR) approach will
be used for intervention development and implementation [29].
By establishing a participatory group and making use of the
management’s and workers’knowledge, skills, and perceptions,
a feeling of joint ownership of both problems and solutions is
created [30]. Further, involving organizational stakeholders in
the process of intervention development and implementation
may enhance their general capacity to successfully address
workplace issues [29]. The participatory group will be led by
researchers with expertise in occupational health and PAR
approaches. The effectiveness of PAR approaches has been
demonstrated in various intervention studies [31,32].

The PAR approach toward intervention development and
implementation consists of various sessions for each
participating unit, in which employees and a project group (ie,
researchers, line managers, HR managers, occupational health
experts) provide input on the intervention content and
implementation. The development and implementation process
can be divided into 3 phases, which are described below.

Phase 1: Needs Assessment

In phase 1, we aim to assess the initial design specifications and
the user requirements for the intervention to meet the needs of
the target group. The basic needs and requirements of the
intervention will be determined in close consultation with the
target group. To this end, we will apply a user-centered design
approach. First, the researchers will observe the workplace of
the participating departmental units and conduct semistructured
interviews with the employees and departmental and unit
managers to gain insight into the characteristics of the target
group, their specific work activities, and their current recovery
practices. Second, the employees from the participating units
(ie, intervention groups) will be invited to participate in 2

successive so-called user sessions that are led by the researchers.
In these sessions, evidence-based and theory-based recovery
practices (ie, psychological detachment, relaxation and
activating recovery activities) will be presented and discussed.
Specifically, employees will be asked for their recovery needs
(eg, preferred work break activities) in context to specific work
shifts (ie, morning, evening, night). In addition, they will be
asked for ideas on how to incorporate new recovery practices
into their current work and recovery routines. For reasons of
feasibility, the focus will be on their formal work breaks. These
ideas will then be rated on desirability by all employees. A
voting procedure will be used to reach consensus. Phase 1 will
result in an overview of the general intervention requirements.

Phase 2: Intervention Development

The aim of phase 2 is the development of an intervention
prototype that can be tested in practice. To ensure that the
intervention will meet the individual needs of various
employees, the prototype should include the introduction and
facilitation of a minimum of three recovery practices. These
practices may be directed at both the individual and the work
environment, depending on the outcomes of phase 1. The
development of the intervention will again take place in
consultation with the project group and the target group (ie,
employees of the departmental units A and B). An intervention
development and implementation team will be set up, consisting
of various target group representatives (ie, employees, managers,
and possibly HR advisors and works council members). We
will use an iterative design to transform a paper prototype into
a working prototype, considering the general intervention
requirements that are identified in phase 1. Phase 2 will result
in 
an 
intervention 
prototype 
and 
an 
accompanying
implementation plan.

Phase 3: Intervention Implementation

In phase 3, the implementation plan that was set up in phase 2
will be executed and rolled out over the 2 subunits according
to the schedule in Figure 1. A part of this plan will be the
organization of informal small-scale meetings at work wherein
the use of the intervention will be demonstrated and explained
by the members of the implementation team. In addition, flyers
with a brief intervention user manual will be distributed
throughout the department.

Study Procedure

All employees of the participating units will be asked to
participate in the intervention evaluation on a voluntary basis.
During small-group information sessions, employees will be
informed about the study purposes and procedures.

An information letter will show the participants how to install
a smartphone-based questionnaire app, after which they will be
asked to activate a user account by filling in a unique login
username and password. Information letters will be handed out
blindly, ensuring that user accounts are anonymous and only
used for linking the participant data of different measurement
moments (ie, T0, T1, T2, and EMA data). After logging in, the
employees will be directed to the baseline questionnaire. The
first question of the baseline questionnaire refers to the informed
consent and asks the employees if they agree to participate. If

they do not agree, the questionnaire will be ended. If they do
agree, the participant acknowledges that the information
provided was clear. No further follow-up of the nonparticipants
will be performed. In addition, during the information sessions
and in the information letter, it is indicated that participants are
free to quit the study whenever they wish to do so, without
having to provide an explanation.

Intervention Evaluation

Web-Based Survey

Intervention effects will be evaluated using pretest (T0/T1) and
posttest (T1/T2) web-based surveys (see Figure 1). Participants
will be invited to complete the surveys through the
smartphone-based questionnaire app. The primary outcome
variables used are as follows.

1. Recovery during work: Recovery during work will be
measured using 3 items, which reflect the cognitive, emotional,
and physical dimension of detachment from work [31,33]. A
sample item is as follows: “During a work break, I think of
things other than work.” Items will be scored on a 5-point
frequency scale ranging from 1 (never or very rarely) to 5 (very
often or always).

2. Need for recovery: The need for recovery will be assessed
with the “need for recovery scale” from the Dutch questionnaire
on the experience and evaluation of work (Dutch abbreviation,
VBBA) [34]. A sample item is “Often, after a day’s work, I feel
so tired that I cannot get involved in other activities.” All items
have 2 response choices: yes or no.

3. Fatigue: Fatigue levels will be measured using the 4-item
shortened version of the Checklist Individual Strength [35]. A
sample item is as follows: “I feel physically exhausted.” Items
will be scored on a 7-point scale ranging from 1 (completely
disagree) to 7 (completely agree).

The secondary outcome variables are as follows.

1. General perceived health: The general perceived health will
be measured using 1 item of the Dutch version of the short form
36-item Health Survey [36].

2. Vigor: Vigor will be assessed using 3 items of the vigor scale
of the Utrecht Work Engagement Scale [37]. A sample item is
as follows: “At my work, I am bursting with energy.” All the
items will be scored on a 7-point rating scale, ranging from 0
(never) to 6 (every day).

3. Work ability: Work ability will be measured using 3 items
of the Work Ability Index [38]. One item is used for subjective
estimation of the current work ability compared with lifetime
best work ability (11-point scale, ranging from 0 [not able to
work at all] to 10 [best work ability in lifetime]), whereas the
other 2 items assess the subjective work ability in relation to
the physical and mental demands of the work (5-point scale,
ranging from 1 [very poor] to 5 [very good]).

4. Safety and performance: Safety and performance at work
will be assessed with a self-constructed item for each type of
shift (ie, morning/evening/night). A sample item is as follows:
“Given the current working conditions, I manage to work safely
and productively every morning shift.” The items will be scored

on a 7-point scale ranging from 1 (completely disagree) to 7
(completely agree).

The other confounding and effect-modifying parameters that
will be collected at baseline are as follows.

1. Sociodemographic variables: Information on age, gender,
work unit, job title, and household composition will be collected.

2. 
Morningness-eveningness 
preferences: 
Personal
morningness-eveningness preferences will be measured using
1 item based on the Morningness-Eveningness questionnaire
[39].

3. Lifestyle: Physical activity and smoking behavior will be
measured with 1 item each, based on the Study on Transitions
in Employment, Ability, and Motivation cohort study [40].

4. Sleep patterns: Sleep disturbances will be measured using
the Jenkins Sleep Questionnaire [41]. This questionnaire consists
of the following 4 items: frequency in the difﬁculty of falling
asleep in the previous month, difﬁculty sleeping continuously,
waking up several times each night, and waking up feeling tired
and worn out after the usual amount of sleep. The response
alternatives range from 1 (not at all) to 6 (22-31 days).

EMA

During the intervention period, all employees will also be asked
to participate in the EMA. EMA is a method for self-monitoring
through the collection of self-reports on indices of behavior,
cognition, or emotions in near real time in the daily lives of the
participants, often through digital devices [42-44]. The

smartphone-based questionnaire app allows us to digitally collect
daily life momentary assessments of changes in employees’
levels of fatigue and recovery behavior, in relation to momentary
context and activity. As such, it provides insight into the
short-term, within-person mechanisms linking fatigue and
recovery with short-term intervention effects. Event-contingent
data collection protocols will be used, indicating that data entry
takes place when a predefined event occurs [45,46]. The
predefined event in this study is the formal work break.
Participants will be asked to fill the data in the EMA app for a
period of 14 consecutive days (1) directly before taking a work
break, (2) directly after taking a work break, and (3) directly
after the end of their shift. Each measurement moment will take
about 1-2 minutes. In alignment with organizational
management, we chose a period of 14 days to ensure enough
day-level data points (despite rotating shift schedules and
possible dropouts) without overburdening the participants. The
use of the intervention, however, can continue after data has
been collected.

Table 1 shows the variables that will be measured. The
information provided will give insight into the effectiveness of
the different recovery strategies (eg, relaxation and activation)
and the influence of work break control, shift types, and personal
characteristics (eg, age, chronotype, job position) on recovery
outcomes. The start of the 14-day EMA period will be
communicated through (1) the app via prompts, (2) the manager
of the specific unit, and (3) through communication at the
workplace (eg, posters, newsletters).

Process Evaluation

It is not only important to develop an intervention with the right
ingredients but also to design a good implementation process
[48]. Studies have shown that the intervention development and
implementation process can affect the outcomes of the respective
intervention [27,28]. For instance, activities aimed at raising
support from the employees and the management for the
intervention may enhance the effectiveness of an intervention.
However, failing to fully implement a planned intervention after
raising support may result in unfulfilled expectations and
negative employee attitudes. By evaluating the intervention
process, the outcomes of organizational interventions can be
better understood [48,49]. These insights can be used to further
improve the intervention effectiveness.

In this study, we will use Nielsen and Randall’s [50] framework
for process evaluations, which is specifically designed for the
implementation process of organization-level interventions. It
provides a broad perspective on the intervention process by not
only including the intervention design and implementation but
also the organizational context and the participant’s perceptions
of the intervention. Evaluation of these factors will enable us
to answer the questions of what works for whom under which
circumstances [48]. Data on the process factors will be collected
during and after the implementation of the intervention. A
variety of data sources will be used: (1) data logs of the
researchers and the organizational management, (2) interviews
with the management and the employees, and (3) the T1/T2
web-based employee survey. Table 2 provides an overview of
the process factors, associated questions, and data sources.

Statistical Analysis

First, intervention results will be analyzed by performing mixed
model repeated measures analyses (multivariate analysis of
variance; time*group interaction) on longitudinal survey data
with the outcome measures at follow-up (T0-T1, T1-T2, and
T0-T2 comparisons) as the dependent variables. Furthermore,
the effectiveness of the intervention will be analyzed by applying
multilevel analyses on data collected within the EMA study
(before break-after break and before break
comparisons). Data will be collected and analyzed at 3 levels:
(1) day level, (2) employee level, and (3) work unit level.
Dropouts will be documented and included in the data analysis
to the point of dropout. Potential confounders or effect modifiers
(eg, age, gender, chronotype) will be compared between the
intervention and the waiting list control group by t tests for
independent samples and chi-square tests. For all analyses, a
two-tailed significance level of P<.05 will be applied. The
multilevel analyses will be conducted using R and the mixed
model repeated measures analyses will be performed using

SPSS software (IBM Corp, Version 25.0). A detailed analysis
plan will be developed prior to finalization of the dataset.

Sample Size

The sample size calculation is based on finding an effect on the
need for recovery. This variable was chosen because of its
test-retest reliability and sensitivity to detect change, indicating
that the need for recovery may be a useful tool for evaluating
interventions related to occupational health [34]. Based on
previous studies [47,51], a small effect size is expected. Power
calculations indicate that to detect a small effect in the context
of a repeated measurements analysis of variance (Cohen f=0.15),
at least 37 subjects are necessary in each study group
(power=0.80 and α=.05), and calculations were performed using
G*power [52]. The response rates of similar PAR studies have
been shown to be around 75% or higher [31,32]. Given the
intended sample size of 150 subjects and the expected response
rate of 75%, resulting in 56 subjects per group, the study has
sufficient power to even detect slightly smaller effects [53].

Results

This study is supported by the Netherlands Organization for
Applied Scientific Research Work and Health Research
Program, which is funded by the Ministry of Economic Affairs
and supported by the Dutch Ministry of Social Affairs and
Employment, program number 19.204.1-3. This study was
approved by the institutional review board on February 7, 2019.
From June to August 2019, baseline data were collected, and
from November to December 2019, the first follow-up data
were collected. The second follow-up data collection and data
analysis are planned for the first two quarters of 2020.
Dissemination of the results is planned for the last two quarters
of 2020.

Discussion

Principal Aspects of This Study

Shift work (ie, irregular working hours) can cause negative
short-term effects for both employees and employers, such as
increased fatigue levels, concentration problems, and
consequently, an augmented risk of accidents and productivity
loss. Unfortunately, evidence-based interventions to mitigate
the negative effects of shift work are still lacking. Previous
research studies have shown that a possible way to counteract
the negative short-term effects of shift work is by enhancing
the recovery of the employees during work. Therefore, the aim
of this study is to develop, implement, and evaluate an
intervention focused on enhancing the recovery of shift workers
during working hours.

Study Strengths

The design of this study has several strengths. First, by making
use of the PAR approach, stakeholders at all levels of the
company are involved. This bottom-up involvement of the
stakeholders will contribute to the commitment to the proposed
interventions, which will likely translate into better overall
intervention adherence and compliance. Moreover, it allows the
target group to participate in the development and
implementation of the intervention. This approach will stimulate
problem ownership and commitment at all levels of the
organization and has the potential to contribute to organizational
sustainability [29], for which the interventions are more likely
to have the proposed impact [28]. Another strength of the study
design is that the timeline for the experimental unit allows us
to compare the short-term intervention effects (T1) with the
long-term effects (T2). In addition, the intervention development
is conducted in a similar way in both the departments, but the
eventual workplace interventions can differ. As a consequence,
we can compare different solutions on similar proposed
outcomes, 
further 
contributing 
to 
both 
theory 
and
evidence-based practice [54]. In addition, to determine the
effects of the workplace intervention, we use a rather unique
data triangulation. Next to group-level outcome measurements
with a web-based questionnaire, EMA measurements are used
to gain insight into the working mechanisms of the intervention
and to determine the influence of the type of recovery strategy
chosen, the time of day, the type of shift, and intraindividual
differences. Moreover, a process evaluation will be performed

in order to gain more insight into what aspects of the
intervention work for whom and why [48]. The process
evaluation outcomes are assessed qualitatively (ie, group
interviews, observations, data logs) and quantitatively (ie,
self-reported measures in digital surveys) and whenever
possible, complemented with objective organizational data (eg,
sickness absence registration).

Study Limitations

From an occupational and epidemiological point of view, this
study can be classified as a prevention-effectiveness study
[27,55,56]. The characteristics of a prevention-effectiveness
study design are as follows: small sample size, no randomization
or blinding, and quantitative and qualitative measures. These
characteristics ensure the internal validity of the study [55].
However, this type of study, as does ours, contains some
limitations as well. First, because we do not use randomization,
allocation bias could take place. However, in this study, it is
impossible to randomly assign participants to an intervention
and control group for practical and ethical reasons. Therefore,
the waiting list control group principle was introduced.
Moreover, one could argue that owing to the preallocation of
the departments, the commitment of the management to the
study is assured (ie, they know that an actual intervention is
taking place and things have to be arranged to get this done),
which enhances the feasibility of this study. A second limitation
is the timeframe of the study. Behavioral and organizational
changes do not occur easily or quickly. Therefore, the follow-up
period (6 months) might be too soon to establish health-related
effects. It might be, for instance, that changing recovery habits
initially requires additional effort before it pays off in long-term
reduced levels of fatigue. By combining quantitative data with
qualitative data, we aim to gain further insight into this matter.
A third limitation is that the evaluation of the effectiveness of
the intervention fully relies on self-reported data. It would be
interesting, for instance, to also assess fatigue levels through
simple cognitive tests. For reasons of feasibility (ie,
extensiveness of current research activities and accompanying
time investment from the participants), we did not include such
tests in the current design, but it might be a useful addition to
the EMA method in the future studies. Another study limitation
is the lack of generalizability of the findings. These study results
may be organization-specific or sector-specific. However,
workplace intervention studies for shift workers are still very
scarce. The intervention in this study may therefore offer a
starting point for future intervention studies in other
organizations and sectors with shift work. Thereafter, aspects
of the intervention should again be tailored to the
workplace-specific context and target group through a
participatory development and implementation process, as this
has been argued to be a crucial condition for organizational
interventions to be effective. An inevitable implication of this
approach is that the effects have to be interpreted by considering
unique contextual factors. A process evaluation will be
performed to identify such contextual factors.

In summary, this study will investigate whether a workplace
intervention study can reduce fatigue and improve the recovery
of shift workers during work by using a PAR-designed

workplace intervention at a large steel company in the
Netherlands.