RESEARCH ARTICLE
Development of a small and sick newborn
clinical audit tool and its implementation
guide using a human-centred design
approach newborn clinical audit process and
design

Muthoni OgolaID1,2,3*, John Wainaina1, Naomi Muinga1, Wairimu Kimani4,
Maureen Muriithi3, Jalemba AluvaalaID1,2,5, Mike EnglishID1,5, Grace Irimu1,2

1 Health Services Unit, KEMRI-Wellcome Trust Research Programme, Nairobi, Kenya, 2 Department of
Paediatrics and Child Health, University of Nairobi, Nairobi, Kenya, 3 Pumwani Maternity Hospital, Nairobi,
Kenya, 4 Kenyatta National Hospital, Nairobi, Kenya, 5 Centre for Tropical Medicine and Global Health,
Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom

Methods

The methods section is divided into three phases; phase one describes the design of the SSNB
audit tool; phase two describes the design of the implementation guide, and phase three
describes the usability testing of the two tools.

Study sites and participants

This study was conducted in hospitals participating in a clinical information network (CIN)
for neonates. CIN-Neonatal is a collaborative effort between the Ministry of Health (MoH),
researchers and the participating hospitals that aims to improve the quality and utilisation of
patient-level data [19]. CIN-Neonatal consists of 21 purposively selected public hospitals from
12 out of the 47 Counties in Kenya [20]. Each facility NBU has a focal paediatrician/s, a nurse
in-charge of NBU and the health records information officer (HRIO) who act as a link between
the hospital and the research teams [21]. Newborn deaths in these hospitals contribute to two-
thirds of mortality among patients aged 0–13 years with five conditions accounting for the
majority of newborn admissions; Intrapartum related conditions, respiratory distress syn-
drome, neonatal sepsis, neonatal jaundice and low birthweight [20].
Description of study sites for the design of the audit tool.
Pumwani Maternity Hospital
(PMH) is one of the County referral hospitals in Kenya and was selected as the site for the
design of the SSNB audit tool [22]. This hospital was selected as at the time of the study, the
lead researcher (MO) had been a paediatrician in the hospital for approximately one year. It is
also the largest referral maternity hospital in Kenya located in Nairobi County with approxi-
mately 100 deliveries per day [23]. The NBU admits approximately 350–400 newborns per
month and provides intermediate-level care [24]. The hospital held monthly MPDSR meetings
to discuss maternal near misses with a brief overview of perinatal morbidity and mortality sta-
tistics. In the event of a maternal death, the meeting was held within 48 hours of the death.
Description of study sites for usability testing.
The initial plan was to test the tools in
PMH. However, Kenyatta National Hospital (KNH), the largest teaching and referral hospital
in Kenya expressed interest in improving its newborn clinical audit process and was

incorporated into the study as a testing site in January 2021. KNH caters for low-and-middle-
income populations from Nairobi and its environs as well as referrals from other hospitals in
the country and the greater Eastern Africa region [25]. The NBU of KNH admits approxi-
mately 250–300 newborns per month and offers intensive care to critically ill newborns [24].
The NBU staff do not attend MPDSR meetings, they however infrequently hold in-house
meetings to discuss the NBU morbidity and mortality statistics.

Study participants

Cognitive walkthrough and usability testing of prototype audit tools in the hospitals.
The SSNB audit tool was intended for use by a transdisciplinary team who directly provide
care to the SSNB and were therefore involved in its design and testing its usability (Box 2).

Virtual design workshop.
The design workshop of the implementation guide involved 37
purposely selected participants (two neonatologists, 17 NBU nurse leaders, 17 paediatricians
and an MoH official) and was held using the Zoom platform.

Development and iterative testing of the audit tool and implementation guide

We describe the methods used for the development of the audit tool and its implementation
guide in three phases: (i) Development of draft zero of the newborn clinical audit tool by the
research team and refining it using cognitive walkthrough methodology, (ii) development of
an implementation guide adapted from the Geneva: World Health Organisation; 2018 manual
through consensus opinion of the end users and iii) usability testing of the audit tool and
implementation guide.
A modified version of a three step HCD approach was used across all three phases in the
design of the audit tool and its implementation guide [14]. Briefly, the three steps in HCD
applied in our study included:

1. Understanding the context of use, user requirements and understanding the structure of
the available audit tools. This led to the development of the implementation guide and draft
zero of the prototype of a SSNB audit tool [2, 3, 10, 26].

2. Cognitive walkthrough which refers to a structured approach assessing the usability of the
prototype audit tool and identifying barriers to its use. The outcome was a high-level proto-
type audit tool which was ready for testing with the end users.

3. Usability testing which refers to the process of field testing the feasibility of the audit tool
and implementation guide as the standard operating procedure (SOP) by which newborn
audits would be conducted in the Kenyan public hospitals. The outcome of this was an
audit tool and implementation guide that are scalable.

The audit tool and implementation guide design process and timelines for each phase are
described in Fig 1 below.

Phase one—Development of draft zero of the audit tool and further
modification by end-users using cognitive walkthrough methodology

a). Design of draft zero of the prototype audit tool.
We studied the existing audit tools
to inform the structure of draft zero of the SSNB prototype audit tool. These audit tools
included: Kenyan MoH MPDSR Tool, WHO Stillbirth and Neonatal Death Case Review Form
and WHO Child and Neonatal Death Review Form [2, 3, 10]. We also made reference to the
modifiable factors in newborn care identified from a scoping review, Kenyan Basic Paediatric
Protocols, Comprehensive Newborn Care Protocols and WHO guidelines that outline stan-
dards of care for the SSNB [12, 21, 27–30]. The outcome of this initial step was draft zero of
the audit tool which was paper based.
b). Cognitive walkthrough of draft zero and subsequent modified prototypes of the
audit tool.
The newborn unit audit meetings were initially held monthly then two-weekly.
Draft zero of the audit tool was subjected to a five-step iterative process during NBU audit
meetings in PMH. The iteration involved the sequence of developing a prototype tool, evaluat-
ing it with the end users and modifying it based on their feedback to improve its efficiency and
ensured that it could be used by the intended users with minimal coaching (Box 3). The tool
went through 15 revisions during the study period until we reached a point of saturation on
the feedback from the end users during each audit cycle. The outcome of this was a high-qual-
ity prototype audit tool.

Phase two—Development of a context sensitive audit implementation
guide by obtaining consensus opinion of the end users

a. Understanding the context through a review of literature.
Initial work involved
understanding the context of use and user requirements. We reviewed literature that described
the Kenyan health system context in terms of: (i)The organizational environment which
include organizational culture, values, leadership [20, 31–33], (ii) physical environment with
respect to structures, availability of equipment, medicines and materials [31, 34], (iii) health
workers who are the end users in terms of their behaviours, attitudes and work tasks [34–37],
and (iv) literature from other LMICs that described the facilitators and barriers to the maternal
and perinatal audit process [38–45]. This information was used to develop the topic guide for
the focus group discussions.
b. Understanding the context through focus group discussions and arriving at consen-
sus on the audit implementation guide. To further understand the context and user

requirements, we conducted a consensus virtual workshop to engage the end users in the
design of the audit implementation guide. The workshop consisted of three parts that
included: (i) FGDs that allowed for in depth understanding of the facilitators and barriers to
the newborn audit process within the Kenyan context (described in detail in S1 Appendix), (ii)
a plenary session to discuss the audit implementation guide based on WHO recommendations
that ensured all participants had the same understanding of an ideal implementation guide,
and iii) a consensus meeting to agree on feasible SOPs for the implementation guide that
would adapt the Geneva: World Health Organisation; 2018 manual with the context and users
in mind [2]. The consensus meeting began with designing user personas to understand the

attributes of the end users before arriving at consensus using the nominal group technique.
The users were involved in every step of the design with a full description of the workshop pro-
vided in S1 Appendix. The outcome of which was the SSNB audit implementation guide.

Phase three—Usability testing of the newborn clinical audit tool and
implementation guide

The usability testing of the audit tool and implementation guide involved the lead researcher
(MO) taking a facilitative role while allowing the hospital teams to take over the management
of the newborn audit process following the recommendations in the implementation guide.
The usability of the audit tool was also tested in PMH and KNH, a tertiary hospital, over a
period of six months from November 2020 to April 2021. The audit meetings in the tertiary
hospital were fully virtual as this was preferred by the hospital team due to the COVID-19
pandemic.
In PMH, a multidisciplinary audit team was constituted to manage the newborn audit pro-
cess. This team was composed of eight members as recommended in the implementation
guide with the paediatrician as the chair. This team employed the implementation guide
recommendations.
At the start the researcher (MO) held a meeting with the audit committee where she
described their roles as specified in the implementation guide and advised that they would be
responsible for managing the audit process. MO was available to provide guidance where
needed, make observations as well as receive feedback from the members of the committee on
components of the implementation guide that were difficult to implement. These were docu-
mented and modified accordingly.
The audit tool was tested in the tertiary hospital as the health workers (residents, fellows
and nurses) would prepare for and present in the audit meeting under the supervision of the
chair of the audit committee. They would engage with the researcher at each stage to seek clar-
ification as well as provide feedback on the usability of the tool. All necessary modifications
were made to the audit tool before each meeting.

Ethics

Ethical approval for this study was granted by the Kenya Medical Research Institute (KEMRI)
Scientific and Ethics Review Unit (Protocol no: KEMRI/SERU/CGMRC/161/3852) with addi-
tional approval from Kenyatta National Hospital- University of Nairobi Ethics and Research
Committee (KNH-UoN ERC (P330/06/2020)) for the testing phase. The participants signed
an electronic consent form and emailed it to the lead researcher (MO) three days before the
workshop (S2 Appendix). In addition, the participants gave consent again before the FGD by
directly messaging the group moderator “I agree”, there were however a few participants who
were not proficient in using the Zoom platform and were allowed to unmute and give their
verbal consent. We applied for a waiver of the consent process during the audit meetings. This
was because the feedback and observations conducted and documentation of the same were
on the audit tool and audit process (our experiences as facilitators during the audit meetings,
where people were positioned in relationship to one another, people’s behaviours etc.). We did
not document any details of the cases discussed therefore ensuring confidentiality. Due to the
sensitive nature of mortality audit meetings, obtaining individual informed consent from each
participant during the audit meetings may have affected the quality of discussions taking place
during the meeting as the participants may have feared that the study was focusing on the
cases discussed which was not the case. This would therefore have negatively affected the quali-
tative results obtained from the study.

Results
Outcome of the co-design of the small and sick newborn clinical audit tool

a. Outcome of reviewing the available audit tools to understand the gaps and inform the
structure of draft zero of the SSNB audit tool. The review of the three maternal, perinatal
and newborn audit tools informed the structure of draft zero of the prototype newborn audit
tool. The Kenyan MPDSR tool and the WHO stillbirth and neonatal death case review form
were focused on maternal and perinatal care. The WHO child and neonatal death review form
had information on neonatal care but focused on care beyond the neonatal period [2, 3, 10].
The Kenyan MPDSR tool and the WHO stillbirth and neonatal death audit tool were simi-
lar in their structure. Both tools followed the same sequence to obtain patient information in a
systematic manner. The sequence began with hospital details, biodata of mother and baby,
mother’s antenatal care, labour and delivery details, resuscitation care of baby, cause of death,
modifiable factors and action plans. The WHO child and neonatal death review form did not
entirely focus on the perinatal and neonatal period, however it had content on the care of chil-
dren beyond the neonatal period. The structure of the audit tool however followed the same
sequence of patient care details from admission to death with more provision to discuss the
care provided during hospital stay. A summary of the structure and content of the three stud-
ied tools has been presented on Table 1 below.
b. Structure of draft zero of the prototype newborn audit tool.
Draft zero of the proto-
type newborn audit tool was divided into four sections (S3 Appendix):

1. Newborn biodata which included the patient admission number, gender, date of birth,
birth weight, gestation at birth, age at death (mortality audits) or age at review (near miss
clinical audits), weight at death (mortality audits) or weight at review (near miss audits).

2. Mother’s details which included the ANC details and details of labour and delivery. ANC
details included: Mother’s blood group, Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) status,
syphilis status, hypertension in pregnancy and diabetes in pregnancy.
Labour and delivery details included: Mode of delivery, complications during labour and
delivery and if the newborn was resuscitated after delivery. The complications of labour
and delivery were coded at the bottom of the audit tool.

3. Review of the care provided during and after admission.
This section of the audit tool began by reviewing the care provided at admission and was
structured to allow the audit participants to discuss the quality of care provided; what was
well done, what could have been done differently and the recommendations made for each
step in care during admission (timely admission, adequacy and appropriate assessment
-history, physical examination, and investigations, primary and secondary diagnoses, sup-
portive and definitive management).
The next section reviewed the post admission supportive and definitive management based
on the progression of illness.

4. Details of death for mortality audits (primary and secondary cause of death) and the condi-
tions that led to unfavourable outcomes for near miss audits.

c. Final outcome of the cognitive walkthrough of draft zero and the subsequent modi-
fied prototype audit tools.
The feedback received during the cognitive walkthrough phase
was categorised into one of the three groups:

1. Usability—the extent in which the content of the audit tool allowed the users to compre-
hensively summarise the care provided to the small and sick newborns.

2. Human factors—the application of feedback on the structuring of the audit tool that
enabled or limited the users’ interaction with the audit tool.

3. User experience—the perceptions and thoughts of the users based on their experience of
using the audit tool.

A detailed description of the results and outcome of the modifications made based on user
feedback during each audit cycle have been summarised in S4 Appendix.
The difference between the co-designed SSNB clinical audit tool and the available audit
tools are summarised in Box 4 below.

Outcome of the development of an audit implementation guide adapted to
the context

a. Characteristics of the context and users that were perceived as facilitators and barri-
ers to using the newborn clinical audit process based on the focus group discussions.
The

focus group discussion results were categorised as facilitators or barriers to the audit process.
The main themes arising from the FGDs and the participants quotes supporting the findings
are provided in S5 Appendix. The themes arising include:

1. Perceived Facilitators

i. Patient safety culture which defines an integrated pattern of individual and organizational
behaviour that continuously seeks to minimize patient harm that may occur from the care
delivery process [46]. The study participants elaborated on how their organisations priori-
tized patient safety by viewing patient care from a systems perspective. This allowed them to
recognize the value of creating an equal environment that supports open dialogue and an
environment that encourages learning from preventable adverse events.

ii. Completion of the audit cycle. Poor implementation of audit identified recommendations
has been identified as a major contributor to the loss of confidence in the audit process [42,

43, 45]. The study participants described the different strategies that they have put in place
to ensure that recommendations are implemented.

2. Perceived Barriers

i. Unhealthy organisational culture. This main theme reflects the perceptions of the FGD par-
ticipants with regard to the impact their organizational culture had on the effectiveness of
the audit process.

ii. Knowledge of meaning of clinical audits. Some contributions in the FGDs revealed that
some participants understood a clinical audit as simply reviewing the monthly morbidity
and mortality statistics focussing on outcomes in the newborn unit. There was no discus-
sion on the processes of care.

iii. Failure to recognise the complexity of the health system and newborn care. The FGD par-
ticipants revealed that they recognized that newborn care required a team effort. The
teams they described were however limited to the immediate newborn care team; nurses
and clinicians and occasionally the midwives.

iv. Health workers’ perceptions about the value of clinical audits. The FGD participants
revealed that the HCW did not fully appreciate the benefits of the clinical audit process on
quality improvement.

v. HCW knowledge to perform. The respondents brought out that there was a gap between
what the HCW should be doing and what they have the knowledge to do.

a. Outcome of the consensus meeting to design the implementation guide. With an
understanding of the user requirements through the creation of user personas (S6 Appendix),
the team arrived at consensus on the standard operating procedure for conducting the SSNB
clinical audit in Kenyan public hospitals using the nominal group technique. Table 2 below
describes the seven components of the audit implementation guide and the proposed proce-
dures by which they would be carried out to ensure the completion of each audit cycle.

The outcome of usability testing of the audit tool and implementation
guide

The seven components of the implementation guide were tested in the County hospital to
determine if they were feasible for the context. Some of the components remained constant,
while others were difficult to implement.
We maintained the four roles of the committee and revised the mandatory members to the
six listed below with other members to attend as required:

a. Nursing officer in charge of the newborn unit.

b. Nursing officer in charge of labour ward.

c. Senior most clinician in newborn unit–Neonatologist/paediatrician/medical officer in
charge.

d. Obstetrician/ medical officer from labour ward.

e. Nutritionist

f. Hospital administration–medical superintendent/hospital administrator/matron in charge
of the facility.

We were successful in holding two-weekly audit meetings except when there were other cir-
cumstances beyond our control. Discussing one case took between one and two hours on aver-
age. We, therefore, recommended that only one case should be audited per meeting.
To ensure that the action plans were implemented, direct task allocation and giving specific
timeframes made it more convenient for the chair of the audit committee to follow up and
ensure that they were implemented. We left it as the responsibility of the chair to follow up on
the implementation of the action plans either directly or through delegation. The modified
implementation guide after the testing period is attached in S7 Appendix.
There were few modifications made to the audit tool during the testing phase and these
were mostly based on feedback from the tertiary hospital team. This feedback was more about
the content, ensuring that the audit tool was detailed enough for use in the teaching and refer-
ral level hospitals. This included restructuring the sections on newborn resuscitation, adding
important parameters to the first section on newborn details and widening the scope of
options for respiratory support. The final newborn audit tool and implementation guide are
attached in S2 and S5 Appendices.

Discussion

We identified a gap in the availability of a clinical audit tool that comprehensively covers the
three periods in the continuum of newborn care. To address this, we used an HCD approach
to design a comprehensive SSNB clinical audit tool and its implementation guide. We began
by drafting a prototype tool based on identified strengths and weaknesses in the available peri-
natal, neonatal and child audit tools. Together with HCWs participating in a clinical informa-
tion network, the prototype tool was further refined and tested to modify design challenges
related to its content, factors causing difficult interaction between the user and the tool such as
font size, writing space, length of the tool, etc., and the overall user experience. The audit
implementation guide contained seven factors that were adapted from the Geneva: World
Health Organisation; 2018 manual and modified to build on the strengths and overcome the
barriers within the context [2].

Co-design of the small and sick newborn clinical audit tool

The co-design of the audit tool was centred around the user experiences of the prototypes. The
use of real cases in high volume newborn units that managed a diverse range of newborn condi-
tions allowed the users to identify a wide range of modifiable factors at each step in the care pro-
cess and modify the tool frequently to cater for all these possibilities. While some previous HCD
studies have carried out the cognitive walkthrough phase in controlled settings, other studies
have used real cases and real scenarios [18, 47]. As expressed by Neyens et al., “the use of real
cases provides more accurate and detailed information into the experiences and problems that
can occur” [47]. The use of real cases however led to several interruptions in the design process
due to several HCW strikes and restrictions on meetings due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
The design process was a delicate balance of ensuring that the audit tool was detailed while
at the same time being conscious of the human factors, therefore, ensuring effective human-
audit tool interaction. The goal was to ensure ease of use to promote adherence. With an
understanding of the users who were busy health workers in a constrained environment with
other competing interests, there was constant feedback to make the different sections easier
and faster to fill. We, therefore, converted the tool that was originally designed on Microsoft
Word into an E-tool on Adobe Acrobat Pro 2020, incorporated checkboxes, textboxes and
drop-down calendars, leaving free text-only where necessary. Similar findings have been iden-
tified from a study by Muinga et al. in the design of a comprehensive newborn monitoring
chart where the users preferred the sections of the chart as fixed options to reduce time spent
filling it [18]. Other important human factors identified in other studies include screen size,
button size, font size, colour, tone and contrast for mobile applications [16, 47].

Understanding the facilitators and barriers to the audit process and their
influence on the design of the audit implementation guide

The extent to which contextual factors influence the success of continuous quality improve-
ment (QI) initiatives such as the clinical audit process cannot be overemphasised. The clinical
audit process is a complex intervention whose design must adapt to fit the local context by
building on the facilitators and overcoming the barriers to ensure that it accomplishes the
desired effects. To understand the contextual factors that informed the design of the compo-
nents of the implementation guide, we can apply the Informing Quality Improvement
Research (InQuIRe) framework developed by Brennan et al. to categorise them into the orga-
nisational, team and individual-level factors [48].
Organisational level factors.
In 2016, the perinatal component was included in the
maternal death surveillance and response process in Kenya to improve the quality of newborn
care in line with the sustainable development goals [49]. The MPDSR guidelines recommend
that at the facility level, all maternal deaths should be reviewed within seven days of occur-
rence, with a set monthly meeting over and above each review meeting [9]. The guideline how-
ever recommends that monthly meetings should be convened to review all the perinatal deaths
occurring in a facility within the period. The recommendation for multiple maternal death
review meetings yet just one monthly perinatal meeting poses a challenge due to the high vol-
ume of perinatal and neonatal deaths [20]. The WHO recommends that the frequency of audit
meetings should be based on the volume of cases with meetings to be held as frequently as
weekly or two-weekly for high mortality areas with an in-depth review of one to two cases [2].
This emphasizes the need to have a separate neonatal clinical audit meeting that complements
the MPDSR so that due attention can be placed on the newborn audit process.
The organizational culture has emerged as one that is capable of change evidenced by the
support of the clinical audit process through having regular clinical audit meetings and adopt-
ing mechanisms to ensure that the audit process leads to change. Despite the presence of an
environment that largely advocates for patient safety, the organizational environment is
marred with a myriad of challenges that affect the impact of QI initiatives [25, 31, 34, 35, 50].
The emotional fatigue from such an environment and burnout from the high workloads may
exacerbate a name and blame culture as identified from the FGDs [51]. Literature that high-
lights the facilitators and barriers to the audit process proposes mechanisms such as ensuring
confidentiality, anonymity, respect and equality among meeting participants and the presence
of a multidisciplinary audit committee to promote a no-blame environment [38, 41, 42].
The absence of organizational leadership from the audit meetings has been linked to the
poor implementation of action plans arising from the meeting. Filippi et al. propose that there
is a high likelihood that this reluctance to attend meetings may be due to lack of funds [40].
This may very well apply to the situation in Kenya as with the decentralization of health ser-
vices, hospitals have lost autonomy to manage and use hospital funds. The result is delayed
procurement of essential resources required to maintain a favourable work environment [32].
Therefore, requests are frequently made to the hospital managers which they are unlikely to
implement and therefore prefer not to attend QI meetings.

Team level factors.
Clinical audits are a complex intervention that requires team collabo-
ration to get the desired results. The hierarchical nature of the context has influenced the suc-
cess of team collaboration in the clinical audit process. As evidenced from the results, the
doctors determine if, when and how audit meetings will be conducted with minimal consulta-
tion from nursing and other cadres. The audit meetings have therefore been viewed as a doc-
tors’ affair where the discussion will be dominated by the doctors and the focus will be on the
medical aspects of care. Constituting an interdisciplinary team to manage the audits would be
a solution to this problem [43]. In complex adaptive systems, each component must under-
stand how important its contribution is to the whole [52]. This informed the selection of an
interdisciplinary team whose actions are tightly linked and would influence the quality of new-
born care. Successful clinical audit teams include those with well-defined roles for each mem-
ber to prevent free riding whereby some members fail to contribute their fair share in team
effort [53, 54]. Other characteristics of successful teams have been identified as those that have
a committed chair who supports QI initiatives, are diverse and constitute the key decision-
makers from departments involved in newborn care, have hospital managers as part of the
team, promotes equality, open dialogue and confidentiality during the audit meetings [40, 43,
45].
Individual-level factors.
The poor implementation of audit recommendations has been
widely recognized as a deterrent to the success of the audit process [42, 55]. Though this can
be attributed to poor support from leadership, another important factor that plays into this is
the poor skills in problem identification. As identified in the literature, a large proportion of
the problems in newborn care in LMICs can be solved through the appropriate use of available
resources and by improving knowledge and skills of the frontline health workers [56, 57].
These ‘simple’ measures added up play a significant role in improving the quality of newborn
care as the health workers await implementation of the more resource-intensive solutions.

Strengths and limitations

The main strength of the design process was the multiple iterations involving the end-users. In
addition, we had senior representatives in the field of newborn medicine actively participating
in the design process and this contributed to the development of a comprehensive small and
sick newborn clinical audit process. The use of real cases during the iteration process enabled
the design of an audit tool that could adequately capture the modifiable factors in the context.
The limitations of the study included the fact that before the focus group discussions, we
shared the Geneva: World Health Organisation; 2018 manual with the participants [2]. The
reason for this was to allow them to gain some knowledge on the recommended standards for
conducting a clinical audit to enrich the discussions. This however resulted in the contamina-
tion of the FGDs as the participant responses seemed to be what was expected, but not neces-
sarily what happened. Another limitation was the inability to include more than two hospitals
in the testing phase. The intention was to include as many hospitals as possible, however, this
was disrupted by the COVID-19 pandemic and a nationwide strike that involved most of the
hospitals except for the two that were included. The two hospitals represented a high-volume
county referral hospital and a tertiary level hospital. This may therefore not be generalisable to
lower level hospitals which may not have the capacity to implement the implementation guide
as designed.

Conclusion

The use of a Human-Centred Design process enabled the design team and the users to design
a high-quality audit tool and implementation guide that can achieve its intended goals with

efficiency, effectiveness and satisfaction while considering the capabilities and limitations of
the end-users within their context.