Telemedicine in the age of the pandemics: The
prospects of web-based remote patient
monitoring systems for orthopaedic ambulatory
care management in the developing economies

Uchechukwu Solomon Onyeabor1
, Wilfred Okwudili Okenwa2,
Okechukwu Onwuasoigwe3, Omolade Ayoola Lasebikan4, Thorsten Schaaf5,
Niels Pinkwart6 and Felix Balzer5

Methods

Research aim

The aim of this research was to design, implement, test and
demonstrate the efﬁcacy of a WB-RPM (via patient portals)
across the tertiary/university teaching hospitals in a devel-
oping country, Nigeria, as a veriﬁable tool to continue to
expand access to affordable, resilient tertiary healthcare
systems.

The research design

This project involved different research paradigms, like
qualitative, quantitative and design research paradigms.
Speciﬁcally, the researchers employed interviews and
observations of existing healthcare protocols and workﬂow,
and they also integrated the iterative agile and human-
centred design thinking methods in order to avail them a
hybrid system development life cycle that could guarantee
a user-centred healthcare support system that satisﬁes
end-user expectations. The three senior orthopaedic sur-
geons provided the speciﬁcations for the remote patient
monitoring and engagement module or portal. They also
iteratively evaluated the improved prototypes until the
ﬁnal module was ready. Issues about the safety of patient
information were considered. Issues about online consult-
ation payment by the patient were also considered. The clin-
icians provided all the requirements to support their full
expectations from a web-based patient portal that can guar-
antee comprehensive remote patient monitoring and viable
orthopaedic outpatient–clinician engagements. These senior

orthopaedic chief consultant surgeons either headed or are
heading the orthopaedic departments of either of the tertiary/
university teaching hospitals studied: a federal university
teaching hospital, a state university teaching hospital and a
national orthopaedic hospital.
After the system’s testing and implementation, it was
evaluated for usability by a 20-patient sample representa-
tive. This evaluation was achieved through a validated
questionnaire that was based on the system usability scale
(SUS).19–21 The choice of patient representatives was
because it was not always easy to get the attention and
consent of real patients to review and evaluate new digital
healthcare systems given their (sometimes) very challen-
ging health conditions, and the researchers wouldn’t want
to appear insensitive to these realities. Again they were par-
ticularly interested in patients who are computer literate or
whose caregivers are computer literate and are willing to
take responsibility for the system use. Then, the researchers
reached a consensus that only being ill met the criteria for
being considered a patient and anyone can be. So, they ran-
domly selected a 20-patient sample (as patient representa-
tives) from young university graduates who are also
members of the National Youth Service Corps and who
are also computer literates, thereby satisfying the eligibility
criteria. The result was quantitatively evaluated using SPSS
and Microsoft Excel for the dashboard.
At this point, it is important to note that the COREQ
standards were adopted while reporting this research.

The research setting

The implementation of the WB-RMPS Patient Portal was
intended to support outpatient care management across
the tertiary/university teaching hospitals in Nigeria. The
researchers therefore selected the University of Nigeria
Teaching Hospital (UNTH), the ESUT Teaching Hospital
and a National Orthopaedic Hospital as the case study
environments.
Meanwhile, the UNTH is one of the foremost and oldest
university teaching hospitals in Nigeria. The UNTH was
established over 60 years ago and serves as the Teaching
Hospital
for
the
University
of
Nigeria
College
Of
Medicine. The hospital was designated the World Health
Organisation Centre for Innovation in Medical Education
between 1991 and 2000. The UNTH was also designated
a centre of excellence in cardiothoracic surgery by the
Federal Government in 1986. The teaching hospital cur-
rently hosts about nine training programmes and schools.
It currently has 41 departments (with 3 outposts). The
UNTH is currently over 500-bed-capacity.22

On the other hand, the ESUT Teaching Hospital has a
capacity of about 350–400 beds. Its history dates back to
the 1930s, but it was made a state university teaching hos-
pital in 2006 by then Governor Chimaroke Nnamani. The
ESUT Teaching Hospital, a tertiary care provider, was

4

designed to provide specialists Medicare to the general
public and also provide a training facility for the ESUT
College of Medicine. The ESUT Teaching Hospital also
runs other ancillary programmes like the School of
Nursing and the School of Midwifery. As a tertiary care
provider, ESUTH provides care services in general medi-
cine, obstetrics, paediatrics and various branches of
surgery, as well as other afﬁliate/support services such as
radiological services, physiotherapeutic services, pharmacy
and laboratory investigations. The ESUTH is also a referral
centre for healthcare services.23

The National Orthopaedic Hospital in Enugu, which was
one of the research environments studied, was established
in 1979 through an Act of the National Assembly. It was
established to provide specialist tertiary care services in
the areas of orthopaedic surgery, nursing services, resi-
dency training, radiological services, dietetics and catering
services, trauma surgery, burns and plastic surgery,
pharmaceutical services, physiotherapy, anaesthesia, etc.
The National Orthopaedic Hospital was established to
serve one third (1/3) of Nigeria’s population residing in
the Eastern and Southern parts of Nigeria. There are two
others of this kind in other parts of Nigeria.24

System interaction modelling using UML

The patient would be able to accomplish the following
functional operations, as illustrated in Figure 1 UML
diagram.
Figure 1 represents the patient and who is also at the
centre of the WB-RPMS Patient Portal design. The use
cases captured several potential functionalities that would
enable the patient to fully engage with the doctor remotely.
These were the products of the several interactions the
researchers had with the orthopaedic doctors, who were
also part of the research team. Important to note is also
that one of the members of the research team was once an
orthopaedic outpatient who suffered distal femoral fractures
due to a car crash. He was presented at one of the hospitals
under study, and the researchers found his experience
helpful during this study. So, when the researchers inter-
acted with the orthopaedic doctors on what they really
want from the orthopaedic outpatients who were placed
on regular health checks, they were detailed on their treat-
ment protocols, and it was so good to know that this can
be managed remotely if a robust remote patient monitoring
support system is in place. To be speciﬁc, after a patient is
discharged, they become an outpatient and are placed on
regular health checks. They would be expected to come
to the clinic from home to see the doctor on a regular
basis. The doctors with whom the researchers interacted
indicated that any orthopaedic outpatient could often be
expected to return to the hospital with new clinical
images based on X-rays, computed tomography (CT)
scans, magnetic resonance imagings (MRIs) and other

images and reports on a new clinic appointment date of,
say, 2 months. The doctor reviews these images and the
accompanying medical reports to ascertain the patient’s
health progress. Afterwards, the patient could be asked to
continue with current medication or new prescriptions
could be made. A new lab or radiological request could
be issued by the doctor pending future visits. Then, the
doctor issues a new appointment date. It is important to
note that before seeing the doctor at the hospital, the out-
patient must have paid the day’s consultation fee. Now,
based on these clinician expectations, the WB-RPMS
Patient Portal has functionalities to enable patients to
upload these images and reports remotely, pay for online
consultations and access the doctor’s feedback. He could
also request a new appointment on the WB-RPMS Patient
Portal, view old and new lab and radiological uploads and
view and even print his own clinical data documented by
the physician according to dates of encounter.
Figure 2 shows the order of the patient’s activities on the
patient dashboard. The patient remains at the centre of the
remote care delivery model. At the start of interaction
with the Patient Portal, the patient enters his username
and password. This is usually the hospital number and
their private email, respectively. If these entries are
correct, then the patient moves on to the next stage of
user authentication, which generates an one-time password
(OTP) and sends it to the patient’s mobile phone or email.
This is intended to ensure that patients do not inadvertently
expose their health information to unauthorised persons due
to poor login credential management. If OTP is correct,
patients would now have access to a wide range of
options or menus to execute, like upload lab/radiological
results and reports/images, view past vital signs, view the
doctor’s clinical documentation by their dates, request an
appointment to see the doctor, view the doctor’s feedback
and even pay for an online consultation. Once he is done,
these activities could be terminated through a logout
operation.
Now it is important to note that some of the goals of this
research were to provide a platform that guarantees success-
ful remote patient–doctor engagement, particularly during
trying times as recently occasioned by the COVID-19 pan-
demic, and also serve as a cost-saving measure for the care
delivery providers and the patients alike by transferring
their outpatient clinics for the digitally literate population
online/remotely, thereby freeing up the usually over-
crowded health facility for outpatients who are in critical
shape and who really needed to see the doctor physically
and those who are not computer literate. It was also
expected that successful implementation of these features
would also protect as many outpatients as possible from
the risk of the COVID-19 pandemic, other health chal-
lenges or any other future disruptions and further free up
the health facility to ensure social distancing protocols are
adequately observed.

Onyeabor et al.
5

Now, when the above features on the activity diagram of
Figure
2
were
iteratively
tested
(on
the
functional
WB-RPMS Patient Portal) by three orthopaedic doctors
who were also part of the research team, they found the
outcome of the evaluation to fulﬁl the above goals of the
system design. These three doctors also participated at
various stages of the system’s development. Again, these
features were further tested by a select sample of 20
patient representatives, and the results were discussed in
the appropriate section below.
Overall, it is important to state that outpatients on the
WB-RPMS Patient Portal must have visited the hospital at
least once when their biodata and other preliminary clinical
documentation would have been performed by the clinicians.
After this stage, they would become eligible for remote patient
care, but this choice is voluntary for the outpatient, particularly
based on the level of their digital literacy.

System architecture

When a patient uses their browser from the Client Tier to
request clinical documentation from the Application Tier
web server, the server will process this request and send
it to the database server (Figure 3). After retrieving this
information, it would then be visible on any device con-
nected to the client web browser, such as laptops, desktops,
tablets and smartphones. These movements of data ensure
that patients are able to read doctor messages and view
patient medical records, including clinical encounters with
doctors. The patient is also able to upload medical updates,
lab and radiological investigation reports, images, etc., for
the orthopaedics. Now, it should be noted that the digital
remote doctor–patient engagement support system is practic-
ally non-existent across any of the tertiary/university teaching
hospitals under study. The standard mode of healthcare

Figure 1. Patient’s use case diagram of the WB-RPMS Patient Portal.

6

Figure 2. Patient’s activity diagram with WB-RPMS Patient Portal.

Figure 3. Three-tier software architecture around which WB-RPMS Patient Portal module was built.

Onyeabor et al.
7

delivery across these hospitals had been through physical
attendance. Therefore, the adoption of this implementation
(WB-RPMS Patient Portal), it is believed, would innovate out-
patient healthcare delivery at each of the hospitals under study
(provided all key factors like training and supporting infra-
structure are in place).

WB-RPMS Patient Portal interface and interaction
design

Figure 4 shows a wireframe of the Patient Portal on the
remote patient monitoring system, where patients, upon
login, could have access to a wide range of menu options

Figure 4. Patient lab result upload interface design.

8

and functionalities to execute patient-centred operations.
The interface in Figure 4 shows that patients, upon
system implementation, could remotely upload up to three
orthopaedic clinical images and accompanying reports,
with which the doctor could monitor progress and send
feedback as appropriate.

Results

The results of the WB-RPMS Patient Portal
implementation and usability evaluation

This section presents the outcomes of the WB-RPMS
Patient Portal implementation and usability assessment con-
ducted on a patient sample comprising of 20 members. This
patient group was a representative of the intended user
population. The survey utilised the SUS to evaluate usabil-
ity. Now, it is important to note that the remote patient
engagement and monitoring portal was designed for a spe-
ciﬁc patient population that possesses technical/digital
skills and is capable of assuming responsibility and taking
precautionary measures to safeguard the privacy of their
health information remotely, to the best of their abilities.
The objective was to provide remote patient engagement
and monitoring services to this group, thereby reducing
the burden on healthcare facilities and making them access-
ible only to patients who require critical care or physical
examination by clinicians (Table 1).
Further results (based on the practical evaluation of the
Patient Portal) from the 20-patient sample evaluations can
be found in Figure 5 and in Table 2, using the mean as a
measure of central tendency to establish the overall position
of the patients against each question of the survey based on
the SUS. Now, using mean as a measure of central tendency
to establish the overall position of stakeholders on each
dimension of the SUS used for the Patient Portal module
evaluation, Table 2 shows an overall mean value of 4.25,
indicating that the patients strongly agree that they would
like to use the Patient Portal frequently. Also, with a
mean value of 4.20, the patients agreed that they found
the new Patient Portal to be simple. More so, with a mean
value of 4.10, the patients agreed that the new Patient
Portal was easy to use. Further details can be found in
Table 2. Meanwhile, the ranges of interpretation of the
Mean Values of Table 2 can be found in Table 3.

Table 1. Characteristics of the respondents.

N
%

Total
20
100

Gender

Male
11
55%

Female
9
45%

Missing
0
0%

Age ranges

30 years or younger
18
90%

>30 years and <40 years
2
10%

Level of education

Bachelor’s degree
20
100%

How often do you use computer systems?

Daily
8
40%

A few times a week
10
50%

A few times a month
2
10%

A few times a year
0
0%

How do you rate your computer skill on a scale of 1–5 where 1,
very poor; 2, poor; 3, good; 4, very good; and 5, proﬁcient?

1: Very poor
0
0%

2: Poor
0
0%

3: Good
6
30%

4: Very good
9
45%

5: Proﬁcient
5
25%

Do you have any experience using electronic health record?

No
13
65%

Yes
7
35%

Have you ever received any training on electronic health record?

No
13
65%

Yes
7
35%

(continued)

Table 1. Continued.

Onyeabor et al.
9

On the other hand, just one patient ‘strongly dis-
agreed’ with the question, ‘I think that I would like to
use the electronic health record system frequently’. It is
possible that the patient could have other reasons why
he thinks he would not like to use the developed EHR
system frequently, and this is difﬁcult to know, given
that he agreed that the system was easy to use and that
he strongly agreed to the fact that he could use the elec-
tronic health record (EHR) system without the support of
a technical person. Again, a patient strongly disagreed
with the question: ‘I could use the electronic health
record system without having to learn anything new’.
Further investigation showed that the patient indicated
that she had never had any training on the use of EHR.
The same patient also indicated that she had not had any
personal or private experience with the use of EHR. It is
obvious that such a patient needs a signiﬁcant level of train-
ing and exposure to the use of the EHR system.

Result of WB-RPMS Patient Portal implementation

As shown via the screenshot of the RPMS Patient Portal
dashboard implementation on Figure 6, the patient is able
to accomplish a lot as listed below (Patient use case of
the WB-RPMS Patient Portal/dashboard section) and as

proposed through the use case diagram of Figure 1 and
activity diagram of Figure 2.

Patient use case of the WB-RPMS Patient Portal/
dashboard

1. Patients would be able to upload lab and radiological
results and images.
2. Patient could view an appointment with the doctor.
3. They could view their personal data.
4. Patient could also view their past clinical encounter
with the doctor.
5. Patient could download their past clinical encounter
with the doctor as a PDF ﬁle.
6. Patient could view their own vital signs on the Patient
Portal.
7. Patient could view feedback messages from the doctor,
as shown in Figure 7.
8. Patient could view past lab and radiological results/
images as shown in Figure 8.
9. They would be able to pay for an online consultation,
as shown in Figure 9.
10. Patient could view appointments with the doctor,
whether they have been approved or not.

Figure 5. Percentages of patients’ overall usability evaluation of the WB-RPMS Patient Portal using the system usability scale.

10

11. Patient could view their own bill as uploaded by
various departments.
12. Patient could log out securely.

Now shown above is an interface through which the patient
could upload lab and radiological images and reports to the

doctor. Given that these uploads are centred around ortho-
paedic care, all associated images and reports, including
X-rays, MRIs, ultrasounds, CT scans and other investiga-
tive images, can be uploaded through this interface.
Outpatient candidates can then come to the hospital when
the doctor feels it is very necessary, saving time for the
doctor to be able to see more critical patients; saving
time, money and other risks for the patient; and helping
the care facility to efﬁciently manage that existing space
and expand access to health for those who are often
turned back and requested to come on another date.

Discussion

This research developed a WB-RPMS via a patient portal to
support remote outpatient care management at the tertiary/
university teaching hospitals in Nigeria during and after
the COVID-19 pandemic. The WB-RPMS Patient Portal
was carefully developed to guarantee a high degree of
usability amongst Nigerian clinical stakeholders, particu-
larly at the tertiary level. Again, the performance of the
system
shown
through
the
evaluation
result
clearly
showed it was well received amongst the patient sample
respondents. It is also important to note that telemedicine/
telehealth are still underutilised in Nigeria at the moment.

Table 2. Patientsusability evaluation of the WB-RPMS Patient Portal based on the system usability scale (number of respondents: 20
patients).

Table 3. The ﬁve-point scale interpretation (scoring range of Likert
scale of the survey).

Weight/
Scale

Mean
Score
Range
Mean Rating/
Interpretation
Further
Interpretation

5
4.21–5.00
Strongly agree
Very positive

4
3.41–4.20
Agree
Positive

3
2.61–3.40
Neither agree nor
disagree
Moderate

2
1.81–2.60
Disagree
Negative

1
1.00–1.80
Strongly disagree
Very negative

Source: Suebwongsuawan and Nomnian.25

Onyeabor et al.
11

In fact, in the work of Egbewande et al.,14 which investigated
the potential of telemedicine in Nigeria, their result concluded
that the usage of telemedicine in Nigeria isn’t as widespread as
it could be and that this was due to a range of issues, such as
the lack of a policy governing virtual care, inadequate ﬁnan-
cing, high costs for running virtual health services as well as
technological and infrastructure problems. All these issues
are hindering the potential of telemedicine to enhance health-
care delivery, access and efﬁciency.
Similarly, in the report of Ezeani et al.,26 it is not yet pos-
sible to experience the thrilling story and the beneﬁt of

telemedicine in Nigeria, as healthcare providers are still
ﬁnding it difﬁcult to incorporate this technology as part of
their healthcare delivery model. The overall goal of the
WB-RPMS Patient Portal development approach was therefore
to ensure that all care provider feature expectations are fully
integrated into the system design and development; hence, clin-
icians were part of the research and development team.
A similar study by Olufunlayo et al.27 still showed that
the overall level of digital maturity for telemedicine imple-
mentation across government funded tertiary institutions in
Nigeria was still at the beginner level.

Figure 6. Patient dashboard on the Patient Portal showing the lab/radiological report and image upload.

12

Another key piece of research that captured the type of
telemedicine that was available in Nigeria during the
COVID-19 pandemic and its degree of use was reported
by Olutayo et al..28 It showed that out of the 103 doctors

who responded to the survey, 93.3% of them agreed that
they used some form of telemedicine during the pandemic.
Speciﬁcally, out of about 1078 patients that were attended
to during the period, 358 were attended to via WhatsApp

Figure 7. Patient’s view of feedback messages from the doctor.

Figure 8. Anteroposterior X-ray view of the knee on the patient’s interface on the WB-RPMS.

Onyeabor et al.
13

(33.2%), 278 via phone calls (25.8%), 238 via SMS
(22.1%), 154 via email and 50 via video call (4.6).
These approaches show that there was hardly a structured
telemedicine app currently in place to support remote patient
monitoring and management across most of the hospitals
studied. On the contrary, WB-RPMS Patient Portal (when
compared with existing implementations) appears to be a
more structured and standard approach to express telemedi-
cine and has the potential to expand and sustain access to
healthcare even in challenging times of global and regional
disruptions!

Limitations of the study

There were two signiﬁcant limitations to this study. Firstly,
the approach used to evaluate each participant’s level of
computer literacy through the administered survey was sub-
jective. The results and feedback received from the partici-
pants, though highly impressive, may not reﬂect exactly the
very high level of digital literacy recorded as result. To
address this issue, the researchers conﬁned the evaluation

of the WB-RPMS Patient Portal to a patient-representative
sample with potential for high digital literacy. Additionally,
the respondents were diverse, representing different cul-
tures and tribes in Nigeria, and were participating in the
National Youth Service Corps scheme. However, the
researchers recognise the need to adopt a more objective
approach to digital/computer literacy evaluation in future
studies.
Another limitation was the inability to include real
patients in the evaluation of the WB-RPMS Patient
Portal. This was due to the fact that the patients who pre-
sented themselves for outpatient clinics at these teaching
hospitals were often visibly dealing with precarious health
challenges, and it would appear insensitive to want to
subject them to evaluation of a digital healthcare system.
However, the researchers were able to mitigate this limita-
tion by considering the fact that most individuals at some
point in their lives would become patients and, therefore,
any individual who meets other sample selection criteria
could actually evaluate the WB-RPMS Patient Portal as a
patient (representative).

Figure 9. Patient’s Online Consultation Payment interface.

14

Conclusion

Our investigation clearly demonstrates the efﬁcacy and pro-
spects of telemedicine via a WB-RPMS as a veritable tool
to support improved access to affordable healthcare in a
developing country, Nigeria, particularly for orthopaedic
outpatients during and after the pandemics. The results of
the ﬁnal system evaluation showed that the system was
well received among stakeholders. The researchers there-
fore
recommend
that
WB-RPMS
Patient
Portal
be
adopted for use across tertiary/university teaching hospitals
in Nigeria to support and sustain improved affordable
access to outpatient healthcare
service delivery and
management.