Design of an Integrative System
for Conﬁgurable Exergames Targeting
the Senior Population

Teresa Paulino1,2, John Muñoz1,2(&), Sergi Bermudez1,2,
and Mónica S. Cameirão1,2

1 Faculdade de Ciências Exatas e da Engenharia, Universidade da Madeira,
Campus Universitário da Penteada, 9020-105 Funchal, Portugal
{teresa.paulino,john.cardona,sergi.bermudez,

2 Madeira Interactive Technologies Institute, Universidade da Madeira,
Polo Cientíﬁco e Tecnológico da Madeira,
ﬂoor -2, Caminho da Penteada, 9020-105 Funchal, Portugal

2
Procedure

Our methodology is structured in stages using techniques commonly found in the ﬁelds
of systems engineering, human computer interaction, and action research. The output
of each stage served as input for the subsequent ones (Fig. 1). The following sub-
sections describe the steps carried out along the system design process.

2.1
Requirements Engineering

Literature supports that requirements engineering (RE) is a crucial step on the devel-
opment cycle of a software system [6, 7], which helps to understand the user needs and
therefore, assisting on designing a system towards its effectiveness.

Fig. 1. Diagram showing the different design processes and participants involved.

288

2.1.1
Interviews with Health Professionals
For requirements elicitation we have chosen a conversational method, under the form
of semi-structured interviews. 12 participants were invited to collaborate in the initial
process of requirements elicitation: 5 physiotherapists, 2 occupational therapists, and 5
physical training instructors, with average age of 28.9 ± 5.4, and 5.6 ± 4.7 years of
professional experience. Interviews were carefully planned to cover most of the topics
that could help understanding the needs of the professionals. Questions included cat-
egories such as: (i) knowledge and opinions about similar systems, (ii) positive and
negative aspects about these type of interactive systems, (iii) daily practices in terms of
rehabilitation therapies and exercise prescription, (iv) expectations of the integration of
this system including data visualization, technical assistance, concerns, and constraints.
Qualitative data was collected under the form of written notes and audio ﬁles recorded
along the interviews. Raw data was coded using the qualitive data analysis tool
MAXQDA1, resulting in 349 distinct codes with 994 records in all ﬁles. A code could
correspond to a feature, a suggestion, a concrete answer, or even an insight that could
be a suitable candidate for a requirement of the integrative system.

2.1.2
Requirements Prioritization
Requirements prioritization assists in making the right decisions when choosing the
most important features to implement on a system [8]. From the data obtained on the
previous step, a data cleaning step was manually performed merging similar codes and
removing the ones which corresponded to suggestions and opinions that were not
considered requirements for the proposed system due to their high diversity. A ﬁnal list
of 110 requirements was then shared with 6 exergaming researchers which evaluated
each requirement with an eleven-point Likert scale considering two perspectives: (i) its
cruciality for the system, meaning: “does this system work without this functionality?”;
and (ii) its importance to fulﬁl the objectives of the system. The requirements were then
ranked according to 3 results: the evaluation from the cruciality perspective (the mean
of all participants), the percentage of interviewees that mentioned each speciﬁc
requirement, and the evaluation from the importance perspective. The top ﬁve
requirements are presented in (Table 1).

Table 1. Top-ﬁve requirements obtained from the prioritization step.

1 MAXQDA: Qualitative Data Analysis Software (https://www.maxqda.com/).

Design of an Integrative System
289

2.2
Software Design

We followed an Object-Oriented design approach using UML notation while applying
universal principles of software engineering [9]. The software design process started by
creating the use cases based on the requirements list. Functional requirements were
adapted and rephrased to represent atomic actions which users can perform with the
system. Three main actors were identiﬁed: (i) professionals - the person in charge of
prescribing activities, (ii) end-users - seniors who will play the exergames, and
(iii) administrator - someone with full access to the system, mainly technicians or
researchers. Use cases were crucial to the next steps, which assisted in identifying the
main entities and their relationships, enabling the creation of diagrams such as high-
level classes, activity, and architecture diagrams. User, session, plan, game, assessment,
exercise, music, are some examples of entities identiﬁed along the software design
process.

2.3
Human-Computer Interaction

In parallel with the software design process, a low-ﬁdelity paper prototype was built to
assist in the design of the software diagrams. This helped in visualizing the possible
interaction ﬂows with the users. Health and sports professionals participated in the
validation of the initial designs, allowing the identiﬁcation of possible preferences of
interaction with the UI. For this, two traditional techniques were chosen and iterated:
card sorting and paper prototype tests, which are described in the following
subsections.

2.3.1
Card Sorting
Card sorting is a technique that assists understanding how information should be
organized in the UI. Open card sorting sessions avoid biasing the participants by
enabling them to group and label their own categories [10]. Four open card sorting
sessions were performed with 2 sports trainers and 2 occupational therapists, who also
participated in the requirements elicitation process. 51 topics were chosen, which
corresponded to functionalities of the system, or actions that the user can perform with
the system (e.g. “Create session”, “Create training plan”, “Deﬁne frequency”, etc.).
Each session was video recorded, and the participants were asked to think aloud while
they were organizing the topics (Fig. 2).

Fig. 2. Participants organizing topics along the card sorting sessions.

290

All participants organized cards in a sequential manner. Some of the new topics that
participants created have already been considered on the prototype, other topics were
used as inputs for modiﬁcations of the current prototype. For instance, the possibility to
edit a training plan, duplicate a session, or creating experimental sessions without being
associated with any user, are functions that were not considered before. Despite each user
have labeled groups in a distinct manner, we observed a pattern in organizing by: “User
and assessments”, “Training plan”, “Sessions and games”, and “Settings and help”.

2.3.2
Paper Prototype Evaluation
A paper prototype was built with sticky paper enabling interchanging elements during
the prototyping and testing, where the features emerging from the card sorting sessions
were considered. The low-ﬁdelity prototype consisted of a mix of hand-written text and
drawings, with printed elements, mostly icons, to evaluate how intuitive they could be
if applied in the ﬁnal UI. Two participants that participated in the previous design
processes (one from each ﬁeld: sports and health), were invited and asked to accom-
plish two tasks and to think aloud while they were performing the actions. Each session
lasted about 30 min. Participants managed to successfully accomplish both tasks faster
than expected. Overall, the steps were intuitively performed without the need of much
support. Some modiﬁcations emerged to integrate in the ﬁnal UI, such as: (i) recom-
mendation of assessments after creating a new end-user, (ii) availability of an history of
the settings previously chosen when creating or editing a plan, session, or activity, and
(iii) automatic saving of data, without the need of having a save button.

3
Discussion and Future Work

The purpose of this work was to design an integrative exergaming system involving the
main interactors with the UI, the health professionals. From the requirements elicitation
process, we found it sometimes hard to differentiate the exergames from the integrative
system. Speciﬁcally, participants tended to always answer considering the effectiveness
and concerns of the exergames. However, in the later steps such as card sorting or the
paper prototype evaluations, the image of the system and its speciﬁc functionalities
became much clearer. As an insight from the paper prototype evaluations, we identiﬁed
that there were too many options present on the system. A better approach would have
been to start with a very simple interface with the basic functionalities and iteratively
increment it along with the needs of the professionals. By involving the health pro-
fessionals in the design process, we acknowledge that participants felt empowered by
taking part of the various stages, and that they understood the importance and impact of
their decisions on the envisioned system. As future steps, after implementing the digital
interface with basic functionalities and navigation, we will run a usability test, which
will serve as a basis for future implementations towards the deployment of a functional
integrative system.

Design of an Integrative System
291

4
Conclusion

In this paper we presented the steps carried out to design an integrative system for
Exergaming targeting the senior population combining human-centered and software
engineer methods. We took advantage of techniques such as semi-structured inter-
views, card sorting, and paper prototyping to involve the main interactors of the
envisioned system in the design process which allowed to design with the consideration
of their preferences and needs. We believe that the performed steps are fundamental for
the future adoption of the proposed system.