Original Paper

Initial Feasibility of the “Families Moving Forward Connect” Mobile
Health Intervention for Caregivers of Children With Fetal Alcohol
Spectrum Disorders:Mixed Method Evaluation Within a Systematic
User-Centered Design Approach

Christie Lynn McGee Petrenko1, BA, BSc, MSc, PhD; Carson Christine Kautz-Turnbull1, BA; Alicia Rose Roth1,
BA; Jennifer Elizabeth Parr1, BA, MSc; Cristiano Tapparello2, BSc, MSc, PhD; Utku Demir2, BSc, MSc, PhD; Heather
Carmichael Olson3,4, BA, MA, PhD

1Mt. Hope Family Center, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY, United States
2Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY, United States
3Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA, United States
4Center for Child Health, Behavior, and Development, Seattle Children’s Research Institute, Seattle, WA, United States

Christie Lynn McGee Petrenko, BA, BSc, MSc, PhD
Mt. Hope Family Center
University of Rochester
187 Edinburgh St
Rochester, NY, 14608
United States
Phone: 1 585 275 2991

Methods

Study Design

This study was designed to assess the feasibility of initial
prototypes of the FMF Connect intervention from both

technological and user experience perspectives to guide further
development of the app. This study involved two rounds of
beta-testing, which allowed the examination of iterative
feedback. The first round of beta-testing (BT1) was conducted
from April to May 2019 and included the iOS prototype. The
second round (BT2) was conducted from November to
December 2019 and an updated iOS prototype and a new
Android prototype with the same content and features were
tested. Each beta test lasted approximately 6 weeks and included
caregivers of children with FASD and providers working with
this population.

To address the study objectives, this study used a concurrent
quasi-mixed-methods design with equal priority given to both
method types [28]. In other words, both quantitative and
qualitative analytical methods were used. However, these
methods were used to answer different aspects of the research
question (ie, the feasibility of FMF Connect intervention
prototypes). Therefore, deliberate integration of findings during
the interpretation of results was not warranted [29]. After each
6-week trial, focus group and individual interviews were used
to elicit participants’ perspectives about the app (qualitative
data). Usage data and crash reports were also collected within
the app and used to assess the functionality of the app
(quantitative data). All study procedures were approved by the
university’s institutional review board before initiation.

Participants

A total of 63 participants (45/63, 71% caregivers; 18/63, 29%
providers) were enrolled as described below by participant type.
Table 1 describes the demographic information. Participants
resided in 18 US states.

Caregivers

Caregivers, including biological, foster, adoptive, and relative
caregivers (Table 1), were recruited through multiple
mechanisms. Information about the study was shared with
providers affiliated with the Collaborative Initiative on FASD
and with moderators of national and regional FASD listservs
and support groups, to be widely distributed to interested
families. We also contacted eligible families in our university’s
FASD research registry. Caregivers reported learning about the
study from the following sources: provider referral (n=16),
FASD research registry (n=3), national and regional FASD
listservs (n=9), online support groups (n=5), and nonspecified
(n=12). Caregivers were eligible for this study if they had a
child with FASD or PAE between the age of 3 and 17 years and
lived in the United States. Although FMF Connect is designed
for caregivers of children aged 3-12 years, caregivers of
adolescents (aged 13-17 years) were also included (n=9). These
caregivers were able to reflect on their experiences in parenting
their children across the full age range targeted by the app and
evaluate the app in this context. A subsample of caregivers
(n=7) who had previously completed the standard FMF Program
was specifically recruited for this study. These caregivers could
offer important insights on what it is like to learn this content
in a self-directed manner through FMF Connect versus their
prior lived experience of participating in the in-person,
therapist-led standard FMF Program.

Providers

Although providers serving children with FASD and their
families (eg, medical and mental health providers, occupational
therapists, and advocates or educators) are not intended to be
direct consumers of the FMF Connect intervention, there were
several important reasons to solicit their feedback. First, many

serve a diverse range of families and could offer insights to
augment those provided by caregivers enrolled in the study. In
addition, providers are likely to be a primary future referral
source for the FMF Connect app. Gaining their perspective early
in development may facilitate app acceptability so that providers
will more likely share it with families once it is widely available.
In this study, providers working with children with FASD were
purposefully sampled through known provider networks relevant
to this population. Providers were eligible for this study if they
served children with FASD and their families and worked in
one of these professions: medical provider (5/18, 28%), mental
health providers (8/18, 44%), occupational therapists (2/18,
11%), and FASD advocates or special educators (3/18, 17%).
A subsample of providers with experience delivering the
standard FMF Program (9/18, 50%) was specifically targeted
for this study.

Procedures

Interested participants were sent the study consent form and
demographic questionnaire. Informed consent was then
completed with the study coordinator over Zoom (Health
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act–compliant) or via
phone. Participants returned the signed consent and demographic
form before receiving the app prototype and installation
instructions.

During the 6-week beta tests, participants could use the app at
their discretion. As part of the intervention, the participants
received weekly emails. These highlighted specific app features
and content and provided information on technical assistance
access. The Family Forum was moderated by 2 experienced
caregivers who had previously completed the standard FMF
Program and were supervised weekly by the first author. The
study team monitored use and metrics throughout each trial.

Bugs and crashes were tracked, and updates were sent to address
problems or expand functionalities.

Following each 6-week trial, participants were asked to complete
individual or focus group interviews with a member of the study
team. In BT1, focus groups were organized by participant type
and usage pattern (eg, number of modules completed, relative
time spent in the app). Interviews were offered to participants
when focus group participation was not possible because of
schedule conflicts or comfort levels. For logistical reasons,
planned individual interviews were conducted with all BT2
participants. Data collection was completed via Zoom for all
but one BT2 caregiver participant, who preferred an in-person
interview to better accommodate hearing loss. The questioning
route (details provided in Multimedia Appendix 1, Table S1)
was similar across both beta tests. However, two topics were
added to BT2 to assess participants’ perspectives on new
features. Topics included Global Impressions & Experiences;
Usage/Engagement; Technology; Utility; and Experience with
Individual Components (eg, Learning Modules and Family
Forum). After introducing the Global Impressions &
Experiences topic, interviewers were given flexibility regarding
the order in which they covered subsequent topics. This was
done to facilitate conversational flow and follow the
participant’s lead during the discussion.

Data Analysis

Audio and video recordings of individual and focus group
interviews were transcribed by the research staff. Observations
of nonverbals (eg, tone, affect, referencing app on phone) were
integrated within each transcript. All transcripts were checked
for accuracy and completeness. The data were then imported
into Atlas.ti for coding and analysis. Four research team
members conducted primary analyses: one of the principal
investigators, a graduate student, and 2 research staff. All
members of the analysis team were involved in data collection.

A thematic analysis [30,31] was undertaken to understand
participants’experiences using the app from both technological
and content standpoints. Coding methods were selected a priori
to inform further app refinements for subsequent larger-scale
trials. These include structural, evaluation, and value coding
[31,32]. Structural coding was used to delineate when
participants discussed different app components (eg, Learning
Modules and Family Forum). Evaluation coding was selected
to identify participants’ positive or negative judgments about
the FMF Connect app and recommendations for further
improvements. Value coding was used to identify caregiver
values, attitudes, and beliefs related to the experiences of raising
a child with FASD and using the FMF Connect app. For
provider data, value coding was only used when providers spoke
about their perceptions of the values, attitudes, and beliefs of
caregivers.

Systematic thematic coding of transcripts was completed
between May and December 2020. Four parent interviews from
BT1 were randomly selected and independently coded line by
line by all 4 coders to establish the study codebook. Weekly
meetings were held to establish consensus and operationalize
first-level codes. The remaining BT1 caregiver interviews were
then distributed across coders, taking care not to assign

transcripts to the team members who had conducted the
interviews. Weekly coding meetings were held to address any
coder questions or suggestions for new codes.

Following completion of BT1 parent interviews, the team
engaged in code mapping to organize and consolidate first-level
codes into preliminary second-level pattern codes to facilitate
subsequent coding [31,32]. BT1 provider coding and BT2
coding followed the same process. The preliminary second-level
pattern codes represented the data well across BT1 providers
and all participants in BT2. No new second-level pattern codes
were added across these participants, suggesting adequate data
saturation and consistency across trials.

Participant matrices [31] were used to examine variance in
second-level pattern codes across participants and several key
demographic features (eg, prior participation in FMF, BT1 vs
BT2). Participant demographic variables were imported into
Atlas.ti, and code co-occurrence tables were examined to assist
with this process. Team members iteratively consolidated and
interpreted the connections among the data through analytic
memo writing to derive the final analytic model.

App usage metrics were examined for caregivers. Usage data
were extracted from the cloud services used for the app.
Descriptive statistics were calculated for several indices (eg,
number of modules completed, number of posts in the Family
Forum, and total time spent in the app). Learning Module
completion patterns were examined using graphical methods.

Results

Objective 1: Examine App Usage Data Metrics to
Identify Any Needed Functional Refinements to FMF
Connect

Overview

Table 1 provides the breakdown of participants and the type of
operating system across the beta tests. A total of 84% (38/45)
of parents (BT1=16/20; BT2=22/25) and 94% (17/18) of
providers (94%; BT1=16/17; BT2 1/1) installed the FMF
Connect app. In BT1, 4 updates of the iOS app were distributed;
in addition to bug fixes and performance improvements, updates
included the ability to see if there were new posts in the Family
Forum since the last user’s login, the addition of the Profile
Graph Tool, and improvements in the screen unlocking
experience and avatar customization. In BT2, 3 updates of the
iOS app and 2 updates of the Android app were distributed for
bug fixes and performance improvements.

On use days, caregivers averaged approximately 20 minutes
(mean 19.63, SD 19.59 minutes) using the app. The largest
amount of time was spent watching videos in the Learning
Modules (45% on average). In the Family Forum, there were
54 original posts in BT1 and 45 posts in BT2. A total of 67%
(30/45) of users posted at least once in the forum.

Not unexpectedly, patterns of use varied considerably among
caregivers. The standard FMF Program is similar in total time
spent on other parent training programs. The FMF Program
typically involves 6 to 9 months of therapist-delivered content
in a collaborative therapeutic relationship with caregivers

(sessions every other week). Therefore, we did not necessarily
expect users to complete all 12 modules in the initial 6-week
test. Usage data differed according to the operating system and
will be discussed separately.

iOS Usage

Figure 3 shows the number of Learning Modules completed by
iOS users by beta test. A total of 31% (10/32) of iOS users who
installed the app completed at least through module 6 (an
average of 1 module per week). We also examined the time

spent on each activity within the modules. Bar graphs for each
module were created with minutes spent in sections by the user
(not shown). Through visual inspection, 5 usage tiers were
characterized based on time devoted to activity completion and
conceptual organization of modules, ranging from tier 1=higher
robust use to tier 5=installed but no module use (Table 2
provides descriptions and number of users per tier). Figure 4
shows this classification graphically. Graphs were also created
for Learning Module total time per day to illustrate usage
patterns by tier (Figure 5).

Tier 1 users tended to distribute their use of the app across
regular sessions of 15-30 minutes or several very lengthy
sessions of 60-120 minutes toward the beginning of the trial;
total app use time was between 4 and 8 hours for these users.
Tiers 2 and 3 users tended to use the app more sporadically and
for a shorter period than those in tier 1. A few users also had a
spike of high use toward the end of the trial, which likely
coincided with scheduling a study interview. Many tier 4 users
logged in just once or twice. The 2 tier 4 users with a higher
percentage module completion quickly skipped through most
screens.

iOS usage tier membership was also examined by participant
characteristics through visual inspection and statistics
(chi-square and analysis of variance). Usage tier did not differ
by caregiver age (F3=1.41; P=.26), level of education (χ2
9=6.15;

P=.73), previous receipt of standard FMF (χ2
3=2.77, P=.43),

target child age (F3=2.46; P=.09), or income level (χ2
18=23.17,
P=.18). Tiers varied according to comfort with technology
(F3=9.07, P<.001). Participants who rated themselves lower on
comfort with technology were surprisingly more likely to be in
tier 1.

Android Usage

Given the small size of the development team, the Android
prototype was implemented on a schedule deliberately set behind
the iOS prototype, and not all functionalities were available at
the time of beta-testing. Nevertheless, the app was distributed
to Android users for the initial testing of the technology. Usage
patterns for Android users in BT2 differed from those of iOS
users across tests, likely because of technical problems with the
Android prototype. Incomplete data appear to have been
recorded in cloud services for Android users. This may have
occurred because of synchronization issues after users completed
modules offline. The data recorded show that 3 of the 6 users
completed at least some (but likely all) of each of the first 4
modules. The other 3 users only have data recorded for some
of module 3. Toward the end of BT2, a few users reported that
they could not unlock modules in level 2 of the app. It is possible
that these users would have proceeded further in using the app
if they had not encountered this technical barrier.

Objective 2: Using Qualitative Methods, Evaluate the
User Experience of FMF Connect to Guide Further
App Refinements

Overview

We attempted to interview all study participants regardless of
whether they installed the app or their usage pattern. Focus
group and interview data were available for 26 parents (BT1:
3 in focus groups, 7 interviews; BT2: 16 interviews) and 16
providers (BT1: 6 in focus groups; 9 interviews; BT2: 1
interview). Of the 19 caregivers not interviewed, nearly all had
little to no app use (1 in tier 2; 8 in tier 4; 3 installed but no use;
7 did not install). Themes did not generally differ between iOS
and Android users, with the exception of ease of use and
technological problems noted below.

General comments on the app were the most frequent (166 coded
segments). Following this, the Learning Modules (151 coded
segments) and Videos (106 coded segments) garnered the most
discussion across participants, with often lengthy, detail-rich
segments. The Family Forum (94 coded segments) and Library
(59 coded segments) received a modest amount of discussion,
with the Notebook (32 coded segments), Dashboard (32 coded
segments), and Logo/Icon (11 coded segments) eliciting limited
discussion of short duration.

Findings From Values Coding

Although not explicitly queried in the questioning route,
caregivers often spoke of their attitudes, beliefs, and values.
These provide an important context for understanding their
evaluation of the FMF Connect intervention. Themes did not
vary by round of beta-testing, Learning Module usage tier,
smartphone operating system, caregiver type (adoptive vs
relative vs biological), child age (child vs teen), or previous
standard FMF Program experience.

FASD are often described as complex and confusing. For
example, one caregiver (FG028) shared the following:

I remember the early days and thinking, “What on
God’s green Earth, you know, is wrong with this
child? What is going on?”... umm, “You could do this
yesterday, what do you mean you don’t know where
your shoes are? (Voice raises) How do you put your
shoes on the wrong feet 90 percent of the time? How
does that happen (laughs)?”...the behavior is just
baffling in the beginning.
The complexity of FASD is further complicated by the fact that
many children with FASD have experienced trauma and have
other comorbid conditions, as illustrated by a caregiver of
teenagers (FG079):

That was our struggle with our kids when they were
little. Is it because of their alcohol exposure? Is it
because of the trauma? Is it because of who they are?
Is it a mental health thing? And, you know, everyone
has their own opinion when you take them to
therapists and doctors.
Participants emphasized that FASD information and resources
are often lacking, which is associated with feelings of frustration,

grief, and being overwhelmed. For example, one provider
(FG059) stated as follows:

So many parents are desperate for answers, they’re
desperate for information. ... There’s a lack of
resources and lack of evidence-based intervention in
most communities.
A caregiver (FG043) also emphasized difficult emotions arising
from inadequate supports:

There is great remorse and guilt... I had a child with
FASD because no physician took the time to get me
into treatment when it was very obvious that I needed
treatment.
Parents further described FASD as isolating. For example, a
caregiver (FG049) described the following:

I don't have the opportunity to talk to other
parents...umm...ever (laughs) who have children with
FASDs, umm, so that is very isolating. … Because we
(raises volume) can't even find a doctor who knows
what they're talking about, let (normal volume) alone,
umm, another grown-up going through it.
Caregivers spoke to their desire to do anything to help their
children be as successful and independent as possible. Given
the limited number of knowledgeable and skilled professionals,
this often results in the need to educate others about FASD. For
example, a caregiver (FG065) explained as follows:

We, as parents, you’re always educating other people.
And so teachers and parents,...some doctors...anybody
working with your kid, you know, occupational
therapist, speech therapist, therapist...(emphasis) A
lot of people do not understand.
As a result, caregivers raising children with FASD highly value
access to information about FASD, people who understand their
experiences, and the ability to connect and share resources with
others. Participants expressed the belief that mHealth
interventions, such as FMF Connect, are needed to help address
barriers. For example, a caregiver (FG071) stated as follows:

We don’t have anything to really go to, so I think it’s
really great to have the educational piece but also to
have the forum, to kind of link people together
because you do feel really isolated.
Many related these barriers to strong emotions, such as
frustration. One caregiver (FG084) described the following:

A lot of people go on here to learn things. But, to be
honest, (strong emphasis) I think most people go on
the apps and go on the groups just to be with other
people who are going through it…nobody in my life
understands (frustrated tone)... And if I post in there,
it would be mostly just to exhale to other people who
get it, you know? And for somebody else to come on
there and say, “I get it.” You know? (slow, normal
volume) It’s just sometimes, that's all you need for
the day. Is for somebody to say, “I get it.”
Because caregivers raising children with FASD are often
overwhelmed, participants articulated the need to use their

limited time wisely and valued choice and autonomy in
self-directed learning. A provider (FG040) stated as follows:

You know, people are busy and they just-they want
to know how much time these are going to
take...knowing how much time you generally might
need to spend with something… just might keep people
engaged.
A caregiver (FG051) emphasized the value of choice:

I think the more people can make choices in what
they’re doing, the more the buy in and (laughs) you
know, the more likely they’re gonna do it and, and
be happy about doing it.

Evaluative Coding: Positives

Across participants, there were 2.5 times as many positively
evaluated coded segments as negatively evaluated segments.
The vast majority of themes were consistent across demographic
and usage tier variables. The few differences are discussed in
the relevant sections.

Global Impressions

Global impressions of the app (eg, “I love it!” “It’s wonderful,”
and “I enjoyed it.”) were nearly all positive (93 global positive
vs 1 global negative segment). Participants appreciated the
accessibility of the app and how they could fit it within their
everyday lives. For example, a caregiver (FG015) said:

This makes it easy for me, it’s right there at my
fingertips.
A provider (FG032) also highlighted the benefits of FMF
Connect as a smartphone app:

The majority of my families do not have a home
computer this year. The majority of them do
everything off of their cell phone so that’s their only
access to the internet.
Most of the iOS users across both beta tests also commented
that they found the app easy to use. In contrast, most Android
users did not mention this theme, likely because of technological
problems in the Android prototype. The participants also made
positive comments about the app’s appearance.

Learning Modules and Libraries
Positive evaluations of the informational content provided by
the app had the most coded segments across all codes (139
segments). In fact, every parent made at least one positive
comment regarding the informational content of the app.
Participants appreciated how the FMF Connect app made this
information more accessible to them. For example, a caregiver
(FG056) explained:

It’s hard to find good information on FASD, and I
thought that it was kind of cool that it was on my
phone, all together, in one spot.
Several participants spoke about the quality of information. For
example, a caregiver (FG065) stated:

I thought it was all very relevant and research based
which I appreciate (laughs) very much.

Informational content also overlapped with parents’ values of
understanding their children. Several parents provided specific
examples of how app content helped them better understand
their children’s behavior and respond differently. Participants
were especially enthusiastic about the ability to share
information from the app, particularly with teachers (relating
to the themes of needing to educate others and value of sharing
resources). For example, a caregiver (FG079) described as
follows:

I printed out something to take to her meeting that I
have next week for the teachers. … I think that was
that was the big thing that I was excited to find this
stuff to give to them.
Participants also spoke positively about aspects of the videos,
including diverse representation of families, range of child ages
and degree of problems, and specific ideas and strategies to try.
Caregivers especially appreciated that the videos featured real
families, as illustrated by a caregiver (FG056):

I was like, really excited when I first started and I
was watching the videos and I was like “Oh my
gosh!” You don’t get to see how other FASD kids live
and how they are, so it was really cool to see like real
families and real kids. Like, that was my personal
favorite part of the whole thing.
Positive comments about the videos also often co-occurred with
themes of parents feeling less isolated and validated in their
experiences as parents. For example, a caregiver (FG052) shared
the following:

[The videos] kept me grounded and mindful, umm,
that, first I’m not in this alone. And other people are
experiencing the same thing, and here are some things
that they found that worked.
The exercises within the Learning Modules received positive
evaluations by some users. Some participants commented on
how the various exercises and games also helped them reflect
on learning content and apply information to their children.

Similar to feedback revealed in prior studies of FMF Connect
[26], the step-by-step progression of access to content in the
Learning Modules and Library received mixed evaluation.
Discussion of this theme was often intertwined with participants’
previous knowledge and experience with FASD and thoughts
about whom the app is best suited. Every provider, especially
those trained in the standard FMF Program, spoke to the need
for and positive aspects of the step-by-step progression of these
components. Most caregivers also spoke of the advantages of
step-by-step progression. A caregiver (FG050) stated:

I liked how the progression went. I thought it was
easier to be able to focus and break it down and think
about that particular section at a time.
Several parents emphasized how this progression made learning
less overwhelming. Although less enthusiastic about the
step-by-step progression for themselves, more experienced
parents felt this would be very beneficial for parents of newly
diagnosed children and thought the app was most well suited
for this group. For example, a caregiver (FG028) stated as
follows:

I’ve been in the trenches for many years (laughs). It’s
nothing is new to me. And I know-like, I guess I kept
thinking as I was using it, this would be super helpful
for someone who was in my shoes 8 years ago.
Participants also spoke to the benefits of the FMF Connect app
as a refresher. They described how parents could go back at
any time and review content and apply it to new challenges.
For example, one caregiver (FG061) stated as follows:

I have thoroughly enjoyed all of the little activities
we had to do that reinforced everything… Being able
to go back to see it over and over again. To get it
going in your little brain “Ok, I can, I can do this.”

Family Forum
Participants were positive about the inclusion of the Family
Forum and articulated its potential to reduce isolation and help
parents connect with others who have shared experience.
Evaluations of the Family Forum often overlapped with parents’
values of connection and people who understand. For example,
a caregiver (FG025) explained as follows:

I thought it was useful that people could ask questions,
like the real issues that we deal with. And get some
kind of advice and some kind of help because I find
that we deal with things that most people aren’t
dealing with all the time.
Participants particularly liked that the Family Forum was
moderated and that there was a special section where their posts
were saved for later reference.

Dashboard and Notebook
The Dashboard and Notebook received fairly limited discussions
and were primarily associated with nonspecific positive
impressions. However, during beta-testing, these components
had relatively limited functionality. In BT2, a Tip of the Day
feature was added through a push notification that subsequently
appeared on the Dashboard for that day. Enthusiasm was high
for this feature, and nearly every participant in BT2 provided a
positive evaluation. For example, a caregiver (FG042) explained
as follows:

The constant tips - I mean it’s like having a social
worker right in your home with you all the time … It
doesn’t matter if you’re having a good day or a tough
day, having that positive reframing and, it, it’s like a
breath of fresh air, it’s like, ok, slow down, you know
this, and here’s a reminder, yes, ok, (laughs) you have
to let go of that and you have to do what the tip says.
Participants also described how the Tip of the Day was useful
in reminding them to use the app.

Motivators and Facilitators of App Use
Participants identified app content and the ability to connect
with others as primary motivators of wanting to use the app.
One caregiver (FG072) described this as follows:

That's a big motivator, too, is just wanting to have
one more tool. I have the books. I'm watching the
YouTube videos. I'm doing everything that I can do.
But I have my phone with me all the time.

Another caregiver (FG068) shared as follows:

I think for a lot of parents the motivation [to use the
app] would be just, you know getting help…And
connect with others.…Cause it’s hard when other
people don’t understand.
Parents described using the app most often at night once their
children were in bed or during moments of downtime. For
example, one caregiver (FG050) used the app:

Whenever I had free time. Usually, before the kids
woke up, or after they went to bed. So it was just,
whenever I had time, I would do it for a couple
minutes here, a couple minutes there.
The parents who progressed the furthest in the Learning Modules
(ie, tier 1) described strategically planning ahead for manageable
segments of time to work through the app. One caregiver
(FG061) described this as follows:

I’d spend at least thirty minutes every day, if not an
hour, if I had the time, I’d make sure I had the time,
but not everybody has my schedule.

Evaluative Coding: Negatives

Overview
Negative evaluations comprised 28.36% (312/1100) of the total
number of evaluation segments coded, so the study methods
were successful in eliciting these. These negative evaluations
largely emphasized technological issues, constructive feedback
relative to navigating the app, and barriers to use. The only
negative global impression segment across all participants was
from an Android user (FG066) who experienced difficulties
loading the videos and was disappointed by the level of activity
in the forum:

Um, (laughter) to be honest I wasn’t very fond of [the
app]... Um, granted there were very few people on
as testers, but… I didn’t see a whole lot of
conversations going on. Um, its, the videos
themselves, half the time they didn’t work for me.

Technological Problems
Some users experienced technological problems using the app.
These were the most significant for iOS tier 4 and Android
users. BT1 included all iOS users. In BT1, some participants
experienced confusion or difficulty with TestFlight (an iOS app
that allows beta-testing before release in the App Store). For
these users, difficulty with TestFlight impacted the initial
installation or updating the app. Several updates were released
early in BT1 because of some crashing and videos not loading
consistently. In addition, several participants reported some
difficulties in saving their progress in the Learning Modules;
after refinements, this was not an issue reported in BT2.

Android users (who were only part of BT2) described more
significant technological problems that resulted in barriers to
using the app. These issues included app freezing, some
inaccessible links, and problems loading videos or unlocking
later content. For example, one caregiver (FG066) described
this as follows:

In this app, it was just stuck, I couldn’t get out of it,
and I couldn’t do anything unless I completely closed
it down.
A provider (FG036) reported problems with video loading:

I could not get the first video to play. Umm, and that
was something that had happened throughout, like
me trying to watch the videos is they just keep
buffering and buffering.

Navigation: Family Forum
On the basis of previous feedback regarding the design of the
FMF Connect app [26], the Family Forum was initially laid out

to allow gradual access to subforums tied to Learning Module
completion to support privacy and shared knowledge. However,
participants in BT1 did not find the Family Forum interface to
be very intuitive (Figure 6A). A caregiver (FG050) explained
as follows:

I found that there’s too many boxes. There’s too many
sections and to go check on each one and to see what
people wrote and see what their comments are as
opposed to Facebook’s way, like everything is there.

Figure 6. Families Moving Forward Connect interface design changes for the Family Forum during (A) round 1 of beta-testing (BT1) to (B) round 2
of beta-testing (BT2).

On the basis of this feedback, the Family Forum interface was
redesigned for BT2. Subsequently, there were fewer negative
evaluations related to navigating the Family Forum (Figure 6B).
In BT2, negative evaluations mainly centered on parents not
noticing or understanding the tags or categories at the top of
the screen.

Participants also noted that the overall use of the Family Forum
was lower than expected, and conversations tended to stagnate
because of insufficient notifications. For example, a caregiver
in BT1 (FG051) commented as follows:

I went in and I introduced myself, and I was excited
about the forums and connecting with other people
but then, I think having so many different forums and
not really getting notifications of when people were
posting, umm, that made me just keep forgetting about
them.

Navigation: Learning Modules and Library
As mentioned previously, the step-by-step progression of the
Learning Modules received a mixed evaluation. Reactions to
move through the content in order varied by usage tier and
previous experience with FASD. Some experienced users, with

robust tier 1 use, identified that content was redundant for them.
However, none of these experienced users described their
experience as tedious or found that step-by-step progression
was a barrier. These themes were only present for lower-use
tiers 2 to 4. Negative evaluations related to step-by-step
progression occurred more often for participants with a greater
degree of previous knowledge and experience with FASD. One
caregiver (FG066) expressed this sentiment as follows:

I’m just simply not going to sit through you know, 5,
10 hours whatever it is of information and watch it
and everything when I already know it just to get to
something I don’t know. There are better ways for
me to do it.
Similarly, about the Library, a caregiver (FG069) explained as
follows:

Maybe it’s because I already came in with a fair
amount of knowledge, but I…wasn’t a big fan of
different things opening up as I went. I would have
preferred to have jumped in and seen everything
immediately.

Participants in BT1 found the number of videos and screens per
module to be overwhelming and a barrier to completion. For
example, one caregiver (FG051) explained as follows:

I’d learn about something and then there would be
people sharing their experiences, which is great. But
after the first two or three I was like ok, I get it, and
then there were like 12! (laughs)… It took more time
than I maybe had at the moment, and I wanted to kind
of get past the videos and work on whatever was next.
Given this feedback, refinements were made for BT2, which
included a table of contents for each module with fewer screens
per section. A smaller number of videos were customized for
users on the basis of user-imputed data (eg, child age and
behavior problems), and the remaining videos were stored in
the Library for further viewing. These changes were very
positively evaluated by the BT2 participants.

Barriers
Identified barriers to app use generally corresponded to the
negative evaluations discussed above. Time and attentional
resources were also described as barriers. One caregiver (FG062)
explained as follows:

Basically I have free time for like 10-15 minutes at
night when I’m putting the youngest kids to bed. And
of that, I have very few minutes where I can actually
listen.
Another caregiver (FG071) also commented as follows:

I think for me it was too much work at that time of
the day… A big issue for me is knowing my energy
level at that time of the day and knowing what I had
to do.

Providers offered additional insights into potential barriers on
the basis of their experiences working with families raising
children with FASD. Several providers mentioned factors, such
as age, literacy level, English as a second language, and comfort
with technology as potential barriers for some families they
work with. For example, a provider (FG047) stated:

I have other [patients] that are great-grandmas and
grandmas who barely have a computer and have a
cell phone mostly to accept phone calls, and make
phone calls and “I don’t know about these apps honey
I don’t want to deal with that.” And then of course a
big barrier here …is we have a big Spanish speaking
component.
Another potential barrier raised by providers was parents feeling
intimidated or lacking confidence in implementing strategies
demonstrated by parents in the videos. For example, a provider
(FG032) described as follows:

As I’m watching the videos, I know some of the
parents I’m working with would be petrified to just
watch [child’s name]’s mom because they’re like, “I
could never do that. I have six children. How is this
going to work?”

Evaluative Coding: Recommendations

The participants offered a number of useful recommendations
to improve navigation and enhance engagement with the app
(Table 3). Some of these recommendations were directly related
to aspects that were negatively evaluated. As mentioned above,
these led to refinements to the app in between trials, and
additional changes are underway.

Additional recommendations were closely related to the values
expressed by the participants. For example, caregivers
emphasized the importance of using their limited time wisely
and having choice and autonomy over their self-directed
learning. As a result, they recommended open access to all
content in the app from the start and tools to make it easier to
refresh their learning when they needed it. For example, a
caregiver (FG057) stated as follows:

I understand the whole idea with the yellow brick
road, I think that’s great, but I think for me, I would
like things that I could just tap on that road, to kind
go back and forth in some other groups and videos
and stuff, and kinda jump around a little bit more...the

app was just leading down a one road, which is great,
but sometimes I like to take the detour.
Another caregiver (FG055) spoke to the benefit of repetition
and refreshing her learning:

I think it would take a lot of repetition… for me to
benefit the most from all the exercises. So, I think it
would be nice … to do the same exercises over and
over and over and over and over again. Especially
when the behavior has just happened, and I want to
go back and I want to do that exercise for that
behavior.
Caregivers also value resources to help them better understand
their children. Most caregivers liked the idea of a behavior

tracker to help them monitor and notice patterns in complex
behavior problems.

A number of recommendations related to a cluster of attitudes,
beliefs, and values; specifically, caregivers’ need to understand
their child, educate others about FASD, and connect with people
who understand. For example, the recommendation for state or
regional subforums in the Family Forum would help caregivers
rely on others in their area to identify and share available
resources and connect locally. One caregiver (FG049) stated as
follows:

I have been in the hunt of my life trying to find my
daughter just somebody to take her to that has even
a basic understanding of her diagnosis. So, if I had
like, like just a place where I could go and know like,
“These are the people from my state.” Like, “Where
do you take your child?”
Some participants also liked the idea of having a coach or expert
associated with the app who could help them understand FASD,
connect them with needed resources, and provide feedback and
discussion relevant to their child. They recommended additional
content and tools that would make it easier to share information
from the app with teachers, providers, and other people working
with their children. Some participants went further and
recommended separate apps or components specifically for use
with their children or with teachers. For example, one caregiver
(FG056) said as follows:

I really liked the material. My daughter’s teacher
would benefit from- it would be cool to like, have her
access it also.
Another caregiver (FG069) also noted as follows:

You know what I’d really like to see is, is this program
targeted at medical providers!
On the basis of their experience with other apps, caregivers
highlighted some additional facilitators that might help them
engage more with the app. The most frequent suggestion was
a more robust notification system. One caregiver (FG015)
described this as follows:

With so much...going on, with the stress level and all
this stuff happening, sometimes you get easily, so
overwhelmed you don’t get a chance. If it’s not at my
fingertips or not right there, then it’s out of sight, out
of mind, you know.
Similarly, a caregiver (FG042) stated as follows:

I find it helpful when I get a little prompt in my text
or in my email, just to remind me that, you know, the
app is here and you can, you can just click from that
email or that text and jump into the app.
Participants thought it would be best if the user could customize
the type and frequency of notifications to their preferences.

Several biological parents emphasized the importance of the
representation and education of their experience in reducing
stigma. For example, one caregiver (FG084) explained as
follows:

You don’t see too many statistics that talk about
successful parenting... by biological [parents], you
know what I mean? ...And so, I tried to...I tried to be
the best mom I can and I try to show people.
Another caregiver (FG043) described the following:

Birth parents understand why people are angry and
they just want to prevent the next birth mother from
drinking. But I think [education about why people
continue to drink] would make them feel more
welcome because we all understand that the general
public doesn’t get alcohol use disorders. … Having
that education, you know, education is the key.
One caregiver (FG084) emphasized the importance of the
moderator in creating a welcoming space:

When I did my introduction, I was a little worried.
Umm, the moderators were the only ones who
welcomed me and that’s okay. I knew that was
probably going to happen... I did post a couple of
times… But nobody made me feel unwelcomed... and
that is more important.
A 
caregiver 
(FG066) 
also 
made 
several 
specific
recommendations for integrating additional support for
biological parents:

Granted everybody’s in [the Forum] together. Maybe
there would be an area that (pause) birth moms could
go do, specific. That, not necessarily saying they’re
any different from the other moms, because
everybody’s a mom whether by choice or by birth,
but more so, because birth moms often have the shame
and the guilt associated that need to be worked
through ...If you touched on it in the Learning
Modules that would be great because a lot of women
we find have a lot of guilt.
Providers also offered recommendations to increase accessibility
for a broader range of diverse families, such as closed captioning
and speech-to-text. Several providers also recommended
Spanish-language features, given the large mono- and bilingual
Spanish-speaking population they serve. Finally, both parents
and providers mentioned that families often have multiple
children with FASD and wanted features within the app to better
accommodate this.

Discussion

Principal Findings

This study presents critical stakeholder feedback and usage data
from two rounds of beta-testing of prototypes of the FMF
Connect mHealth intervention for caregivers of children with
FASD. This fifth phase in the systematic user-centered design
approach to the development and evaluation process of the app
(Figure 1) yielded important insights on the acceptability and
usage patterns of FMF Connect. The findings have implications
not only for subsequent app refinements specific to FMF
Connect but also for broader mHealth and digital parenting and
developmental disability-related interventions.

Two primary research objectives were examined to evaluate
the feasibility of the FMF Connect intervention during this phase
of our systematic approach.

Objective 1: Examine App Use Data Metrics to Identify
Any Needed Functional Refinements to FMF Connect

First, we considered how well the app worked for diverse users
from a technological standpoint. iOS users in both rounds of
testing generally described the app as easy to use. Usage patterns
were variable, but surprisingly, had few associations with
demographic factors or how participants evaluated the app.
Users in the “higher more robust use” tier 1 were more likely
to strategically set aside time to engage with the app. Technical
issues were more significant for users in lower usage iOS tiers.
Recognizing technical issues during beta-testing, we released
multiple updates in each trial to fix bugs and improve
performance.

It should be noted that BT2 also included a new Android
prototype that was designed in alignment with the iOS prototype.
Despite alpha testing within the development group on several
devices and simulators, Android users experienced greater
technological difficulties. These included issues with loading
the videos, unexpected crashes and issues when accessing some
of the Learning Modules, and synchronization issues between
the Android app and Cloud storage. Relative to iOS, it is
possible that the more limited regulation and decreased
consistency among Android devices and supported versions of
the operating system contributed to these technological barriers.
Consistent with the objective of beta-testing, we expected to
identify technological issues in the context of real-world user
implementation. This is a valuable part of the process of
user-centered design and informs needed functional refinements.

Usage data also highlight the need to carefully consider design
features for engagement and operationalize these features for
the FMF Connect app. The tier classification of usage patterns
in this study showed evidence of nonusage attrition, with 44%
(14/32) of iOS users who installed the app with minimal or no
use (tiers 4 or 5). Although this is within the range of premature
dropout rates observed for in-person parenting interventions in
community settings [33], much work is required to improve

accessibility and engagement. Research has called for a science
of attrition [34], arguing that understanding dropout and nonuse
in mHealth interventions is essential to optimize interventions
for targeted populations. In line with this, we examined
participant characteristics across tiers and found that those with
higher comfort with technology were more likely to have low
or no use. It is possible that these participants had other supports
in place or had already discovered the information on the web.
This highlights the likelihood that the FMF Connect app is of
particular importance for underserved populations and could
help address social disparities.

More general data on usage patterns in mHealth and digital
interventions highlight the critical need to carefully consider
design features for engagement. On average, approximately
25% of apps are only used once after download [35], and only
29% of app users were still using an app 90 days after download
[36]. Overall, these statistics suggest that engagement in
self-directed mHealth and digital interventions can be
challenging. This is especially true for parents, given the many
demands on their time. Participants in this study noted barriers,
such as lack of time and feeling exhausted and overwhelmed,
which will arise for any parenting intervention. However, this
may particularly be true for interventions targeting parents who
are faced with the challenge of raising children with disabilities.
A portion of the users in this study were able to strategically
prioritize time to engage with the app on a regular basis. Clearly,
additional features and supports are required to facilitate and
maintain engagement for other users.

In a cogent review, Wei et al [37] identified seven themes that
improve user engagement with mHealth applications. As shown
in Table 4, the participants in this study independently identified
and positively evaluated aspects of the FMF Connect app that
correspond to each of the 7 engagement themes. Especially
strong were features supporting the themes of interface esthetics,
message presentation, and credibility. The findings reveal that
many existing design features thought to enhance engagement
were already built into the FMF Connect app. However, useful
recommendations for further refinement relating to the four
themes of navigation, personalization, reinforcement, and
communication were suggested by participants.

Objective 2: Using Qualitative Methods, Evaluate the
User Experience of FMF Connect to Guide Further App
Refinements

Next, we considered how users evaluated the FMF Connect
intervention and what could be improved to enhance user
experience before larger-scale testing. Despite differences in
technological problems and usage metrics, iOS and Android
users had remarkably similar evaluations of the app. Globally,
users were very positive about the app, with 2.5 times more
positive- than negative-coded segments across participants.
Positive evaluations emphasized the need for and practical utility
of the app, which often related to significant barriers to care in
this population. The informational and video content of the app
was described as particularly valuable to caregivers. The
Learning Modules and videos yielded the most detailed
discussion, and every caregiver made at least one positive
evaluation of the content within the app, much of which was
originally derived from the standard FMF Program.

Participants also spoke about the affective and social benefits
of the app. They described that raising a child with FASD is a
very confusing, frustrating, and isolating experience, which is
consistent with previous literature [11,38,39]. Many positive
evaluation themes were associated with caregivers’ expressed
values of understanding their child and working to support their

children’s success. Participants also valued watching videos of
real families and connecting with others in the app, which made
them feel validated and less isolated. Caregivers’ stated
motivators for using the FMF Connect app consistently related
to informational content and connecting with others, which
aligns well with their values and beliefs.

Negative evaluations of the user experience largely emphasized
the technical and navigational aspects of the app. On the basis
of feedback from BT1 users, we redesigned the Family Forum
interface and added organizational features (eg, table of
contents) and tailored video presentation in the Learning
Modules to improve navigation. These refinements were
positively evaluated by most BT2 users. Consistent with our
previous findings during the initial design process [26], the
theme of step-by-step progression of learning content received
mixed evaluations. All providers and most parents provided at
least one positive evaluation of the step-by-step progression of
content. Importantly, however, some users (especially more
experienced caregivers in usage tiers 2-4) found this progression
redundant or tedious. They preferred greater autonomy in
self-directed learning, which characterizes the app. Step-by-step
progression was identified as a barrier to the use of some
caregivers. A recommendation for open access to content
occurred frequently in relation to this theme. Time and
attentional resources were common barriers to app use, as

described by caregivers. Providers also offered insight into
additional barriers that could impact caregiver use of the FMF
Connect on the basis of their experiences serving diverse
families, including literacy level, English as a second language,
caregiver age, and comfort with technology.

Participants 
offered 
a 
large 
number 
of 
valuable
recommendations for further app refinement to continue to
improve the user experience. As described above, several of
these were implemented in the period between BT1 and BT2
and were then favorably evaluated. Additional refinements,
such as a behavior tracking tool, changes to weekly emails, and
open access to content, have already been implemented and are
being tested in a larger feasibility trial. Subsequent refinements,
such as a more robust notification system, coaching
infrastructure, search tools, overlays, integration of accessibility
tools, and optimization of content for viewing and sharing are
in progress.

Strengths and Limitations

This study represents the first initial test of a mHealth
intervention for caregivers raising children with FASD, a part
of a systematic approach to app development and evaluation.
This study had many strengths, and efforts were made to reduce
the impact of the limitations of this study. The findings
emphasize the acceptability and feasibility of the FMF Connect
app for caregivers and offer important directions for further
refinement. This intervention has clear potential for larger-scale
dissemination, with vital public health implications for this
underserved population—and, perhaps, especially for some
subgroups within this population facing greater social disparities.
The methodological approach is also rigorous, involving
iterative feedback from key stakeholders to ensure relevance
and usability, which is an important step in user-centered design
and development [20,52].

Study findings are limited by the perspectives of participants
sampled. As is true in many studies, all participants were
volunteers, contributing to the possibility of selection bias. The
current sample size is relatively large for beta-testing feasibility
studies and is considered sufficient for the primary objectives
of this study. However, it is possible that valuable perspectives
may have been missed. Although the consistency of themes was
very high across both caregivers and providers, some
demographics of this diverse clinical population are less well
represented. For example, only 7% of the parents and 6% of the
providers were men. Overrepresentation of women is common
in studies involving primary caregivers [53,54]. The sample
represented primarily adoptive parents, although the perspectives
of relative caregivers and biological mothers are represented.
Racial and ethnic diversity is also somewhat lower than in the
general population, and all participants were English-speaking
(although some may have had fluency in other languages). The
study was also limited to participants who were able to afford
smartphones, WiFi, or data plans. Participant income spanned
all queried levels but was still skewed above average relative
to national statistics. It is notable that the inclusion of provider
perspectives provided additional insights into potential barriers

and recommendations for families that may not have been
represented in the sample.

Although our nonusage attrition rate was generally within the
range seen in community and digital interventions, it may have
contributed to bias in the study findings. Participants were less
likely to complete focus group or individual interviews if they
did not install the app or had low use. Therefore, the study of
attrition factors was necessarily limited. Interviewees may have
displayed a positive response bias. A number of participants
expressed desperation for information and resources on FASD;
therefore, fewer negative evaluations of the app may have been
offered because of the lack of alternative treatments. The
research team was also involved in developing the app, which
could have impacted participant feedback. To reduce positive
response bias, the research team actively tried to elicit negative
and constructive feedback about the app and emphasized the
benefits of hearing negative evaluations during this stage of
development when refinements could more easily be made.
Although significantly fewer than positive evaluations (n=788
segments), a robust number of negative evaluations were elicited
(n=312 segments). However, it remains a possibility that users
experienced difficulty expressing negative feedback in
interviews, and this should be considered a limitation of the
current work.

Conclusions and Future Directions

This study demonstrates that a scalable digital health
intervention can successfully be derived from an empirically
supported therapist-led intervention tailored for families raising
children with FASD, adding unique and important additional
features. The FMF Connect app is acceptable and feasible as
self-administered learning for caregivers raising children with
FASD. In addition, the FMF Connect app aligns with important
reported caregiver values and builds on our previous work
evaluating the initial design and functionalities of the app [26].
The sixth phase in our systematic evaluation of the FMF
Connect app (Figure 1) is to conduct a larger pilot trial with
pre-post quantitative data collection, which is currently ongoing.
The results of this pilot trial will provide direction for further
refinements to the FMF Connect intervention, measurement
tools, and study design methods before the advent of a
large-scale RCT. Surprisingly, many mHealth and digital health
interventions have been disseminated without clear empirical
validation. In our systematic development and evaluation plan,
a carefully designed RCT is an important seventh and final
phase. This systematic approach is squarely aimed at producing
the FMF Connect app as a robust mHealth intervention
responsive to the needs of a clinical population that deserves
high-quality FASD-informed care.