RESEARCH ARTICLE
Open Access

Human-centered implementation research:
a new approach to develop and evaluate
implementation strategies for
strengthening referral networks for
hypertension in western Kenya

Mc Kinsey M. Pillsbury1, Eunice Mwangi2, Josephine Andesia2, Benson Njuguna3, Gerald S. Bloomfield4,
Agneta Chepchumba2, Jemima Kamano3,5, Tim Mercer6, Juliet Miheso2, Sonak D. Pastakia7, Shravani Pathak8,
Aarti Thakkar4, Violet Naanyu5, Constantine Akwanalo3 and Rajesh Vedanthan9*

Methods
Study setting
The STRENGTHS study focuses on improving referral
networks for hypertension care across the public sector
health system in western Kenya. STRENGTHS is em-
bedded within the AMPATH (Academic Model Provid-
ing Access to Healthcare) program, a global health
partnership between Moi University College of Health
Sciences, Moi Teaching and Referral Hospital, and a

Page 2 of 16

consortium of North American academic medical cen-
ters led by Indiana University [19]. In collaboration with
the Kenyan Ministry of Health, AMPATH has estab-
lished a Chronic Disease Management (CDM) Program,
which has enrolled over 40,000 patients with hyperten-
sion at over 70 health facilities spanning all levels of the
health system [20, 21]. The multicomponent CDM care
delivery package includes task redistribution [22], clin-
ical decision support using HIT [23], consistent and se-
cure medication supply [24], linkage and retention
activities [25], community and stakeholder engagement
[26], and social support for patients.
The CDM program has also used the AMPATH Med-
ical Record System (AMRS), a customized version elec-
tronic health record to document and access patients’
clinical information across the health system [27]. The
most updated version of AMRS, implemented in 2016,
includes
a
software
program
called
“Point-of-Care”
(POC), which supports historical patient data review,
real-time clinical data entry, decision support tailored to
the type and training of the clinician, health facility man-
agement), and data visualization (e.g. quality indicators).
The POC platform also includes an electronic referral
form, in which referring providers document the reason
for referral and other clinical information. This program
is supported through a solar-powered Wi-Fi network to
ensure network connectivity for each health facility.
Where this infrastructure is not available, clinical data
entry
occurs
retroactively
through
two
alternative
means: an offline tablet-based program (called mUzima)
or through standardized paper forms, which are subse-
quently synced or manually entered, respectively, into
AMRS. Regardless of the method of data capture, clin-
ical data from all facilities is housed within AMRS.

Conceptual approach
The HCD process was adapted from the Ideo.org Design
Kit [28]. Our primary goal was to create an implementa-
tion strategy combining peer support and informatics
that would meet the needs of end-users—patients re-
ferred for hypertension and clinicians. In addition, we
aimed to engage community and health system stake-
holders throughout the process. We organized the de-
sign
process
into
three
phases
from
January
to
September 2019 (Fig. 1). During design phase 1, we held
four half-day design sessions to review preliminary find-
ings from the baseline needs and contextual assessment
and construct prototype 1, followed by acceptability and
appropriateness testing. Then in design phase 2, we held
a full-day design session to incorporate community feed-
back into an updated strategy (prototype 2), followed by
the pilot study and feasibility testing. Finally, in design
phase 3, we held a full-day design session to incorporate
pilot feedback and finalize the implementation strategy

(prototype 3). Between each design session, facilitators
presented design progress to the study investigators,
who provided additional feedback that was incorporated
by the design team.

Participants
The interdisciplinary design team consisted of 15 key
stakeholders, including two patients with hypertension,
two peer navigators from the HIV care program [29],
three clinicians from primary- and secondary-level facil-
ities, three health system administrators, three informat-
ics experts, and two members of the STRENGTHS
research team. Participants were identified through pur-
posive sampling based on personal or professional expe-
riences
with
hypertension
referrals,
peer
support
strategies, or clinical informatics. Preliminary data from
referral network analysis, conducted during an early
phase of the STRENGTHS study, further identified key
clinicians who linked multiple parts of the referral sys-
tem for inclusion on the design team [30]. All design
team members represented end-users who may imple-
ment, receive, or administer the implementation strat-
egy. The team was led by two facilitators from the
STRENGTHS research team who were trained in HCD
methods (JA, MP).

Design inputs
Prior to design phase 1, the STRENGTHS research team
conducted a baseline needs and contextual assessment
that included qualitative evaluation of key barriers and
facilitators to hypertension referrals, referral network
analysis, and observational process mapping of hyperten-
sion clinic workflows [30, 31]. These data were summa-
rized as key “insight statements” to align with HCD
methods and presented to the design team. In addition,
study investigators proposed initial design specifications
for the implementation strategy, which included the use
of peer support strategies and HIT to enhance referral
adherence and patient tracking [16]. Initial specifications
functioned as a scaffold that could be adapted and
enriched through the design process through addition of
contextually specific details (Fig. 1).

Design phase 1
In design phase 1, the design team synthesized formative
findings from the baseline needs and contextual assess-
ment, reviewed initial specifications for the implementa-
tion strategy, and created prototype 1. During Meeting
#1 (Inspiration), the design team grouped key insight
statements into themes. During Meeting #2 (Brainstorm-
ing), the design team crafted “How Might We…?” ques-
tions to address each theme and brainstormed solutions.
During Meeting #3 (Conceptualization), the design team
grouped similar ideas together and refined solution

Page 3 of 16

ideas. During Meeting #4 (Creation), the design team se-
lected the best solution ideas and integrated these into
prototype 1 for community testing, comprised of de-
tailed diagrams and storyboards depicting how stake-
holders would interact with the implementation strategy.
Qualitative feedback on prototype 1 was gathered to
assess acceptability (perception that the strategy is
“agreeable, palatable, or satisfactory”) and appropriate-
ness (perception of strategy “fit, relevance, or com-
patibility” to address hypertension referrals in our
setting) [32]. Focus group discussions (FGDs) were
conducted in English and Swahili with patients (n =
14), clinicians, and administrators (n = 15) at multiple
health facilities. Participants were recruited through
convenience sampling and provided written informed
consent. The initial prototype diagrams conveyed key

features of the implementation strategy to FGD par-
ticipants and depicted use from the patient, clinician,
and
peer
navigator
perspectives.
Subsequently,
a
structured discussion guide was developed to ensure
data collected was relevant (Supplementary Files 1
and 2). The FGD sessions were moderated by a
trained research assistant using the FGD structured
guide to facilitate discussion and feedback among
FGD participants. FGDs were audio-recorded, tran-
scribed, and translated into English by research assis-
tants. Transcripts underwent content analysis using
Nvivo software. An a priori coding framework was
established based on the discussion guide, and add-
itional
inductive
codes
were
subsequently
added.
Emergent themes were identified which captured key
strengths and challenges related to acceptability and

Fig. 1 Participatory design process for the STRENGTHS implementation strategy

Page 4 of 16

appropriateness.
All
participants
were
provided
a
transport allowance and refreshments.

Design phase 2
During Meeting #5, the design team incorporated feed-
back from community FGDs and created prototype 2.
Following this session, we conducted a pilot study to test
prototype 2 for feasibility (perception that the strategy
can be “successfully used or carried out within a given
agency or setting”) [32]. We selected three pilot clinics,
one at each level of the health system, thus constituting
a referral chain. Three peer navigators were recruited
from the study sites, trained in core roles and responsi-
bilities, and equipped with the HIT package via tablet.
Peer navigators were hired members of the clinical team
and were compensated for their work. Each peer was
stationed at a specific clinic and was able to communi-
cate directly with the peer stationed immediately above
or below in the referral chain. We recruited 15 patients
referred among these three facilities over a four-month
period. Inclusion criteria included age greater than 18
years and currently enrolled in the AMPATH CDM pro-
gram; exclusion criteria included acute illness requiring
immediate medical attention, terminal illness, or inability
to provide informed consent. Patient referral encounters
were analyzed for referral completion, reason for refer-
ral, and reported barriers to referral.
We subsequently assessed feasibility of prototype 2 via
FGDs with patients (n = 12), clinicians, and administra-
tors (n = 13) who participated in the pilot, as well as
semi-structured interviews (SSIs) with each peer naviga-
tor (n = 4) (question guides available in Supplementary
Files 1, 2 and 3). These discussions were recorded, tran-
scribed, translated, and underwent content analysis in
the method described above in order to capture key
strengths and challenges related to feasibility.

Design phase 3
During Meeting #6, the Design Team incorporated the
FGD and SSI results in order to enhance feasibility,
yielding prototype 3. This final model was then imple-
mented in the STRENGTHS cluster-randomized con-
trolled trial.

Design team reflections
In order to capture reflections on the HCD process, de-
sign team members (n = 14) participated in FGDs after
Meeting #5 (Design Phase 2) and completed a 32-item
6-point Likert-scale questionnaire after Meeting #6 (De-
sign Phase 3). FGDs were conducted in English using a
structured discussion guide and were audio-recorded,
transcribed, and analyzed for content in the method de-
scribed
above.
The
Likert-scale
questionnaire
was
adapted
from
the
Community-Based
Participatory

Research community engagement survey and included
the following four domains: contextual factors, partner-
ship processes, research method perceptions, and par-
ticipatory outcomes [33, 34]. The questionnaire was
administered individually to each design team member
by a research assistant using a tablet-based RedCap tool.

Results
Design phase 1
The initial implementation strategy (prototype 1) con-
sisted of a peer navigator program and HIT package for
patient tracking, documentation, and decision support
(Fig. 2).

Peer navigator program
Peer navigators were patients with hypertension who
had achieved blood pressure control and/or successfully
completed inter-facility referrals, and they were hired as
members of the clinical team and compensated for their
work. All peer navigators underwent standard training
on patient privacy and handling of protected health in-
formation. These peer navigators would meet with re-
ferred patients at both the referring and receiving facility
in order to facilitate referral completion. Core responsi-
bilities of the peer navigator included logistical naviga-
tion, education, and psychosocial support. Logistical
navigation ensured that patients knew the correct date,
time, and location of the next clinic, estimated costs as-
sociated with the referral visit, mode of transport, and
what to expect during the referral appointment. Educa-
tion included reviewing basic facts about hypertension
and the patient’s specific reason for referral. Psychosocial
support leveraged the peer navigator’s shared disease ex-
perience of hypertension to emphasize the importance
of referral adherence.

HIT package
Patient movement between facilities was captured in the
HIT package, which facilitated transmission of informa-
tion among all peer navigators, clinicians, and adminis-
trators involved in a referred patient’s care. Based on the
foundation of AMRS and existing electronic clinical en-
counter forms described above, we programmed add-
itional functionalities for peer navigators and referring
clinicians. This included a “peer navigator encounter
form” to document patient counseling sessions and sup-
plement clinician referral forms, which included the rea-
son for referral and other relevant clinical information
for the next provider. In addition, the HIT package in-
cluded integrated decision support to guide peer naviga-
tor discussion topics and basic clinical actions.

Page 5 of 16

Acceptability and appropriateness testing
Overall, prototype 1 was found to be acceptable and ap-
propriate to patients, clinicians, and administrators. In
addition, participants identified several specific prototype
strengths and challenges to be addressed through the
next design phase (Table 1).
Patients felt that the STRENGTHS implementation
strategy would improve their experience of the referral
process and facilitate referral completion. Patients felt
that the proposed approach would improve logistical ex-
perience during referrals, reduce stigma through peer
support and advocacy, strengthen patient education, and
facilitate information sharing between facilities. Clini-
cians
and
administrators
similarly
felt
that
the
STRENGTHS implementation strategy would augment
their abilities to refer patients and facilitate referral ad-
herence through improved communication and health
data access.
Patients also cited several concerns with the strategy
and identified three main challenges: referral-related
costs (e.g. transport, healthcare fees), persistent cultural
and language barriers between patients and peer naviga-
tors, and lack of peer navigator accessibility. Clinicians
and administrators also shared the concern that the im-
plementation strategy did not address many barriers to
referral completion. They felt that without organized

transport, stipends, or other incentives, patients would
be unable to complete referrals. Clinicians and peer nav-
igators were also skeptical of peer navigators’ level of
knowledge or training and ability to integrate into the
clinic setting.
While clinicians and administrators generally liked the
idea of using technology to facilitate referrals, they also
emphasized the practical challenges of technology in the
rural setting. Frequent network or power outages at
rural clinics could interfere with tablet charging or inter-
net use. They emphasized the need for paper back-up
forms and poor usability of prior electronic encounter
forms. Finally, clinicians and administrators raised con-
cerns that the HIT package may be unable to coordinate
between clinics using different health record systems (es-
pecially those with paper-based record systems).

Design phase 2
Design adaptations
The design team incorporated feedback from acceptabil-
ity and appropriateness testing to create prototype 2. To
address the patient concerns, we equipped peer naviga-
tors with airtime credits to ensure reachability via phone
and stationed them at the health facility during clinic
hours; additionally, we recruited peer navigators from
local communities near each facility to strengthen the

Fig. 2 The STRENGTHS Implementation Strategy (Prototype 3) - Peer navigators meet with referred patients at to facilitate referral completion.
Peer support strategies include referral adherence, logistical support, education, and counseling. The health information technology (HIT) package
captures patient movement in AMRS and enhances communication between clinicians, decision support, patient tracking, and monitoring of key
referral metrics

Page 6 of 16

sociocultural bond with patients. To address the clin-
ician and administrator concerns, we expanded peer
navigator training to augment medical knowledge and
communication skills, coordinated development of the
HIT package to align referral tools with the appearance,
workflows, and features of AMRS, and organized train-
ing sessions for clinicians and administrators on hyper-
tension referral algorithms and use of AMRS. Prototype
2 was subsequently implemented in three hypertension
clinics and tested for feasibility.

Feasibility testing
Seventeen patients referred for hypertension care were
screened and 15 of these (4 male, 11 female) met inclu-
sion criteria and enrolled in the pilot study. All patients
were referred up to higher levels of care; there were no
down-referrals. Seven patients were referred from the
primary level and eight from the secondary level.

Fourteen pilot participants (93%) completed the referral.
The one participant who did not complete the referral
was referred for investigations (diagnostic tests) and met
with a peer navigator, but after consulting with her fam-
ily decided against attending the appointment. Reported
referral barriers included costs of attending the referral
(40%), transport logistics (7%), and insurance coverage
(7%). Despite the stated barriers, these patients success-
fully completed the referral. Eight patients (53%) re-
ported no barriers to referral completion. Pilot feedback
supported the feasibility of prototype 2 in hypertension
clinics. Thematic analysis identified multiple perceived
strengths and challenges (Table 2) aligned with 3 central
domains: active peer engagement, enhanced communi-
cation, and referral data integration.

Active peer engagement Patients described how fre-
quent contact with the peer navigator reduced stress and

Table 1 Acceptability & Appropriateness Testing by Stakeholder Group

Acceptability

Theme
Patients
Clinicians/Administrators

Peer
Support
Improved Patient
Experience
Peer navigators may address inefficiencies and delays
during referrals
Peer navigators will help patients navigate unfamiliar
health facilities

Stigma
Peer navigators may reduce perceived bias and
judgement by clinic staff through accompanying patients
and orienting them to the new health facility

Patients may feel uncomfortable disclosing personal health
information to other community members (Peer
navigators, who are not seen as health professionals)

Integrating Peer
Navigators into
local clinics

Due to regional differences in culture and language,
patients referred to a different facility (in a different
community) may not feel comfortable or trust their
receiving peer

Nurses and administrators currently help facilitate referrals,
and there may be conflict when peers come in to assume
this role

HIT
Package
Information
Sharing Between
Facilities

Referral information (including clinical data) can be
available to clinicians at facilities across the health system
Electronic forms must be streamlined and user-friendly, as
clinicians have encountered inefficient forms in the past

HIT Reliability
(No patients commented on HIT reliability)
The intervention would need a backup so that data is not
lost and the core functionality of referral navigation may
proceed in the event of power or network outage

Appropriateness

Theme
Patients
Clinicians/Administrators

Peer
Support
Capacity of Peer-
based Education
Peer navigators may provide patient education on
hypertension on multiple occasions during referral
process

Patients with hypertension may be inappropriate peer
support providers as they may be older, harder to retain,
and less familiar with technology; in addition, these
patients lack formal health training necessary to provide
peer support (participants advocated for use of
Community Health Volunteers

Prohibitive Costs
Without transport or funds, referral barriers may still be
insurmountable for patients
Patients may not complete referrals without providing
transport, incentives, and/or peer accompaniment

Peer Navigator
Accessibility
Peer navigators may be inaccessible or unreachable
when needed by patients
Concerns that peer navigators may be difficult for patients
to locate at busy facilities like MTRH

Peer-Clinician
Information
Sharing

(No patient comments on appropriateness of Peer-
Clinician Interactions)
Peer navigators will effectively relay clinical information
between clinicians at different facilities during referrals

HIT
Package
Centralized Data
Storage
(No patient comments on appropriateness of HIT tools)
Referral data is stored centrally and can be accessed via
tablet by referring or receiving clinicians

Integration Barriers
with Existing
Record System

Clinical information must be accessible no matter what
health record system is used, meaning that the
intervention must integrate all existing systems

Page 7 of 16

Table 2 Feasibility testing results, summarized by themes and representative quotations

Feasibility Testing

Domain
Key Theme
Quotation

Active Peer
Engagement
Effective Patient
Navigation
Peers provided logistical support and oriented
patients to unfamiliar health facilities
Someone like me, if am told to go to Referral [Moi
Teaching and Referral Hospital], where would I start
from to get to the doctor? Because in Referral people
are many and you can’t even know which room you
will go to so that you be served immediately. [I] am
thankful, that program [STRENGTHS] is good. (Patient,
Turbo Secondary Level Facility)

Improved Patient
Advocacy
Patients felt comfortable talking with peer navigators,
who functioned as patient advocates and often
accompanied patients into their clinician visits

The patient is more free to explain himself to the peer
navigator whom he seems to see as a normal
person…when the patients knows that he is going to
talk to the Doctor, he thinks to prepare him so much
that sometimes he ends up forgetting other things but
when he is talking to the peer navigator, he feels very
free…but when with the Doctor, the patient may come
out and say I had forgotten to tell the provider A, B, C,
D. And so mostly the patient feels comfortable with the
peer navigators when they are explaining their
thoughts. (peer navigator, Moi Teaching and Referral
Hospital)

Active Peer Follow-
up
Active follow up from peer “challenged” patients to
overcome barriers that may have prevented them
from completing referrals

I am grateful because [the Peer Navigator] will even
challenge you. If you have lacked money you will run
to the neighbor and say, ‘there is someone somewhere
who wants to help me.’ So I run and found the
transport and I went. (Patient, Turbo Secondary Level
Facility).

Prohibitive Costs
Remaining challenges of referral completion included
high cost of transport, drugs, and tests
Sometimes money becomes a challenge. I went [to the
hospital] and [the] doctor wanted to do some tests...I
was told one is 1800 KSH and the other is 900 KSH and
I didn’t have that money. I had to go back home.
(Patient, Cheramei Primary Level Facility)

Limited Scope of
Patient Education
Peers lacked training to counsel patients with
multiple comorbidities or educate on topics other
than HTN

They say [my] eyes have been bad because of
hypertension and because of diabetes. So mostly you
are told [by peer navigators] that [they] have nothing
to do on the side of the eyes. It’s better you go check
on the eyes in Nairobi or where you will go. So what I
can suggest is that diabetes and [high blood] pressure
it affects the eyes, so they bring again here an optician
so that he can direct us as well. (Patient, Turbo
Secondary Level Facility)

Enhanced
Communication
Timely Referral
Updates
Peers effectively communicated referral updates with
clinicians and patients
Communication was effective, was good
communication. I think when you have a case to refer
it was good to go to the desk where the peer is and
the good thing she was always available, so we
actually had no problem to go there. So, at times she
can just come and explain this is a referral from the
facility so we could give them a priority. So
communication is very effective. (Clinician, Turbo
Secondary Level Facility)

Improved Patient
Understanding of
Reason for Referral

Peers helped explain the reason for referral and
convinced patient of the benefits of referral
completion

After being told from the doctor [that they must go to
a referral facility], they end up not realizing really the
exact meaning. But when we impact on them and
explain more about why, in fact they end up realizing
that we, they have understood the reason for referral.
(peer navigator, Moi Teaching and Referral Hospital)

Convenient Access
to Peers via Phone
Phone calls were most convenient means of
planning and following up with patients
[The peer navigator] took my phone number and I
went home and she has been following me up from
home...she calls me, she asks me how things are, even
when I come here she asks me, “you have come, how
are going on with your clinic?.” So they help so much.
(Patient, Turbo Secondary Level Facility)

Successful
Integration with
Clinic Staff
Peers integrated well with clinic staff and assisted in
other clinic tasks (e.g. triage vitals and patient
We also engage the peer in providing health education
to our clients and they also assisted us in working in

Page 8 of 16

Table 2 Feasibility testing results, summarized by themes and representative quotations (Continued)

Feasibility Testing

Domain
Key Theme
Quotation

Clinic Staff
education)
other areas in the facility. (FGD, Providers, Turbo)

Reinforced Referral
Practices
The presence of peers seemed to reinforce
adherence to clinical protocols and increase
clinicians’ awareness of referral resources

After the providers understood the referral network, for
the first weeks we didn’t have so many referrals but as
time went by, they understood our role in the clinic…
So, our communication was really good. Yes. They even
come and look for me because am always at the front
desk, they have a referral, the doctor comes to me and
tells me I have such a referral. If I need them, I also go
to their offices, I tell them what I need from them so, it
was a two-way traffic.” (Peer Navigator, Turbo Second-
ary Level Facility)

Interruption of
Clinic Workflow
Peers sometimes interfered with clinic flow if they
spend too much time with the patient
Patients have a priority to be seen by the consultant
and then probably the consultant to the clerks and
then to go home and then this peer educator comes in
between. The patient is not ready for his or her service,
so this navigator must be very convincing and actually
bring the patient closer so that the patient can be able
to give him or her time. (Clinician, Moi Teaching and
Referral Hospital)

Difficulty Finding &
Identifying Peers
Providers sometimes struggled to identify peer
navigators in busy clinics without an established
work station or uniform

But my challenge has always been, how will this be a
navigator be identified? (Clinician, Moi Teaching and
Referral Hospital)

Referral Data
Integration
Fast Retrieval of
Clinical Information
Use of a tablet enabled fast retrieval of referral
information (when EMR available)
From the word “go,” when a patient is referred we are
able to know why the patient is referred from the
[health record] system…it makes work easier. Yes. You
don’t have to make phone calls [or] ask so many
questions. (peer navigator, Turbo Secondary Level
Facility).

Utility of Encounter
Forms
Encounter forms provided some useful information
that was referenced by other peers (even though
most information sharing occurred over phone)

[The HIT package] helped. You see, when the peer
navigator was at [the] other facility [you] could click
and see the updates about the patient. Then from there
one could be able to know what is supposed to do
next about the patient. (Peer Navigator, Moi Teaching
and Referral Hospital)

Reliability of
Network and HIT
Package

Peer navigators had consistent access to the HIT
package via a tablet and mobile data network
For my case, there [was] no time [when I couldn’t use
the electronic form] because...we used to have the
[mobile data] bundles, which we were to buy and use
it to fill the forms. So, I never [had problems with the
network] but some other people experienced the same
problems because the [clinic’s wifi] network was down.
(peer navigator, Moi Teaching and Referral Hospital)

Lack of Physical
Patient Reminders
Keeping track of paper referral forms, slips, or clinic
booklets was challenging for patients
If you are given that small card [referral appointment
card] I can put in this bag. And tomorrow I want to go
to the hospital [and] I have forget it was in another
bag...now you find there is challenges because you will
forget [the card]. (Patient, Cheramei Primary Level
Facility)

Integration Barriers
with Paper Record
System

Some clinicians still used paper encounter forms due
to simplicity, reliability, and availability (some clinics
did not have access to EMR), which limited clinical
information available in the EMR

We used the written [paper] forms, up to now as am
talking. The forms are in the POC [EHR], but finding
them is a problem. But when you click you need to add
“Sending to MTRH” in that form you are referring...now
from Moi Teaching and Referral Hospital we need to
add where specifically we need--is eye clinic, is renal
unit--[the electronic form] doesn’t have that
specification. Is it to oncology? You need to specify you
are sending to oncology and a bit of notes what are
you going to do. (FGD, Provider, Turbo)

Limited Provider
Use of Referral
Forms

Some clinicians were unaware of a standard referral
form (instead used a freehand note), limiting referral
information available in the EMR

We use the internal consultation forms [for
referrals]...But I have seen there are those [clinicians]
who don’t want to use the consultation forms from
MTRH and so we just write a letter which will be
stamped by the hospital...But we don’t have a specific

Page 9 of 16

improved engagement in care. Improved referral naviga-
tion included both logistical planning before the ap-
pointment as well as orienting the patient upon arrival
to the unfamiliar health facility. In addition, patients
generally felt more comfortable discussing health topics
with their peers and often requested that the peer navi-
gator accompany them during the clinician visit as an
advocate.
Participants voiced persistent concerns about transport
and other referral-related costs, but emphasized how ac-
tive follow-up from peer navigators helped patients to
overcome these barriers. Peer navigators provided per-
sistent appointment reminders, helped patients brain-
storm ways to gather funds and leverage their social
networks for support, and emphasized the benefits of
engaging in referral care, including preventing disease
complications and associated downstream healthcare
costs. Patients and peer navigators described that these
peer-based counseling strategies often enabled patients
to attend referral appointments despite significant finan-
cial barriers.

Enhanced communication Peer navigators enhanced
communication between clinicians, administrators, and
patients. Frequent follow-up (usually by phone) ad-
dressed any patient questions and ensured that patients
understood the reason for referral. This filled a key com-
munication gap between patients and clinicians, who
had limited time for discussion during clinic visits. Peer
navigators also provided referral updates to clinicians
and alerted them when a new patient referred from an
outside facility had arrived. This was especially import-
ant in clinics without AMRS access, in which peer navi-
gators also provided relevant clinical context for the
referral.
In addition, peer navigators reminded clinicians of
the clinic referral pathways and the resources avail-
able to referred patients, ultimately improving pro-
vider referral practices. Peer navigators felt that the
frequency of referrals increased over the course of the
pilot as clinicians learned to collaborate with the peer
navigators.

Referral data integration The HIT package supported
core peer navigator responsibilities, enabling fast re-
trieval of clinical information and documentation of re-
ferral information through tablet-based encounter forms.
Peer navigators felt that the HIT package helped coord-
inate patient follow-up, reducing the need for peer-to-
peer phone calls to convey patient information to one
another. In addition, use of tablets with mobile data
bundles ensured reliable AMRS access for peer naviga-
tors despite occasional power or clinic WIFI outages.
However, there were multiple challenges integrating
with paper-based record systems. Prototype 2 was de-
signed to be used with both paper charts and electronic
data entry forms. When clinics used an electronic record
system, peer navigators could easily retrieve relevant pa-
tient information. In contrast, clinicians in paper-based
clinics rarely used a standardized form, making it diffi-
cult for peer navigators to interpret the reason for refer-
ral and clinical context.
This issue reflected larger challenges in expanding the
implementation of POC throughout AMPATH clinics.
As described by pilot clinicians, many clinics continued
to use paper forms due to simplicity, reliability, and
availability. Moreover, some clinicians used nonstandard
referral forms (often a freehand note), resulting in little
referral information available to other providers. In these
instances, the peer navigator encounter form provided
basic referral information in the electronic health record
and ensured that some information was relayed to the
next clinician. In summary, the HIT package was useful
for peer navigators but faced significant integration bar-
riers with the existing health record systems.

Design phase 3
Design adaptations
The design team incorporated feedback from feasibility
testing and created prototype 3 for implementation in
the cluster-randomized controlled trial. To address con-
cerns related to the patient referral experience, we fur-
ther expanded peer navigator medical knowledge to
include complications of uncontrolled hypertension and
common medical comorbidities (e.g. diabetes mellitus).
We strengthened peer navigator follow-up by developing

Table 2 Feasibility testing results, summarized by themes and representative quotations (Continued)

Feasibility Testing

Domain
Key Theme
Quotation

referral navigator-specific patient list on AMRS to high-
light incomplete referrals. In response to the issue of
averting potentially unnecessary referrals, we developed
a workflow for the peer navigator to utilize. For example,
if a patient was referred to a higher level facility for
poorly controlled hypertension, and the peer navigator
learns that the patient has been nonadherent to medica-
tions, then the peer is able to provide adherence coun-
seling, discuss with the referring clinician, have the
patient return to the referring clinician for further man-
agement and adherence counesling, and thereby effect-
ively “cancel” the referral. Finally, to improve integration
with clinic providers, we provided peer navigators with
uniforms to facilitate identification and encouraged them
to assist in clinic tasks during free time (e.g. triage vital
signs).
Multiple modifications expanded the HIT package and
improved integration with existing health record sys-
tems. We enhanced peer navigator decision support
using branching logic embedded in encounter forms.
We additionally created a dashboard platform for moni-
toring real-time referral metrics for each facility through
AMRS, which was designed to ensure maintenance of fi-
delity and quality of the implementation strategy. Finally,
the STRENGTHS research team liaised with CDM lead-
ership to create a standardized referral form to be used
by the referring clinician (available on paper and elec-
tronically) with standardized reasons for referral. These
were introduced to each clinic through structured
sensitization and training led by local leadership.
Overall, integration across multiple health record sys-
tems remained the biggest challenge to implementation.
While some aspects of the HIT package offered a one-
size-fits-all solution, the final prototype was optimized
for clinics that used the electronic POC system. The
CDM program is currently scaling up POC across the
health system, but paper-based clinics will not benefit
from the full functionality of the HIT package.

Design team reflections
Design team members reflected on their overall percep-
tions of the HCD process through FGDs and a survey
following design phases 2 and 3, respectively (Table 3).
The survey was administered to 14 participants (8
women and 6 men) with median age 39.5. Participants
attended nearly all of the sessions (average 5.6 out of 6).
FGD participants identified several strengths of the HCD
process: participation from all design team members re-
gardless of hierarchy, moderators’ ability to promote
group consensus when conflicting opinions emerged,
and representation of key stakeholder groups on the de-
sign team. Perceived challenges included: time manage-
ment, refining solution ideas after prototyping, and
promoting patient contributions during later stages of

the design process. Participants emphasized the need for
transparency and power-sharing in three major domains
of the design process: 1) prioritizing session discussion
topics; 2) selecting solution ideas for further develop-
ment; and 3) incorporating feedback from the study in-
vestigators, who were external to the design team.
Overall, design team members felt that they had made
valuable contributions to the intervention and gained
skills
in
communication,
collaboration,
and
HCD
methods through the design team experience.

Discussion
We used an HCD approach to design the STRENGTHS
implementation strategy, which overall was found to be
acceptable, appropriate, and feasible for facilitating refer-
rals for hypertension care. Participants recognized the
strategy’s potential to improve referral completion and
identified consistent strengths across multiple proto-
types. Primary among these were referral facilitation
through active peer engagement, enhanced communica-
tion between patients, clinicians, and administrators, and
referral data integration through the HIT package.
Coordination with health system reform was critical to
the success of our approach. For instance, we collabo-
rated with the CDM program to update hypertension
care protocols that included reasons for referral and re-
ferral pathways. During implementation of the pilot
study portion of our project, peer navigators became in-
tegrated into clinic and collaborated closely with clini-
cians and staff. We observed that the frequency of
referrals increased during this process, suggesting that
providers were more aware of the need to refer patients
and more confident that patients would complete refer-
rals. Our experience underscores how the STRENGTHS
implementation strategy aligned with broader health sys-
tem reform, a critical step to enhancing implementation
fidelity and sustainability. Similarly, in addition to stand-
ard clinical training related to patient privacy and pro-
tected health information, peer navigators participating
in the STRENGTHS study also will receive CITI Re-
search training for ethics in clinical research.
Challenges that arose during the design process, rather
than exposing weaknesses in the implementation strat-
egy, prompted critical discussions that demonstrate the
strengths of the participatory design methods. One ex-
ample was the persistent concern regarding prohibitive
referral-related costs. Providing funds or travel vouchers
was felt to be outside the scope of the study. However,
we found that peer navigators could elucidate the poten-
tial daily-life impacts, disability, and catastrophic health-
care
expenses
associated
with
complications
of
uncontrolled hypertension. These counseling strategies
demystified what is colloquially known as a ‘silent killer’
and reinforced the benefits of referral completion, which

Page 11 of 16

were especially powerful when conveyed from a peer (i.e.
fellow patient) perspective [35].
Figure 3 demonstrates iterative redesign of key peer
navigator skills to address this challenge. In prototype 1,
peer navigators promoted referral completion through
shared disease experience, but lacked communication
skills and ways to address patients’ cost-related con-
cerns. Prototype 2 addressed these deficits by adding
peer navigator training in motivation interviewing and

education on hypertension. However, feedback from
feasibility testing indicated that addressing these persist-
ent referral barriers required more active counseling
strategies. As a result, prototype 3 equipped peer naviga-
tors with additional tools to address specific referral bar-
riers (e.g. possible ways to mitigate transportation costs)
and emphasize the risks of uncontrolled blood pressure.
This trajectory illustrates not only how the design
process added contextually specific details to initial

Table 3 Design Team Survey Results

Design Team Reflections
Completely Agree or Mostly Agree

Contexts

The STRENGTHS research team understands the needs of the
community
100%

Some perspectives are NOT represented on the Design Team (Yes/
No)
29%

Other perspectives desired included: village leadership (chief, elders, church
leaders), public health officers, policy makers

Partnership Processes

Participation in discussion was equal among all DT members
100%

Discussion was dominated by a few individuals on the DT
7%

I felt that my opinions were taken into consideration during the
design process
93%

Intervention Design & Research

I liked how input from the STRENGTHS investigators was used to
select solution ideas
64%

I felt that decision-making power was shared equally between the DT
and STRENGTHS Research team
71%

Participatory Outcomes

I felt that I was a valuable member of the DT
100%

I felt there were barriers or consequences to participating in the DT
7%

Barriers included: travel time (distance), work conflicts, time required, difficulty
of design work

Participation in the DT taught me skills that I will use in the future
100%

Skills included: communication skills (listening, respectful discussion, building
consensus), HCD methods (brainstorming, empathy, refining ideas,
implementation), collaboration (especially with those with different
perspectives), eliciting community feedback, how to navigate the health
system, how to serve patients

At the end of the design process, I felt that the final STRENGTHS
intervention reflected decisions made during Design Team meetings
100%

I trust that the STRENGTHS research team will implement the
intervention as specified by the Design Team
71%

Constructive Feedback
More voting or rating of discussion topics

Shorten the process so it can be applied to urgent issues

Start sessions later to allow for participant transport

Break up more difficult sessions over multiple days

Involve more patients and have a component that directly educates them
about HTN and referrals

Use less medical language and jargon during sessions

Involve patients and other stakeholders earlier in the design process so they
can help draft the research proposal

Page 12 of 16

specifications, but also how community feedback drove
iterative redesign to enhance implementation.

Advancing human-centered implementation research
Our approach builds on the existing literature for
design-focused implementation by integrating participa-
tory design principles into the pre-implementation stage
of the STRENGTHS study [36]. Based on our experi-
ence, we propose “human-centered implementation re-
search” as a new conceptual framework that builds on
the extensive base of stakeholder engagement literature,
and defines inter-linkages and partnerships among key
actors (community stakeholders, the design team, and
study investigators) in the core activities of HCD and
implementation science: iterative and contextually driven
redesign, structured stakeholder engagement, and cycles
of implementation and evaluation in the community
(Fig. 4).
The STRENGTHS design process enhanced stake-
holder engagement by including community members
(including local clinicians and administrators) on the de-
sign team, which additionally reviewed and interpreted
information gathered during the baseline needs and con-
textual
assessment.
Early
and
frequent
stakeholder

engagement ensured consistent alignment with health
system initiatives and increased capacity for design
thinking in the community [26].
Iterative redesign enabled collaboration between the
design team and study investigators, who provided an
additional layer of input on design products from the
HCD process. Our design team used a co-creation ap-
proach, in which participants represented end-users of
the implementation strategy (not an external design
thinking team). As has been described in prior studies in
this setting, co-creation adds contextual insights not
only to design products but also to implementation pro-
cesses by building partnerships with local stakeholders
[18, 37].
Through implementation and evaluation of successive
prototypes, we generated actionable feedback from com-
munity stakeholders. This approach introduced prag-
matic boundaries to the HCD process to better align
with implementation research methods [13]. Acceptabil-
ity, appropriateness, and feasibility testing—core con-
cepts
of
the
implementation
science
literature—
formalized iterative feedback cycles of HCD. The final
prototype—the ultimate product of the HCD process—
will be implemented and evaluated in the cluster-

Fig. 3 Example of Iterative Redesign during STRENGTHS Design Process – Peer Navigator Skills Development

Page 13 of 16

randomized controlled trial. We will therefore be able to
evaluate whether our approach and method for integrat-
ing peer support strategies and HIT can address gaps in
referral systems for chronic disease management.
Human-centered implementation research seeks to ad-
dress a central tension in applying a design thinking
mindset to implementation research: how to integrate
HCD practices such as dynamic iteration, tolerance for
ambiguity, and rapid prototyping, with aspects of trad-
itional research where the study plans and procedures
are often determined a priori [13]. As we found in
STRENGTHS, the original project scope occasionally
constrained the design team’s brainstorming activities,
and some design team participants remained uncertain
about how the design process would ultimately inform
the implemented product. We recognize that addressing
these challenging questions—regarding transparency of
the design process, use of pre-determined intervention
specifications in the study protocol, and relationship be-
tween investigators and design team members—remain
central to successful human-centered implementation
research.

Nevertheless, our experience with STRENGTHS sug-
gests that integrating HCD methods with implementa-
tion research—rather than manifesting an “inherent
tension” between these disciplines—may optimize imple-
mentation strategies initially proposed by study investi-
gators [13]. Design team meetings enhanced scaffold
specifications described in the study protocol (i.e. use of
peers and HIT) through culturally and contextually spe-
cific details (e.g. defining the peer navigator role, deter-
mining
appropriate
training,
designing
the
HIT
interface). These essential details prioritized community
perspectives, reflecting how human-centered implemen-
tation research may harness the creativity of HCD within
the adaptation-focused framework of implementation
science. We anticipate and hope that our approach may
be replicable in other settings.

Limitations
We recognize that the ultimate product of our human-
centered implementation research process was specific
to our context in western Kenya and therefore may lack
generalizability.
However,
we
feel
that
our
overall

Fig. 4 Conceptual Model for Human-Centered Implementation Research – an approach to strengthening partnerships between community
stakeholders, the design team, and study investigators by defining their collaboration in core activities of implementation science: iterative and
contextually-driven redesign, structured stakeholder engagement, and cycles of implementation and evaluation in the community

Page 14 of 16

approach—human-centered implementation research—
can be relevant for other settings. We acknowledge that
our assessment of design team members’ reflections was
limited in scope, but we feel that important insights
were generated that will inform future studies and HCD
implementation. We also recognize that appropriateness
(not volume) of referrals is an important outcome to as-
sess; due to the small number of participants in the
feasibility pilot that was conducted, there were insuffi-
cient data to draw broader conclusions about the inter-
vention’s ability to prevent avert unnecessary referrals.
This important referral process metric is being actively
assessed in the ongoing STRENGTHS trial. Finally, as
the cluster-randomized controlled trial studying the
STRENGTHS implementation strategy is ongoing, we
cannot determine the ultimate effectiveness in terms of
referral process metrics or health outcomes.

Conclusion
In this study, we utilized a human-centered implementa-
tion research process to design the implementation
strategy prototypes and test them for acceptability, ap-
propriateness, and feasibility. Our experience supports
the use of human-centered implementation research to
create contextually specific implementation strategies.
Our new conceptual model supplements previous litera-
ture to more fully capture the relationship between
HCD and implementation research by emphasizing
inter-linkages among study investigators, design team
members, and community stakeholders. This approach
may be used in different settings to enhance stakeholder
engagement, implementation research, and population
health.