Developing an mHealth program to improve 
HIV care continuum outcomes among young 
Black gay and bisexual men

Aaron Plant1*, Paul Sparks1, Deborah Neffa Creech1, Ta’Jalik Morgan1, Jeffrey D. Klausner2, 
Cornelis Rietmeijer3 and Jorge A. Montoya1 

Methods
Inspiration for AMP
The concept for Amp emerged from a series of infor-
mal conversations between our team and HIV linkage 
and retention staff from a large HIV service organiza-
tion in Los Angeles, CA, beginning in 2015. These staff 
expressed a need for programs to better engage gay 
and bisexual men living with HIV in care, to keep them 
retained in care, and to help them achieve viral sup-
pression. We had additional conversations with staff 
at HIV service organizations in San Francisco, CA, Los 
Angeles, CA, and Huntsville, AL, in 2018. Organiza-
tion staff suggested a program that could function as 
both a stand-alone intervention for people living with 
HIV and something that could be integrated into their

organization’s HIV testing, linkage, and retention work-
flow to improve HIV care continuum outcomes.
From 2016–2018, we held individual and group dis-
cussions with 16 young gay and bisexual men who were 
diverse in age and race/ethnicity to assess their needs 
with regard to HIV care and to investigate potential solu-
tions. These conversations revealed that despite the avail-
ability of highly effective treatment, an HIV diagnosis 
remained devastating. Many expressed feeling isolated 
after their diagnosis and overwhelmed with the infor-
mation they were provided to manage their condition. 
When discussing possible solutions with these men, we 
developed the initial concept of an mHealth program 
(e.g., mobile website or app) that could include content 
(e.g., personal narrative videos and articles), tools, and a 
community of peers to holistically support people living 
with HIV. In 2018, we received funding to use HCD to 
fully develop the concept. We decided to focus the pro-
gram on YBGBM due to the HIV care continuum dispar-
ities experienced by this group.
HCD is an approach to creating programs or products 
that requires a deep understanding and intensive involve-
ment of stakeholders to ensure that programs meet the 
needs of the intended users [54, 55]. This process has 
been used to create innovative and culturally appropri-
ate programs [56] that are high in satisfaction, usability, 

and effectiveness [57] among intended audiences. The 
mixed methods approach described below follows the 
stages of HCD developed by the design firm IDEO [55]. 
This approach is highly iterative, enabling continuous 
improvement throughout the development process, and 
refinement even after the program is launched.

Stage 1: ideation
The first stage of the HCD process was intended to build 
upon the initial concept and to generate a large number 
of ideas for the functions, features, and design character-
istics of the program. We conducted focus groups with 
YBGBM and key informant interviews with HIV service 
providers in several U.S. cities to gain a better under-
standing of the needs of intended users and organizations 
that would implement the program. Interview and focus 
group data were analyzed for themes, which were used to 
develop prototype features in the subsequent stages.

Focus groups
From March–April 2019, we conducted six in-person 
focus groups with a total of 50 YBGBM, ranging from 
18–30 years old (see Table 1). Focus group participants 
were recruited through our team’s network of contacts. 
Groups were held at HIV service organizations or com-
munity spaces in Alabama (Huntsville) and California 

(San Francisco, Los Angeles, and Oakland). Participants 
gave written consent and received a $100 incentive for 
a 90-min group. We developed a semi-structured dis-
cussion guide to investigate the experiences of YBGBM 
living with HIV, specifically barriers and facilitators to 
HIV care continuum outcomes. During the discussion, 
we asked for feedback on The Body, an HIV website to 
which patients are often referred for HIV information. 
We showed participants two sections, the home page 
and the newly diagnosed section, and asked what they 
thought of this website, if it seemed helpful, and how it 
could be improved, if at all. We then showed four exist-
ing videos available online (two of young men living with 
HIV and two of HIV providers) to assess preferences for 
video content. Finally, we read a description of our ini-
tial program concept and solicited feedback both gener-
ally and on specific content topics, tools, and features. 
Focus groups were audio recorded and professionally 
transcribed.

Key informant interviews
In July 2019, we conducted 12 key informant interviews 
in person or by telephone with HIV service providers at 
five different organizations in Alabama (Huntsville), Lou-
isiana (New Orleans), Texas (Dallas), and California (Los 
Angeles and Riverside; see Table 1). Providers gave either 
written or verbal consent and received a $75 incentive for 
a 60-min interview. All worked at HIV service organiza-
tions that provide case management and linkage to care 
to YBGBM, and 10 worked at organizations that also 
offer HIV treatment. We interviewed providers from dif-
ferent levels within the organization, including executive, 
senior, and frontline staff. We developed a semi-struc-
tured interview guide to solicit both general and specific 
input on program content, tools, and features that could 
be useful to YBGBM living with HIV and that would help 
staff to better support clients along the HIV care contin-
uum. Provider interviews were audio recorded and pro-
fessionally transcribed.

Stage 2: rapid prototyping
Rapid prototyping is a methodology used in HCD that 
involves the iterative testing and refining of low-fidelity 
prototypes to efficiently optimize program elements. 
YBGBM and providers were recruited for rapid pro-
totyping through our team’s HIV service organization 
contacts. Rapid prototyping sessions were carried out 
over two days each in California (Los Angeles), Ala-
bama (Huntsville), and Mississippi (Jackson), with 
a total of 31 YBGBM ages 20–30 and 12 HIV ser-
vice providers (see Table  1). Sessions took place from 

August–September 2019. Each session was conducted 
in-person with individual participants by one of three 
study staff. Participants provided written informed con-
sent and received a $100 incentive for a 60-min session.
During these sessions, low-fidelity hand-drawn and 
digital prototypes were used to gather participants’ input 
on: the user interface; content, tools, and resources to 
be included in the program; how YBGBM might want 
to interact in a community of peers; ways to maximize 
program engagement; and whether the program should 
include an app, mobile website, or both. At the end of 
each day of prototyping, responses were integrated into 
revised prototypes and tested again the next day.
Prior to the rapid prototyping, we produced 13 videos 
on eight topics based on needs expressed by YBGBM 
participants and providers in the ideation stage. We 
varied the settings (a person’s home or a film studio), 
speakers (YBGBM or HIV clinician), and video char-
acteristics (e.g., subject looking directly into the cam-
era or off camera, and heavy or light editing) in order 
to give participants the opportunity to provide feed-
back on both video content and style. Each participant 
was shown at least two videos, and videos were evenly 
divided between participants.

Stage 3: user feedback
Online survey
An online survey was conducted from September–
October 2019 to gather detailed feedback on the range 
of program features that had been developed and 
refined in stages 1 and 2 and to assess the generaliz-
ability of those findings. The survey instrument was 
designed to capture preferences for content topics, 
tools, features, and resources, as well as to assess the 
acceptability, feasibility, and usefulness of the concept 
among a national sample of YBGBM living with HIV, 
ages 18–29 (n = 200; see Table 2). This sample size was 
sufficient given the intention was for descriptive pur-
poses rather than statistical analysis. The survey began 
with questions designed to screen out participants 
who did not meet these inclusion criteria. Survey par-
ticipants were recruited through our team’s network 
of HIV service organization contacts and through paid 
advertisements on geo-spatial networking apps and 
social media platforms. The survey took an average of 
20 min to complete. Duplicate responses (e.g., consecu-
tive surveys from the same IP address or similar email 
addresses) and responses completed in under six min-
utes (deemed too fast given the survey length) were 
excluded from analysis. Participants provided consent 
online before taking the survey and received a $20 
incentive.

Usability testing of the functional prototype
Using data from stages 1 and 2 and the online survey, we 
worked with a website developer to create a working digi-
tal prototype of the app. The objective of the online usa-
bility testing was to identify potential functionality issues 
and use the findings to maximize program acceptability 
and effectiveness. Participants were sent a link to the 
prototype and asked to view it on their smartphone. The 
prototype included the proposed topics, tools, and videos 
developed in stage 2, but was designed in grayscale with-
out any branding or images. This approach allowed us to 
test usability of the interface without distracting users 
with design elements.
Usability testing participants (n = 21; see Table 1) were 
recruited through our team’s network of HIV service 
providers and from the online survey, with participants 
contacted in the order in which they completed the sur-
vey. Usability testing sessions were conducted in October 
2021, with study team members observing participants 
interacting with the prototype over Zoom. During the 
session, participants were presented with several tasks 
related to finding information, tools, or resources on the 
prototype (e.g., “find and use the medication reminder” 
or “find a video about disclosing HIV status to sex part-
ners”). Participants were also asked open-ended ques-
tions about topics, community features, tools, and 
resources; ease and predicted frequency with which 
they would use the app; and whether most of the con-
tent should be video- or text-based. Finally, each partici-
pant orally completed the System Usability Scale, or SUS 
[58], a reliable tool for measuring usability comprised of 
10 questions with five response options, from “strongly 
agree” to “strongly disagree.” Each testing session lasted 
approximately one hour. Participants provided verbal 
consent and received a $100 incentive.

Analyses
Stage 1 focus group and interview transcripts were 
coded using deductive and inductive approaches by two 
of the team members experienced with qualitative data 
analysis. They developed codes based on the interview 
and discussion guides and added codes as they emerged 
from the data. Transcripts were coded to identify themes 
relevant to developing the app and its components 

(e.g., content, tools, community features, and resources). 
In stage 2, written notes of participants’ feedback dur-
ing rapid prototyping sessions were entered into a digital 
spreadsheet after each session and were categorized into 
prototype elements that received positive feedback and 
those needing improvement. In stage 3, survey data and 
the SUS results were assessed using descriptive statistics 
(e.g., frequencies) in SPSS v.26. During usability test-
ing of the functional prototype, task completion times 
were captured by the interviewer using a timer and 
were used to calculate mean and range values. Qualita-
tive responses were analyzed for common themes with 
regard to satisfaction with content, tools, usability, and 
likely uptake of the program.

Results
Stage 1: ideation
Seven main themes emerged from the focus groups and 
interviews. Sample quotes for each theme can be found 
in Table 3.

Learning about HIV after a new diagnosis is overwhelming, 
and available online resources do not meet the needs 
of YBGBM
Many focus group participants described being devas-
tated after receiving their HIV diagnosis (e.g., feeling iso-
lated, depressed, and afraid of dying and social rejection). 
Participants also reported having many questions about 
living with HIV (e.g., effects of HIV and medications on 
long-term health, and transmission to partners). Many 
participants felt overwhelmed with receiving so much 
information about HIV from their providers right after 
their diagnosis.
Participants reported seeking HIV information 
online, often even years after their diagnosis. Sev-
eral participants stated that it was difficult to find 
trustworthy and accurate information. When partici-
pants were shown The Body website, many felt it was 
too text-heavy and visually busy to easily find needed 
information.
Most interviewed HIV service providers said that they 
wanted a medically accurate, easy-to-navigate infor-
mational website to offer clients, but that they were not 
aware of such a resource. Few providers reported refer-
ring clients to websites or apps, other than several who 
recommend apps specifically for medication adherence. 
Providers said that clients receive HIV information, 
including written materials, during the first clinic visit 
after their diagnosis. However, many providers said cli-
ents struggle with important concepts related to living 
with HIV (e.g., CD4 count and viral load) and would ben-
efit from ongoing education.

Participants expressed a desire for video‑based content 
and programs
YBGBM participants and HIV service providers felt that 
the new program should include videos of both people 
living with HIV and experts. Participants and providers 
said that program videos (and the content overall) should 
be informational and motivational, should feel authen-
tic as opposed to overly polished, and should include a 
diversity of stories (e.g., people at different stages of liv-
ing with HIV, and stories of challenges and successes). 
Some YBGBM and providers felt that the content should 
be delivered through both text and video, as people learn 
in different ways.
When participants were shown sample video testimo-
nials of other young men living with HIV they responded 
very favorably; many said that seeing peers speak openly 
about their HIV status and sexual orientation was moti-
vating and empowering. Some providers felt that includ-
ing videos of peers navigating challenges related to living 
with HIV could increase YBGBM’s self-efficacy related 
to care continuum outcomes and help them build skills 
to stay healthy (e.g., videos could show YBGBM discuss-
ing their strategies for taking medication and staying in 
care). They also thought that the program could reduce 
fears and offer hope by showing people thriving while liv-
ing with HIV.

YBGBM need more support related to disclosure and stigma, 
which can impact their HIV care outcomes
Numerous YBGBM participants across groups described 
the impact that disclosure issues and HIV stigma have 
had on their lives. Some YBGBM reported positive 
experiences with disclosure, describing telling others as 
cathartic and facilitating social support. However, many 
shared fears or negative stories of disclosing their HIV 
status, with some experiencing stigma from friends, 
partners, and family members, which added to feelings 
of isolation. YBGBM participants also said HIV stigma 
within the gay community (e.g., on dating apps) exac-
erbated challenges with finding partners and establish-
ing romantic relationships. Both YBGBM and providers 
talked about stigma being related to fear and misinfor-
mation about HIV transmission (e.g., family members 
believing that HIV can be transmitted from hugging or 
sharing dishes). Several providers suggested that the pro-
gram provide accurate information to family members 
to reduce this stigma and demonstrate how to support a 
loved one living with HIV.
YBGBM participants and providers mentioned dis-
closure issues and stigma as barriers to accessing HIV 
care, to medication adherence, and to staying in care. 
For instance, some YBGBM reported missing medical

appointments due to fears of being seen at a clinic or 
missing medication doses because they did not want 
to take the pills in front of others. Both providers and 
YBGBM participants suggested that the program include 
videos with examples for when and how to disclose their 
status. Further, participants and providers emphasized 
that the program should address confidentiality concerns 
(e.g., HIV should not be in the program name).

YBGBM would benefit from opportunities to learn and get 
support from others living with HIV
Most YBGBM participants said that they rarely discuss 
HIV with anyone, even with others whom they know are 
living with HIV. However, participants in all groups dis-
cussed the value of getting support and information from 
other people living with HIV. Providers also emphasized 
the importance of spaces where people living with HIV 
can support one another in a safe environment. Both 
YBGBM and providers responded enthusiastically to the 
idea of building a community of people living with HIV 
where they can share their experiences (e.g., through cre-
ating a profile, direct messaging, or posting on a forum) 
as part of the program. Some providers also suggested 
that the program could include trained peer mentors liv-
ing with HIV who can answer questions and provide sup-
port and resources.

A holistic approach would be most useful for people living 
with HIV and for service organizations
Participants across focus groups wanted a wide range 
of content about living with HIV, including informa-
tion about medical treatment, disclosure, sex and rela-
tionships, nutrition and exercise, mental health, and 
resources. Participants explained that having holistic 
content would be most beneficial, as information needs 

vary from person to person and also change over time 
(e.g., right after a diagnosis versus several years later). 
All HIV providers felt the program should include con-
tent, tools, and resources on a wide range of issues that 
affect well-being and HIV care outcomes of YBGBM 
(e.g., unaddressed mental health issues, disclosure, 
stigma, substance use, HIV misinformation, medication 
adherence, awareness of available resources, and medical 
distrust). Providers felt that a “one stop shop” approach 
would make the program more acceptable, engaging, and 
useful to both YBGBM and to HIV organizations.

YBGBM want an HIV program that is not exclusively focused 
on them
The majority of YBGBM participants felt that the pro-
gram’s videos and community should represent people 
living with HIV of diverse races/ethnicities, gender iden-
tities, sexual orientations, and experiences. Many par-
ticipants said that they would not relate to a program 
that was only for Black men living with HIV, or they felt 
that this would be stigmatizing (as a program for only 
YBGBM would suggest that they are the primary group 
affected by HIV). Others felt that a diverse community of 
people living with HIV should be included yet the expe-
riences of young people of color should be emphasized. 
Very few participants felt that the program should only 
be for YBGBM.

Digital programs can help HIV providers and their 
organizations reach HIV care continuum outcome goals
All HIV service providers interviewed felt that an 
mHealth program could help them to support their 
clients through linkage, treatment initiation, adher-
ence, retention, and viral suppression. Providers men-
tioned several features that could be useful, including a 

messaging platform that could be used by case managers, 
clinic appointment and medication reminders, and a way 
to track CD4/viral load test results. Providers at organi-
zations that already offer some of these features (e.g., a 
messaging system) thought that an mHealth program 
could be very useful for other components (e.g., videos 
addressing HIV stigma, HIV education, and a commu-
nity for people living with HIV). Providers suggested that 
the program could be offered to clients as soon as they 
receive a diagnosis in order to provide social support and 
encourage linkage during that critical time. All providers 
said that their staff are open to using technology and that 
the proposed mHealth program could be feasibly inte-
grated into their workflow.

Stage 2: rapid prototyping
Insights from the focus groups and interviews were 
incorporated into the development of a series of proto-
types covering potential content topics, sample videos, 
tools, and resources (See Table 4 for ways that findings 
from each stage of research were used to improve the 
program).

Content
When presented with a list of program topics and sub-
topics, participants expressed that the proposed content 
was comprehensive and that it would appeal to people 
at different stages of living with HIV. When asked which 
topics would be most helpful to them personally, par-
ticipants offered a range of responses, which supported 
findings from stage 1 that having holistic content would 
engage a broader audience. All participants emphasized 
the value of information specifically for individuals newly 
diagnosed with HIV and said that content should empha-
size that people can lead a long, healthy life with HIV. 
Specific topics that participants found helpful included: 
U = U (Undetectable = Untransmittable); that people liv-
ing with HIV can have a fulfilling love life and sex life; 
mental health (e.g., addressing depression and anxiety, 
and dealing with trauma and stress); maintaining overall 
health (e.g., diet and exercise, preventing sexually trans-
mitted infections, and managing substance use); under-
standing medications and their side effects; and examples 
of how to disclose their HIV status to partners, family, 
and friends.
Nearly all participants supported the idea of delivering 
most of the content through videos featuring individu-
als living with HIV and experts. The majority preferred 
video over text-based content or desired a combination of 
video and text. Similar to focus group participants, pro-
totyping participants expressed the desire for videos fea-
turing diverse people living with HIV. Participants also 
liked the idea of featuring videos of doctors, mental health 

specialists, and case managers from the organization 
where they receive their HIV care. Participants suggested 
several ways to keep them engaged with the program, such 
as incorporating motivational content (e.g., daily affirma-
tions and tips), regularly updating the program with new 
videos, sending notifications about new content (via app 
notifications or text messages), the ability to post their own 
content, and having a way to save and share content.
Participants responded favorably to the 13 sample 
videos we created and found the people in the videos to 
be relatable and authentic. Most considered the video 
lengths (ranging from 1.5 min to 4.5 min) to be appro-
priate. Notably, some participants who did not favor a 
particular video indicated they would simply switch to 
another video rather than discontinue using the pro-
gram. We tested versions of these videos where the sub-
ject did or did not speak directly into the camera, with 
participants overwhelmingly preferring the former.

Tools
Proposed tools, including adherence and appointment 
reminders, viral load and CD4 trackers, a tool to meet 
health and personal goals, and a notepad to write ques-
tions for providers received highly favorable feedback. 
Some participants expressed the desire to interact with 
mentors or case managers through the program. Oth-
ers suggested customizability or the inclusion of games. 
While some participants said they might not use every 
tool, they felt that including a range of tools was needed 
to meet the diverse needs of people living with HIV.

Community
Participants strongly advocated for having various ways 
to interact with other people living with HIV, including 
creating a profile, direct messaging, and responding to 
questions on a forum. They expressed a desire to share 
information and offer help to others, and they empha-
sized the potential for such a community to reduce 
stigma and isolation, and facilitate the exchange of useful 
information, strategies, and support. Some participants 
stressed the importance of mechanisms to address online 
bullying and proposed rules for community engage-
ment, such as prohibiting trolling and having methods 
for removing users who breach community guidelines. 
One participant recommended creating online support 
groups centered around specific topics.

Resources
Most participants felt the resources proposed, which 
included HIV care and treatment, mental health, hous-
ing, food assistance, career, legal, and education were 
comprehensive and useful. Participants emphasized the 
need to understand the full range of available resources

and to provide instructions and support for accessing 
them. Several participants suggested including hotlines 
as additional resources.

Rapid prototyping with providers
Providers reacted enthusiastically to the prototypes and 
felt that the mHealth program would help improve HIV 
care continuum outcomes. They felt it would provide 
their clients with an efficient means of engagement and 
support, as well as enhance the provision of medically 
accurate information. Some providers proposed intro-
ducing the app to newly diagnosed clients on their first 
visit to support linkage into care and treatment initia-
tion. One provider noted that newly diagnosed people 
are often overwhelmed with information, which makes 

it difficult to retain. This provider felt the program 
would allow clients to access important information 
when they are ready to receive it. Providers also sug-
gested potential improvements, such as renaming spe-
cific topics and including a feedback mechanism so 
clients could suggest service improvements for their 
organization. One provider early in stage 2 suggested 
developing a dashboard to enable staff to support cli-
ents as they use the app (e.g., a tool to message clients 
and suggest specific content or tools to assist them with 
specific challenges). This idea was tested with all sub-
sequent providers and they were all very supportive 
of this feature. All providers considered the mHealth 
program to be feasible for implementation within their 
organization Table 4.

Stage 3: user feedback
Online survey
Results from the online survey among YBGBM nation-
wide echoed the findings from stages 1 and 2 (See 
Table 5). For instance, a high percentage of respondents 
indicated that: including topics such as mental health 
(92%), recent diagnosis (91%), and sex and relationships 
(86.5%) is “very important”; having a community of 
young men living with HIV to communicate and share 
experiences with through the program would be “very 
helpful” (77%); and the program’s community should not 
be exclusive to YBGBM living with HIV (90%).
A large majority of respondents agreed that the pro-
gram concept was appealing (91.5%) and that it would 
be “very helpful” for both people recently diagnosed 
with HIV (90.5%) and those who have had HIV for two 
or more years (76%). Most respondents said the pro-
gram should include both a mobile app and a website 
(53.5%), followed by an app only (41.5%) or mobile web-
site only/other (5%). All participants said that they would 
use the program. When asked how often they thought 
they would use the program, 35.5% of respondents said 
they would use it at least once a day, and 82.5% said they 
would use it at least once a week.
Respondents reported the proposed tools and resources 
would be useful and helpful, in particular the CD4/viral 
load tracker and adherence tool (81.5% and 75%, respec-
tively, would “definitely” use these). Over 60% said they 
would “definitely” use a series of proposed community 
features (e.g., message forum, virtual support groups, 
and direct messages). Respondents indicated that the fol-
lowing would motivate them to continue using the app: 
interacting with other people living with HIV in the app 
community (83.5%); regularly adding new videos of 
people living with HIV telling their stories (73.5%) and of 
experts (72.5%); and the resources (73%) and tools (65.5%) 
on the app.

Usability testing of the functional prototype
Most usability testing participants completed their tasks 
on the working web-based prototype quickly, with many 
completing them within a few seconds (see Table 6 for 
average task completion times), indicating that the pro-
gram prototype was intuitive and easy to navigate. The 
prototype scored a 95.7 out of 100 on the SUS, indicat-
ing very high usability [58]. When presented with lists of 
tools (e.g., medication reminder, CD4/viral load tracker, 
and provider messaging), resources (e.g., mental health 
and support, housing, substance use treatment, and job 
and career), and community features (e.g., virtual support 
groups, ability to message mentors and other users, and 
ability to post videos or photos) that the program would 
include, participants shared that the content and features 

included the most important things that a person living 
with HIV would need. All participants said that they had 
never seen a website or app with our proposed program’s 
comprehensive content and tools. Nearly all favored hav-
ing program content that is mostly video-based versus 
text-based. All participants said they would use the pro-
gram, though with varying frequency—some would use it 
daily and others weekly or monthly.

Discussion
This study details the use of HCD to create Amp (Fig. 1), a 
holistic mobile app created to improve the health and well-
being of YBGBM living with HIV. Insights gathered across 
three stages of research—ideation, rapid prototyping, and 
user feedback—were iteratively incorporated to develop 
a program prototype that received high acceptability 
and usability ratings. HCD is a comprehensive approach 
that has been increasingly utilized in the development of 
mHealth programs [54, 59]. As demonstrated in this 
study, HCD is an approach that can yield high usabil-
ity, feasibility, acceptability, and potential uptake from 
end users. The use of HCD in this study, which included 
engaging YBGBM living with HIV and HIV service pro-
viders as co-creators, resulted in a desirable program 
with a combination of content, tools, and resources 
that participants had not previously seen all in the 
same place. Further, the Amp concept was described by 
providers as promising for engaging YBGBM living 
with HIV across the care continuum, which is impera-
tive to reducing HIV-related transmission, morbidity, 
and mortality [4, 5, 7].
Findings from our HCD research reinforced those 
identified in prior research regarding the needs of 
people living with HIV, including: social support [60], 
adherence support [53], HIV knowledge [61], programs 
to address stigma and discrimination [6, 11, 25, 62], and 
the general demand for more holistic approaches to HIV 
care [30, 31, 53]. Amp includes content, tools, and fea-
tures to address all of these needs. Amp offers several 
alternatives to the ways that YBGBM living with HIV 
usually receive support—including community features 
that allow users to create a profile, communicate with 
peers via forums and direct messaging, professionally 
produced video narratives, trained mentors who can 
be messaged on-demand, and a range of tools to sup-
port medication adherence, retention in care, and viral 
suppression. This wide variety of tools and resources is 
designed to meet the needs of YBGBM where they are, 
and as their needs change over time. Further, HIV ser-
vice providers were very enthusiastic about using Amp 
within their organization, to improve their services 
and help clients reach their HIV care continuum goals. 
While several existing mHealth HIV care continuum

interventions take a comprehensive approach [63], Amp 
is unique with regard to the holistic range of tools and 
content, and in its extensive use of custom-created per-
sonal narrative video content.
Our study has strengths stemming from the mixed 
methods approach it utilized. Intensive involvement of 
program end users and stakeholders is fundamental to 
designing interventions using HCD. During every stage 
of our research, we collected data from geographically 
diverse groups of YBGBM and providers, validating and 
triangulating findings at each stage. This is likely the rea-
son that Amp was so well received in the final user feed-
back stage.
While this study outlines a design process that was 
effective, there are several limitations to our findings 

that should be noted. Recruiting a sample of 200 HIV 
positive YBGBM for participation in a survey is logisti-
cally challenging, and it was not possible to ensure that 
this sample is representative of the broader population. 
Thus, our survey findings may not be generalizable to all 
YBGBM living with HIV in the U.S. Similarly, relying on 
our professional network of HIV service providers for 
much of the recruitment may have introduced some bias, 
especially as this meant that most YBGBM participants 
were linked to care. We attempted to mitigate this poten-
tial bias by working with multiple HIV service providers 
from diverse organizations who had direct connections 
to local populations, as well as by recruiting from a geo-
graphically diverse sample of YBGBM in stage 3, mostly 
via geospatial apps. Survey findings mirrored findings 

from other stages, which suggests that responses from 
stages 1 and 2 were minimally biased by our recruitment 
methods. Further, we administered the SUS verbally with 
usability testing participants over Zoom, which is dif-
ferent from the typical questionnaire-based approach. 
While we requested that participants give honest feed-
back in order to facilitate improvements to the app, it is 
possible that this approach resulted in response bias.
The results of these activities have led to the produc-
tion of Amp, a mobile app that has the content, tools, 
community, and resources identified as important among 
YBGBM and HIV service providers in our HCD pro-
cess. At the time of writing, the Amp mobile app is being 
developed with Phase II funding through a Small Busi-
ness Innovation Research Grant provided by the National 

Institutes on Minority Health and Health Disparities. 
Amp will be evaluated in a nationwide randomized con-
trolled trial in 2024, which will test the effectiveness of 
the application on knowledge, social support, linkage to 
care, medication adherence, retention in care, viral sup-
pression, mental health, and HIV related stigma among 
a relatively large sample of YBGBM living with HIV. Our 
team plans to disseminate Amp to organizations nation-
wide, including HIV service organizations, public health 
departments, and community organizations. Ideally, Amp 
will be offered to people immediately after an HIV diag-
nosis as well as to existing clients who are living with HIV.
This study adds to the limited research on using HCD 
to develop HIV mHealth programs. The evaluation study 
will be among the first randomized controlled studies of 

an HIV intervention developed with HCD. Although we 
attribute the early signs that Amp will be feasible, accept-
able, usable, and effective to the HCD process through 
which it was developed, further research is needed 
to understand the impact of HCD relative to other 
approaches. Future studies could also investigate using 
HCD to create mHealth self-management programs for 
other chronic illnesses.

Conclusions
We used HCD in a highly collaborative, multi-stage pro-
cess to develop an innovative mobile app that holistically 
addresses multiple health and wellness needs identified 
by YBGBM and HIV service providers. Each stage of the 
process identified barriers and facilitators to program 
uptake, with findings used to make the app more useful 
and engaging. These results support prior studies finding 
that intensive involvement of end users and stakeholders 
using HCD can yield innovative, acceptable, and culturally-
appropriate programs.

Abbreviations
YBGBM	
Young Black gay and bisexual men
MSM	
Men who have sex with men
HCD	
Human-centered design
CD4	
CD4 T lymphocytes; CD4 cells or T-cells
SUS	
System usability scale