User-Centered Design in a
Large-Scale Naval Ship Design
Program: Usability Testing of
Complex Military Systems—DDG
1000

& Vince Quintana, Robert A. Howells, and Lawrence Hettinger

COOPEX EVENTS, COGNITIVE WALKTHROUGHS,
AND INTERACTIVE EVALUATIONS
DD phase UAs require the application of a num-
ber of different evaluation techniques, primarily
due to variations in the level of developmental
maturity of the systems under investigation, as
well as the nature of the design questions to be
addressed. These evaluation techniques
(as shown in Figure 2) include Cognitive Walk-
throughs, COOPEXs, and Interactive
Evaluations.

As an example of the types of issues examined to
date, several DA events have been carried out to
examine the ease, efﬁciency, and effectiveness of
the use of the human–computer interfaces being
designed for use within the DDG 1000 Ship
Mission Center—the tactical nerve center of the
ship. Other DA events have focused on the de-
sign and layout of equipment on the ship’s
Bridge, Galley, and Damage Control facilities
among others. In each case, results from these
UT events have resulted in signiﬁcant modiﬁca-
tions to the design of ship systems, enhancing
their overall usability and effectiveness.

A variety of analytic techniques are used to sup-
port DA UT and UA events. These range from
‘‘cognitive walkthroughs’’ (cf. Dumas and

Redish 1995) of very early conceptual depictions
and representations of candidate systems to the
use of fully functional prototypes for hands-on
Human-In-The-Loop (HITL) UT. The purpose
of these events is to expose representative users
(generally active-duty US Navy ﬂeet personnel
with expertise matched to the system under con-
sideration) to various aspects of the design when
possible, and also to expose the design to exam-
ination by HSI engineers to head off potential
HSI problems of the design in its earliest stages.
The results of UTs and UAs conducted to date
have also resulted in signiﬁcant modiﬁcations
and improvements to the DDG 1000 design.

UTs/UAsandMethodsUsedwithintheDDG
1000Program
FULL-DIMENSIONAL MOCK-UPS
For several of the formative usability assess-
ments, the creation of a full-dimensional
mock-up was used, each built to the design
speciﬁcations deﬁned by the latest architectural
dimensions (Figure 3 is typical). The primary
purpose of these mock-ups was to evaluate the
utility of the area in question to support the
watchstations and functions contained within
those areas for any indications of design-
imposed human performance limitations
(i.e., line of site). In addition, end users were

Sailor input and performance evaluations are critical at all stages of design

Prototype Developmental Maturity Continuum

Advanced Prototype
Early Prototype
Functional Concept

Concept of Operations Exercises

Interactive Testing

Cognitive Walkthroughs

Figure 2: Usability test-
ing approaches as a
function of product
maturity

28 &2007 #1

brought to the test to provide a subjective
analysis of the design in question to ensure
that the designers and engineers had in fact
‘‘gotten it right’’ from an end-user perspective.
It also provided the systems and space
design engineers with an opportunity to
obtain data from experienced end users on
the optimum placement of equipment, displays,
and controls before completion of the
watchstation designs.

The advantage of this type of assessment comes
from the ability to make the ‘‘boxes’’ of which it
is made rapidly reconﬁgurable. Operators were
polled on their best assessment of the location of
various devices, and the test conductors were
literally able to reconﬁgure the space ‘‘on the
ﬂy.’’ With weighting and discussion, this would
lead to the best of breed consensus-derived con-
ﬁguration whose performance could be further
checked with a DV event.

MODELING AND SIMULATION (MISSILE
LAUNCHER COMPARTMENT)
For modeling and simulation needs, two types of
analysis tools were used by the DDG 1000 HSI-
DV-IPT (physics-based and dimensional-based
modeling). The use of modeling for dimensional-
based analysis is primarily a DA tool and was
in many cases used to catch a quick or cursory
advisory look at design products. Several system
and component engineers requested the use of
DV support to resolve the use of non-standard
solutions in cases where those solutions may

have impacted crew performance. An example
of this was the review conducted of the periph-
eral vertical launch system entrance door, which
was a non-standard design but required review
to ensure the door was usable by the crew, espe-
cially in emergency situations. A volumetric/
dimensional model was created of the notional
design, and 3D modeling was used to verify that
the door in question was in fact usable by a
95 percentile male in full Damage Control
Ensemble (see Figure 4).

The use of 3D modeling is an effective tool and
provides for the ability to make assessments
without actually having to ‘‘cut steel.’’ Properly
utilized, it is a great cost and time saver, and
provides for rapid feedback through the use of
almost instantaneous parameter change (elec-
tronic bulkheads are easier to move). It is
important to note here, however, that the most
important component of this method of testing
is to ensure that all components of this solution
set, including software, tools, and device mod-
els, are carefully and completely validated
through a recognized validation and
veriﬁcation process.

PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS (LINE-OF-SIGHT
STUDY)
Another test tool that has been used is the exe-
cution of performance analysis studies
conducted to quantify performance using more
traditional mathematical and engineering
approaches (Figure 5). This method is especially

Figure 4: Simulation modeling for human factors

Figure 3: Helicopter control station mock-up

2007 #1&29

important when determining precision perfor-
mance metrics required to support either design
decisions or precise estimations of the crew’s
abilities, especially critical tasks. As an example,
a performance analysis test was required to de-
termine the ﬁeld of view that a given design
would provide crew members to support a spe-
ciﬁc watchstation. Combining design data with
known human ergonomic distribution data en-
abled the test engineer to determine what
capabilities of ﬁeld of vision the operator must
have to support the accomplishment of a speciﬁc
task, which in this case was to observe the ﬂight
deck during aircraft recovery and takeoff. The
results of this particular case indicated that a
change of the operators’ location was required,
and retesting was able to conclude that the new
position would provide much better operator
performance.

HITL—CONFIRMATION OF MANNING ESTI-
MATES (POCKETIZED REFUELING STATION)
A number of the DDG 1000 HSI-DV-IPT UTs
were driven by a need to conﬁrm that estimates
of design performance to enhance crew perfor-
mance and reduction in crewing were viable.
A signiﬁcant portion of the HSI effort on DDG
1000 has been to reduce the crew size to support
minimum crewing. This, however, cannot be
successful if the remaining crew members are
incapable of safely supporting sustainment evo-
lutions essential to supporting a ship’s
operations. An example of this is the HITL UA
that was conducted to conﬁrm that the ship
could refuel using a new conﬁguration
‘‘pocketized fueling station’’ that is located

behind a large sliding door inside the skin of
the ship (Figure 6). With the cooperation of the
In Service Engineering Agency (ISEA), a fully
functional mock-up of the station was built,
and refueling evolutions were conducted. This
was done using only those number of personnel
assigned to watchstations planned to conduct
that operation in accordance with the Proposed
Ships Manning Document. The tests were
quite successful and some safety improvements
were recommended to make the evolution even
safer, and in fact proved that the evolution
could be performed with fewer crew members
in an emergency. It also provided the design
engineers with an opportunity to conduct
‘‘overnight’’ reconﬁguration of the space to
ﬁnd the best possible conﬁguration of
equipment and controls.

HITL—PROCEDURAL SEQUENCE PERFOR-
MANCE (ADVANCED GUN SYSTEM)
As discussed by Kaber and Endsley (2001), one
of the most signiﬁcant human performance
problems associated with the use of extensive
automation is the creation of the OOTL or ‘‘Out
Of The Loop’’ problem discussed in their re-
search. For the DDG 1000 HSI team, one of our
primary concerns has also been the ability of the
crew to perform certain emergent tasks when the
ship is damaged, responding to secondary oper-
ational methods when automation fails, or
simply to support those ‘‘cats and dogs’’ evolu-
tions that are such an important part of everyday
sustainment of the ship and that automation

Figure 5: Operator line-of-sight study for aircraft operations

Figure 6: Human-In-The-Loop testing of the DDG 1000 re-
fueling station

30 &2007 #1

cannot perform (there are some things people
have to do for the ship . . . like unclogging the
toilets).

Several of these tests have been conducted
to date, with considerable emphasis being
placed on ensuring that these tasks can be
accomplished with the tools and procedures
at hand, that they can be performed safely, and
that the crew is provided with the necessary
training to perform these tasks if they are called
upon to do so. Given the maturity of various
aspects of the design, much of this work to date
has been with the ship’s weapons systems and
has led to early identiﬁcation of potential
problems, as well as provided positive
indications that these systems have been, for
the most part, Human-Centered Design (HCD)
optimized.

For example, in Figure 7, two experienced ﬂeet
sailors are shown executing an emergency re-
covery procedure for the Advanced Gun System
magazine to demonstrate that the ammunition
pallets could be relocated by the crew in the
magazine, in case of system failure. This effort
was a cooperative test and analysis that com-
bined the efforts of the ISEA, HSI engineers,
safety engineers, the DDG 1000 training Cross
Product Team, the original equipment manufac-
turer (OEM), and the prototype control
authority.

LessonsLearnedfromUTs/UAsandMethods
UsedwithintheDDG1000Program
We can summarize our lessons learned into two
categories: process lessons learned and design
lessons learned. The design lessons are derived
from the test outcomes and are summarized in
Figure 8. It is important to note that these out-
comes have a very speciﬁc ship-building
taxonomy assigned to them and that those labels
are associated with their adjudication. The indi-
vidual items, however, have very speciﬁc HSI,
safety, and training labels assigned to them and
are maintained as such in the DDG 1000 HSI
test outcomes Signiﬁcant Findings Database.
Post test, they are all examined for root cause
and worked in accordance with the DDG 1000
Human Systems Integration Plan-deﬁned
process and fed back into the design using pre-
scribed engineering processes. They are not all
easily mitigated as the usual compromises that
need to be negotiated (space, weight, cost, etc.)
exist with the DDG 1000 program as with all
ship-building programs. However, by adding a
scientiﬁc process to this evolution, it enables the
HSI engineers to provide more credible value to
their arguments and recommendations. Even
more importantly, by combining these efforts
with other Cross Product Teams (Training
and Safety), it provides a greater return on
investment from the events as the data gathered
provide feedback on several aspects of the design
simultaneously and reinforce the priority of
some outcomes.
Figure 7: Fleet test participants conducting emergency recov-
ery procedures in the Advanced Gun System magazine

Figure 8: Summary of usability test ﬁndings (relative distribu-
tion)

2007 #1&31

The process lessons learned are very speciﬁc
overall to process, and the logistics of test exe-
cution. For DDG 1000, the HSI UT program is
an ISO-compliant, Work Instruction-prescribed
process. Each step of the process, from candidate
test selection and prioritization to outcomes ad-
judication and prioritization, is carefully deﬁned
and monitored for both completeness and qual-
ity. They are also governed by ﬁscal realities as
not everything can be tested; hence, a reasonable
means approach to prioritization is a must.

SELECTING TEST CANDIDATES
Candidates were chosen using a grading system
based on the following priorities:

Design Uncertainty – Design uncertainty refers
to those design items that either the systems en-
gineers or the HSI team deems as having some
effect on the crewing plans and models. They are
characterized within the Manning Uncertainty
Issues List (MUIL) and are then assigned a de-
gree of relationship between a proposed test
event candidate and an MUIL item or items. If a
candidate event directly addresses an MUIL
Category 1 item, then it has a higher degree of
applicability than if it addresses an MUIL Cate-
gory 3 item. MUIL item category values are
assumed to reﬂect HSI management and pro-
gram priorities.

Manning KPP Requirement or Issue – The man-
ning KPP value is a set target that includes both
the crew and the air detachment. When a design
does not meet requirements, it is possible that
the manning KPP will be at risk if more crew
members must be added to resolve the design
problem. A candidate event that can detect/
prevent a design problem that requires a large
manning increase will have a high priority value,
while an event that involves smaller potential
manning increases will be assigned a lower
priority value.

Human Factors Engineering Considerations –
A system may fail to meet requirements due to
a failure of hardware components, human com-
ponents, or both. This criterion refers to all

aspects of system performance or functions that
are related to human components of the system.
This includes human performance consider-
ations such as operator workload, speed,
accuracy, and situation awareness and
traditional human factors and ergonomics
considerations such as lighting, control arrange-
ment, workspace layout, operator positioning,
and dimensional compatibility of workspaces
and clearances.

System Operational Safety – This criterion
refers to the probability that one or more
crew members may be killed or injured if a
system does not perform as required. As
the probability and number of injuries
(which can be detected via a candidate event)
increases, the priority of the candidate event
increases.

HSI Requirements Coverage – This criterion
refers to the spread of assessment events across
the set of HSI requirements. It is important that
all HSI requirements be veriﬁed. If a few
requirements are covered by most of the events,
but others are left unveriﬁed, then there is a
problem. Events that are useful for assuring
that all requirements will be veriﬁed will be
considered to have high priority.

SELECTING A TEST METHOD
Each test is then run through a series of ﬁlters
beginning with Table 1, to determine an
execution method, location, and opportunity,
so that the test can be set in motion. The
test methods are prescribed by DDG 1000
requirements documents, and the Total Ship
Integrated Test program and schedule. Every
attempt is made to use ‘‘targets of opportunity,’’
in other words tests that are already scheduled,
to leverage costs and availability. The HSI-
DV-IPT has ‘‘piggy-backed’’ as many test
opportunities as it can, given schedule and
resources.

Conclusion
HSI UT is a signiﬁcant and vital element
of any HCD effort. A comprehensive and

32 &2007 #1

methodological plan, speciﬁc to the program
under design, is however required for it to be
effective and the program-speciﬁc methodology
and processes must be agreed upon and imple-
mented early so that early entry economic and
HCD-inﬂuenced returns can be realized to
greatest opportunity. This must include every-
thing from selecting test items and objectives to
adjudicating the outcomes. A synergy of (Safety,
Training, OEMs, etc.) effort to maximize the
tests to provide relevant feedback to both
designers and system engineers as early in the
design as possible cannot be overemphasized as
change cost growth (a key program driver)
expands almost explosively as the program
matures and makes HCD change implementa-
tion even more difﬁcult. There are many tools
and methods for actually executing the tests and
assessments, and the efﬁcacy of each needs to be
deﬁned on a test-by-test requirements basis, with
ﬂexibility being the operative word.

Lastly, the test methods selected must be ﬂexible
enough to examine, even at small sample rates,
all aspects of the human components of the
design.