Developing the system architecture
for conducting synchronous paediatric
feeding assessments via telepractice

Madeline Raatz1,2
, Elizabeth C Ward2,3, Jeanne Marshall1,2

and Clare L Burns2,4

Methods and results

A four-phase iterative process, integrating principles of
human-centred design,2,3 was used to develop and evalu-
ate the system (Figure 1). The study was conducted with
ethical exemption from The University of Queensland.

Phase 1: Understanding and specifying use

Phase 1 involved collaboration between four clinicians
with diverse experiences (two experienced adult tele-
practice researchers; two experienced paediatric feeding
clinicians). This design team identiﬁed the context of

use, including identiﬁcation of key users and stakehold-
ers in the model, characteristics of users, goals and
tasks required to be completed and the system environ-
ment.2 It was identiﬁed that the audio-visual system
needed to be sufﬁciently ﬂexible to facilitate a range
of tasks/observations including infant oral reﬂex exam-
ination, oral motor assessment, breastfeeding, bottle
feeding, cup drinking and solid food trials, different
seating/hold positions, infant/child posture/position
for feeding, respiratory rate/colour change during feeding
and parent–child interaction. As assessments were to be
conducted in patient homes, it was identiﬁed that multi-
ple forms of consumer-grade equipment (e.g. laptop,
tablets) would need to be considered and trialled in plan-
ning. Speciﬁc consideration was given to the capacity of
equipment to be positioned and re-positioned to capture
the necessary visual/audio footage of the parent and child
in speciﬁc situations (e.g. assessment of nipple attachment
and suck-swallow-breath pattern during breastfeeding).
Four main camera angles were proposed to enable cap-
ture of required visual information: a wide-angled front
on view; a close-up front on view; a 45 camera angle;
and a front-on long-shot. Speciﬁc assessment tasks, such
as
the
infant
oral
reﬂex
and
non-nutritive
suck
assessment, are typically completed by a face-to-face
clinician.22 Consideration was given to how to complete
these tasks in a telepractice environment, with modiﬁca-
tion so that the parent would complete these tasks
under verbal instruction from the telepractice speech
pathologist.

Phase 2: User-based testing (simulation)

Phase 2 involved multiple trials of the system in a range
of simulated environments, with modiﬁcations made
based on user feedback from the research team.
Using infant mannequins, members of the team por-
trayed the online clinician and parent roles to under-
take trials of all identiﬁed assessment tasks using a
variety of devices (e.g. smart phone, laptop). Whilst
these trials conﬁrmed that the research team were
able to achieve all assessment elements using any move-
able device (e.g. laptop), a desktop computer was
unsuitable for assessment needs due to difﬁculty repo-
sitioning the camera. Device cameras also needed to be
positioned at a 45 angle from the child and feeder
(Figure 2) as user testing identiﬁed that the child’s
bottle or cup and/or the feeder’s hand obstructed clini-
cian view if the camera was positioned front-on.
A wearable breastfeeding simulator was utilised to con-
duct simulated breastfeeding trials. Feedback from
trials with this device determined that a smart phone,
due to its manoeuvrability, was the ideal device for this
task. The phone, positioned approximately 10 cm
above the mother’s shoulder, enabled visualisation of

Phase 1: 
Understanding 
and specifying 
use 

Phase 2: 
User-based 
testing 
(simulation) 

Phase 3: 
User-based 
testing (with 
parents and 
children) 

Phase 4: 
Used-centred 
evaluation and 
feedback 

Figure 1. The four-phase iterative human-design process used
to develop system architecture.

553

the mother’s breast and the infant’s mouth and detec-
tion of feeding sounds (Figure 3).
In preparation for Phase 3, telepractice fact sheets
were drafted to help improve user experience: one for
breast/bottle-feeding infants and one for older children.
These fact sheets were intended to improve the usabil-
ity of the telepractice system for parents, including
information regarding technical and set-up require-
ments (e.g. device video/audio capabilities, providing
preferred toys and food/ﬂuid); device connection; opti-
misng lighting and sound; troubleshooting technical
difﬁculties; and plan for medical emergency support
(if required).

Phase 3: User-based testing (with parents
and children)

Phase 3 involved user-based testing with ten typically
developing children (aged 1 month to 6 years) and their
mothers (n¼ 8). Synchronous telepractice feeding assess-
ments were conducted in participant homes, led by an
experienced paediatric speech pathologist located in a hos-
pital facility. Participants utilised a variety of personal
devices (Table 1), whilst the telepractice clinician used a
desktop computer with a Logitech 1080p HD Pro webcam
and Jabra SPEAK 410 MS speaker. Videoconferencing
calls were made via a secure web-based platform provided
by the health service (free to participants) with dual image
layout and a bandwidth of >0.4 Mbps.
Nine telepractice appointments were successfully
conducted using the procedures conﬁrmed from feed-
back during Phases 1 and 2 (Figure 4). One appoint-
ment could not be completed due to patient-end
internet connectivity issues that were unable to be
resolved. Of those assessments completed, all parents
of infants successfully conducted the infant oral reﬂex
and non-nutritive suck assessment following the online
clinician’s instruction.
User feedback was used after each session to
enhance the design. After the ﬁrst two assessments it
became clear that parents were taking a long time, and
experiencing difﬁculty capturing images for assessment
of positioning and the intra-oral examination during the
appointment, with some images inadequate for clinical
decision making. For subsequent appointments, modiﬁ-
cations to the telepractice fact sheets included instruc-
tions for the parent on how to collect images of the

Figure 2. Simulation user-based testing enabling view of the
parent and child to facilitate assessment of feeding and parent–
child interaction.

Figure 3. User-based testing with wearable breastfeeding simulator: (a) smart phone positioning above the mother’s shoulder
assisted and (b) visualisation of attachment and feeding/suckling.

554

child’s usual feeding position and oral cavity, to send to
the telepractice clinician prior to an appointment.

Phase 4: Used-centred evaluation and feedback

Although feedback was sought from the research team,
clinicians and parents throughout the design process,
further verbal feedback was sought from all parents
immediately following their telepractice appointment.
Feedback from the research team identiﬁed that the
ﬁnal system design (incorporating both synchronous
and asynchronous telepractice aspects) effectively met
clinician need. It was reported that the designed tele-
practice system provided little disruption to clinical

workﬂow, and that the use of asynchronous images
was beneﬁcial to improve the diagnostic accuracy of
assessment tasks such as intra-oral examination due to
reduced image quality during synchronous assessment.
All parents also provided positive feedback about
their experience. They reported that the telepractice
session was easy to complete and that they only occa-
sionally experienced minor technical issues (e.g. initial
connection
difﬁculties,
occasional
audio
drop-out).
Parents liked that the clinician was available immediate-
ly via the phone to assist with troubleshooting. The
parents also stated the fact sheet provided prior to the
telepractice appointment assisted them in preparing for
the assessment and setting up the equipment. The simple

Table 1. Phase 3 participant information.

Child age
Child gender
Assessment tasks completed
Device used

1 month
Male
Developmental screen, infant oral reflex assessment, non-nutritive suck
assessment and breast-feeding assessment
Smart phone

1 month
Female
Developmental screen, infant oral reflex assessment and non-nutritive
suck assessment
Laptop

3 months
Male
Developmental screen, infant oral reflex assessment, non-nutritive suck
assessment and breast-feeding assessment
Smart phone

6 and 8 months
Male
Developmental screen, infant oral reflex assessment, non-nutritive suck
assessment, breast-feeding assessment, bottle-feeding assessment,
assessment of purees and assessment of cup drinking

Tablet

10 months
Male
Developmental screen, oral motor assessment, breast-feeding assess-
ment, assessment of purees and chewable solids
Laptop and
smart phone
2 years
Female
Developmental screen, oral motor assessment and assessment of
chewable solids and cup drinking
Laptop

2 years
Male
Developmental screen, oral motor assessment and assessment of puree,
chewable solids and cup drinking
Laptop

4 years
Female
Developmental screen, oral motor assessment and assessment of puree,
chewable solids and cup drinking
Tablet

4 years
Male
Developmental screen, oral motor assessment and assessment of puree,
chewable solids and cup drinking
Tablet

6 years
Female
Unable to be completed
Tablet and
smart phone

Figure 4. User-based testing with typically developing children enabling assessment of a) infant oral reflex exam, b) chewable solids
and c) purees.

555

instructions and visual examples provided on the fact
sheets assisted their preparation for the session, partic-
ularly planning positioning of their child at home in
relation to the device camera to optimise image quality.
Most parents of infants reported that the telepractice
clinician’s verbal instruction and modelling of the infant
oral reﬂex exam was sufﬁcient for them to complete the
required tasks. One parent identiﬁed that providing
access to video examples of these reﬂexes being elicited
may have also been beneﬁcial for her to complete the
assessment tasks. During breastfeeding assessments, two
mothers reported that they were able to hold the camera
independently, and two others had their partner hold the
camera. All participants agreed that having someone else
to hold the camera was, or would have been, beneﬁcial
for their appointment, and would be crucial for mothers
of children with breastfeeding difﬁculties. Mother’s
reported that they would not have been able to manage
any attachment/re-attachment difﬁculties whilst holding
the camera themselves. One mother who trialled using a
tablet device for the breastfeeding assessment reported
this was difﬁcult to hold and position.

Recommendations

On the basis of information gathered in all four phases,
ﬁnal equipment and system positioning recommenda-
tions were established (Table 2).

Discussion

An efﬁcient telepractice system needs to be appropriately
designed, integrating feedback from users and testing in

‘real world’ scenarios.2,3 The four-phase iterative human-
centred design process utilised in this research study
engaged both clinicians and parents to help design and
develop a viable telepractice system. Through this pro-
cess, it was identiﬁed that the integration of both syn-
chronous and asynchronous assessment elements was
required to optimise the feeding evaluation. The need
for both telepractice methods was identiﬁed through
a combination of user feedback regarding usability
and clinician identiﬁcation of required diagnostic image
quality. The combination of these telepractice elements is
not uncommon in speech pathology,6,14,23,24 with store-
and-forward typically used when high quality diagnostic
images are required.25,26

User-based testing also revealed that the patient-end
device needed to be ﬂexible and easily moveable. This is
similar to previous research highlighting that paediatric
telepractice platforms should be as ﬂexible as possible
to enable assessment in a variety of environments.25,26

Trials identiﬁed that some components of the feeding
assessment (i.e. assessment of breastfeeding) required
speciﬁc technology (smart phone) to improve assess-
ment feasibility. This was highlighted further during
the breastfeeding assessments, with mothers reporting
difﬁculty completing breastfeeding assessments with
larger devices. Such smaller devices are more often
available within a family home; therefore their suitabil-
ity
was
considered
a
positive
outcome
for
the
future uptake of this telepractice model. Clark et al.
reported that the majority of families accessing their
telepractice-enhanced paediatric feeding service used
tablets or smart phones to link into consultations.17

Table 2. Assessment components and camera angles/modifications identified through human-centred design approach.

Assessment component
Camera angle
Adaptations/specifications for
telepractice environment

Developmental screen or assessment
Wide front-on with view of table/tray
Parents provide child with pre-
ferred toy/s
Assessment of state, colour and
respiration
Wide front-on with view of table/tray
Observe during developmen-
tal screen
Infant oral reflex exam and non-nutri-
tive suck assessment (infants only)
Close up front-on view of face
Clinician provides verbal
instruction for parent
to complete
Oral motor assessment
Close up front-on view of face and
asynchronous assessment
Request parent take picture/s
prior to appointment
Assessment of positioning for feeding
Asynchronous assessment
Request parent to take picture/s
prior to appointment
Assessment of breast feeding
Positioned above the breast
Use of smart phone with second
person present to hold device
Assessment of bottle feeding
Camera positioned at 45 angle to child
–
Assessment of drinking and solids
Camera positioned at 45 angle to child
with both parent and child in view
–

Assessment of parent–child interaction
Camera positioned at 45 angle to child
with both parent and child in view
–

556

Finally, parents reported that the provision of infor-
mation prior to the appointment was useful to prepare
for the practical and technological expectations of the
assessment. Session-speciﬁc factsheets ensured that
parents had all necessary equipment ready for the
appointment (e.g. toys, food) and were familiar with
key camera positions. Then during the assessment,
when the telepractice clinician required the parent to
move to a different camera angle or position, they
could refer directly to images on the fact sheet.
Previous research by Bloomﬁeld et al. reported the pro-
vision of information when enrolling parents in feeding
intervention via telepractice.18 Malandraki et al. also
reported sending an email the day prior to their tele-
practice sessions to inform the parent what materials
they needed to prepare.16 They hypothesised that involv-
ing the family in the preparation of appointment mate-
rials and intervention tasks improved task saliency,
speciﬁcity and generalization due to the natural inter-
vention environment and incidental parent training.
In conclusion, the current iterative study design
enabled development of a telepractice system that was
acceptable to users and enabled completion of typical
paediatric feeding assessments within the home. This has
laid the foundation for the stages of further research to
be conducted by this team, which will involve systemat-
ically investigating the reliability of this new model of
care and both parent and clinician perceptions of the
model when integrated into clinical practice.