Original Paper

Optimizing e-Consultations to Adolescent Medicine Specialists:
Qualitative Synthesis of Feedback From User-Centered Design

Jacquelin Rankine1*, MD, MSc; Deepika Yeramosu2*, BSc; Loreta Matheo1, MD; Gina M Sequeira1,3, MD, MSc;
Elizabeth Miller1, MD, PhD; Kristin N Ray2, MD, MSc

Methods

Study Design

We conducted an iterative user-centered design and evaluation
process in two phases. In phase 1, we developed a prototype
e-consultation template and workflow based on a literature
review and conversations with individuals using e-consultations
in other settings, including the Veterans Health Administration
and University of Pittsburgh Medical Center. We evaluated the
static prototype and workflow storyboards with target users,
including general pediatrician PCPs and adolescent medicine
specialists. We incorporated feedback from this process to
develop a functional prototype within the electronic health
record (EHR) and again evaluated this with PCPs and adolescent
medicine specialists in phase 2. We performed a qualitative
analysis of the feedback obtained through think-aloud

commentary during the use of the prototypes and semistructured
exit interviews to identify perspectives regarding e-consultations
for AYA care.

Recruitment

We approached target users via email from an existing research
network of primary care practices (Pediatric PittNet) and the
Division of Adolescent and Young Adult Medicine of the
University of Pittsburgh Medical Center Children’s Hospital of
Pittsburgh. The Division of Adolescent and Young Adult
Medicine is the primary group of adolescent medicine specialists
caring for AYAs across 26 counties in Western Pennsylvania
as well as portions of Ohio and West Virginia. The general
pediatrician PCPs across more than 40 practices affiliated with
the Children’s Hospital of Pittsburgh span both academic and
community practices across 13 counties in Western
Pennsylvania. Approximately one-quarter of these practices are
in rural counties, and all use a shared EHR, which is also used
by the Division of Adolescent and Young Adult Medicine. At
the time of this study, no payers in our region paid clinicians
for their time conducting store-and-forward provider-to-provider
consultations. General pediatrician PCPs and adolescent
medicine specialists were eligible for participation, including
both academic and community general pediatricians, advanced
practice providers, and trainees in fellowship. Clinicians who
were not engaged in patient care were excluded from the study.
The participants received US $25 gift cards. Participants were
purposefully sampled to ensure a balance between PCPs and
adolescent medicine specialists and diversity of years of
experience and clinical effort. The University of Pittsburgh
institutional review board provided ethical approval. We
obtained written documentation of informed consent from
participants.

Iterative Design Process

Phase 1: Static Prototype

Phase 1 was conducted from July to August 2018. A study team
member (DY or KNR) met with each participant in a private
office, obtained informed consent, and talked through a series
of 22 slides. These slides reviewed the goals of e-consultations,
the research process, prototype note templates for both PCPs
and adolescent medicine specialists, and storyboards that
provided a visual representation of planned workflow and
prototype screenshots illustrating the planned process as a
clinician worked through the system. We started with these
static prototypes because they could be developed with minimal
time investment and rapidly adapted in response to feedback.
During this phase, data were collected through think-alouds,
exit interviews, and web-based surveys. Changes were made to
the prototype after every 3 participants to continuously
incorporate feedback.

Phase 2: EHR Prototype

After incorporating feedback from phase 1, we developed a
functional electronic prototype within the play environment of
our EHR (EpicCare). Phase 2 was conducted from July to
September 2019. In this phase, participants were asked to
complete specific tasks depending on their role (PCP vs
adolescent medicine specialist).

During PCP sessions, participants were given 3 vignettes where
adolescent medicine specialist advice might be sought related
to polycystic ovary syndrome, gender-affirming care, and eating
disorders. Participants were asked to prepare mock
e-consultations for each vignette within a practice EHR
environment. During the first 2 vignettes, PCPs provided
think-aloud commentary while completing the task. For the
third vignette, participants completed the notes at their usual
working pace while their efforts were timed. For the final 3 PCP
participants, mock responses created by prior adolescent
medicine specialist participants were shared after the prior
session components, and the PCPs were asked to think aloud
as they reviewed and interpreted this mock advice.

During adolescent medicine specialist sessions, participants
were given 3 mock e-consultations (1 for each vignette)
generated by PCP participants during prior PCP sessions without
identifiers of the participating PCP. During the first 2 vignettes,
adolescent 
medicine 
specialists 
provided 
think-aloud
commentary while preparing mock responses. For the third
vignette, participants completed the mock response at their usual
working pace while their efforts were timed.

After completing these tasks, all participants completed
semistructured exit interviews and the same web-based survey
used in phase 1. Throughout this phase, changes were again
continuously made to the EHR prototype in response to
feedback.

Data Collection and Analysis

Throughout the iterative user-centered design and evaluation
process, feedback was collected from PCPs and adolescent
medicine specialists through the processes described above:
think-aloud commentary during the use of the prototypes and
semistructured exit interviews. During think-alouds, participants
were asked to talk through their thoughts as they reviewed the
prototypes and were encouraged to comment on possible
limitations or undesirable components of the proposed system.
The semistructured exit interviews included questions on the
perceived usefulness and usability of the e-consultation system.

A study team member (DY or KNR) took written notes during
think-alouds and exit interviews, which were deidentified and
securely stored. Next, 2 investigators (DY and KNR) analyzed
think-aloud and exit interview data using content analysis,
informed by elements of the Technology Acceptance Model
and usability theory [20,21]. The results were organized around
the major overarching themes of the usefulness and usability
of e-consultations for AYA care.

After reviewing the prototypes, participants also completed a
web-based survey with 31 questions, including demographic
questions and items adapted from the Technology Acceptance
Model survey [20] and the end user computer satisfaction survey
[22]. Demographic data collected in the web-based survey were
analyzed with descriptive statistics using Stata 14 (StataCorp).
Web-based survey responses from PCPs and adolescent
medicine specialists during phases 1 and 2 were compared using
the Kruskal-Wallis test to ensure that we did not overly adapt
the design to favor one group (PCPs vs adolescent medicine

specialists) at the expense of the needs and preferences of the
other.

Results

Participants

Participants included 12 general pediatrician PCPs and 12
adolescent medicine specialists (Table 1). Participants included

individuals in training (n=6) as well as individuals with more
than 20 years of practice (n=9). Participant characteristics were
similar in each phase with the exception of years of experience,
with more clinicians with more than 21 years in practice in
phase 1 (n=7; 6 PCPs and 1 adolescent medicine specialist) than
in phase 2 (n=2; 1 PCP and 1 adolescent medicine specialist).

Perceived Usefulness

Regarding the usefulness of e-consultations, PCPs and
adolescent medicine specialists perceived potential advantages

for patients, including themes of improving access to care,
increasing timeliness and convenience of care, reducing travel
burden, and enhancing the role of the patient-centered medical
home (Table 2).

PCP and adolescent medicine specialist perceptions of the
advantages of e-consultations for clinicians were more variable.
Although 
adolescent 
medicine 
specialists 
felt 
that
e-consultations would provide structure and documentation to
activities that specialists already do, PCPs identified a burden
on their time and desired adequate reimbursement in a
fee-for-service environment. Similarly, regarding the value for
generalists versus specialists, PCPs felt that e-consultations
would make the referral process easier for specialists while
increasing the workload of PCPs. Regarding the complexity of
the process, adolescent medicine specialists expressed concern
that PCPs may not be comfortable carrying out their
management plans, and both groups noted the complexity of
anticipating the knowledge that the other clinician would need.
Regarding the compatibility of e-consultations, PCPs raised
concerns about duplicating their work, and adolescent medicine

specialists expressed varying degrees of concern about
incorporating e-consultations into their daily workflow and
interoperability with other EHRs. Both PCPs and adolescent
medicine specialists noted learning incentives related to
increasing PCP knowledge of AYA health concerns and
decreasing reliance on specialists for this care in the future.
Both groups anticipated the frequent use of e-consultations.

Perceived Usability

Efficiency was a common focus for both PCPs and adolescent
medicine specialists, with comments falling into four themes.
First, participants recognized the importance of reducing
documentation time by avoiding redundancy, minimizing
free-text entry, and using drop-down menus (Table 3). Second,
they recommended organizational changes to emphasize critical
information, including prompting for the specific consult

question at the beginning of the templated note. Third, they
encouraged maximizing the use of autopopulated data fields.
Fourth, they balanced these recommendations for efficient
documentation with the need for adequately detailed
information. For example, an adolescent medicine specialist
recommended using diagnosis-specific templates tailored to
referral reason, whereas a PCP worried that too many prompts
might be interpreted as guidance to perform history or exam
components that may be unnecessary and overly burdensome
for specific patients.

Comments related to usability also frequently addressed
reducing potential errors within the four themes. First,
recommendations to use autopopulated fields to enhance
efficiency were tempered with the acknowledgment that
autopopulated fields can contain inaccurate or outdated
information, 
leading 
to 
recommendations 
to 
follow
autopopulated data fields with prompts to encourage PCP review
and annotation of autopopulated data. Second, the importance
of ensuring accurate information for interprofessional
communication was emphasized. Third, both PCPs and

adolescent medicine specialists advocated for prompts for
specific 
patient 
and 
clinical 
information. 
These
recommendations included prompts for PCPs relevant to the
care of AYAs (eg, affirmed name and pronouns), prompts for
adolescent medicine specialists to enhance the specificity of
their recommendations (eg, exact laboratory test order number),
and simple text changes to enhance clarity overall (eg, replacing
follow-up with adolescent with follow-up with Adolescent
Medicine Clinic). Fourth, the importance of prompts related to
confidentiality was noted both to inform follow-up
communication 
and 
ensure 
appropriate 
confidential
documentation within the EHR, if needed.

Comments related to the affective experience of using
e-consultations were mixed. Although some users found the
amount of data entry to be frustrating and burdensome, others
commented that the process was straightforward and clear. Both
PCPs and adolescent medicine specialists felt that the
e-consultation process was generally easy to learn with minimal
training.

Survey Results

During phase 1, PCPs’ responses trended lower for perceived
usefulness and usability compared with adolescent medicine

specialists (P=.05; Figure 1). During phase 2, PCPs’perceptions
of these domains increased, such that PCPs and adolescent
medicine specialists had more similar assessments of
e-consultations.

During the timed tasks during phase 2, the median time for
PCPs to enter the mock e-consultation was 6 minutes 9 seconds
(range 4 minutes 31 seconds-7 minutes 26 seconds). The median
time for subspecialists to review and respond to the mock
e-consultation was 7 minutes 49 seconds (range 3 minutes 56
seconds-11 minutes 8 seconds).

Iterative Design Changes

During the first phase of development, we made changes based
on feedback as participants reviewed the static prototype. For
the PCP note template requesting the e-consultation, we moved
the consult question for the adolescent medicine specialist to
the beginning of the note template, changed the order of items
to enhance accuracy and efficiency when autopopulated text
was pulled in, and reduced the number of unique prompts across
the review of systems, physical exam, family history, and social
history fields. Although these portions were streamlined, other
specific prompts relevant to the care of AYAs (eg, gender
identity, confidentiality, and contact information for patients
and families, and PCP) were enhanced. For the adolescent
medicine specialist note template responding to the

e-consultation, substantially more details were added regarding
follow-up recommendations (eg, location, interval, and the
specific adolescent medicine specialist to be seen if relevant).

During the second phase of development, we made further
changes based on feedback as participants interacted with an
EHR prototype (Figures 2 and 3). We added drop-down boxes
to most open-ended prompts to allow rapid selection of as above
if a clinician had already addressed a specific prompt. We
consolidated multiple prompts for review of autopopulated text
throughout the template into one prompt, which was placed
after autopopulated information on past medical history,
allergies, and medications, providing a single opportunity to
review and add to these automated fields. In addition, prompts
were added to pull the objective data with interpretation (eg,
BMI percentiles). Furthermore, we clarified the language around
contact information and confidentiality expectations for the
PCP, adolescent medicine specialist, and patient and included
free-text response options to clarify complex privacy concerns
if needed (eg, providers may communicate with one parent but
not the other). The final note templates are included in their
entirety in Multimedia Appendix 1.

Discussion

Principal Findings

We used a replicable user-centered design process to develop
and refine e-consultation templates and processes for general
pediatrician consultation with adolescent medicine specialists.
We qualitatively analyzed user feedback during two phases of
development to guide the revision of our e-consultations and
produced a final prototype with similar perceived usefulness
and usability among PCPs and adolescent medicine specialists.
Our iterative design process and feedback themes may inform
the development of similar e-consultation systems in other

settings. In particular, by engaging experts in pediatric and
adolescent health in our user-centered design process, we
identified specific considerations for the use of e-consultations
with AYAs to promote safe, equitable, and high-quality care
for this population.

Participants identified both opportunities and risks for the use
of e-consultations with AYAs related to confidentiality. A major
perceived advantage was the potential to enhance access to
confidential care for AYAs. AYAs may delay or forgo care
because of a lack of knowledge of how or where to obtain
services, transportation challenges, and concerns about
maintaining confidentiality [23,24]. e-Consultations were

perceived as a means to ameliorate these barriers faced by AYAs
in traditional primary care to subspecialty referral models by
allowing adolescent medicine specialist-guided care of
confidential health concerns either without the need for an
in-person adolescent medicine visit or with PCP-facilitated
handoff to adolescent medicine care. By providing point-of-care
education for PCPs during e-consultations, this process may
also enhance PCP’s ability to deliver care for future confidential
health concerns. A perceived threat to confidentiality was the
potential for miscommunication between PCPs and adolescent
medicine specialists regarding patients’preferences for contact
and expectations of confidentiality. To reduce this risk, it was
recommended that e-consultations for use with AYAs include
prompts to document patients’ preferred contact information
and explicit expectations surrounding confidentiality. Such
prompts could have the additional benefit of encouraging PCPs
to discuss laws governing confidential health care for minors
and reserve time for private conversations with AYAs during
their visits, features of pediatric primary care visits associated
with increased disclosure of health concerns that may otherwise
be lacking [25]. As laws regarding adolescent confidentiality
and consent may be complex and vary among states, those
developing e-consultations for AYAs may consider including
details of state-specific adolescent privacy regulations to assist
PCPs who are unfamiliar. Another perceived threat to
confidentiality was unintended caregiver proxy access to
e-consultation documentation within the EHR or receipt of an
explanation of benefit statements or copays, all of which are
previously identified barriers to confidential care for AYAs in
general [26,27]. To reduce this risk, those developing
e-consultations for use with AYAs should consider local system
capacity to restrict the sharing of EHR documentation through
patient portals and assess the potential to reduce breach of
confidentiality through insurer explanation of benefit statements
and copayments. In addition, both PCPs and adolescent medicine
specialists who use e-consultations with AYAs should discuss
these risks with their AYA patients and examine local options
for limiting EHR documentation sharing with caregiver proxies,
such as through confidential note types.

Participants further identified opportunities for the use of
e-consultations with AYAs to facilitate communication. Overall,
participants perceived e-consultations as a beneficial way to
enhance communication between clinicians and AYAs and
between PCPs and specialists. Both PCPs and adolescent
medicine specialists suggested that e-consultations could
increase centralized communication from the PCP to their
patients, which was seen as promoting high-quality and
coordinated care within the patient-centered medical home.
e-Consultations were further seen as benefiting AYA health
care by facilitating immediate and ongoing communication
between PCPs and adolescent medicine specialists in a way not
achieved through traditional referral methods [28,29]. The
immediate discourse opened through e-consultations was seen
as enhancing care by avoiding unnecessary visits to adolescent
medicine specialists, identifying when alternative visit types
(eg, telemedicine visits) might be appropriate, and triaging the
immediacy with which patients should be seen. The ongoing
communication facilitated by e-consultations was perceived to
both enhance coordination of care and provide valuable

opportunities for PCPs to enhance their adolescent health skills,
a finding suggested in prior qualitative work and hinted at
through a study of referral patterns throughout time [30,31].

AYA-specific e-consultation templates were also seen as a
means of enhancing the quality of care for AYAs. Perceived
opportunities to improve AYA care delivered by PCPs included
placing prompts in PCP templates for patients’ names and
pronouns—information integration to the sensitive and
respectful care of AYAs that may otherwise not be elicited, may
not align with EHR documentation, and which AYAs may be
reticent to disclose without such signals from providers that
they are in a safe space [32]. Condition-specific templates were
also identified as an opportunity to ensure that necessary clinical
information is transmitted from PCPs to adolescent medicine
specialists 
to 
allow 
accurate, 
timely, 
and 
informed
recommendations. Although participants saw potential in the
ability to specify the information needed for effective
collaboration through e-consultation templates, they also
acknowledged that excessive documentation might become
burdensome and decrease the uptake of e-consultations, a
concern raised in prior studies as well [19].

The ability to refine the minimum required documentation to
balance efficiency and precision in e-consultations shows the
value of iterative user-centered design in this context. Using a
multiphase development process including think-alouds, exit
interviews, and surveys with representative users, we elicited
increasingly specific feedback that facilitated the first broad
updates to the content and layout of the e-consultation prototypes
and later finer changes to the template language. By engaging
users who were both generalists and specialists, we were able
to increase the alignment of PCP and adolescent medicine
specialist perceptions throughout time through iterative
modification with input from both sides. Such user-centered
design has the potential to increase the uptake and acceptability
of new health information technologies [33] and may be valuable
in tailoring existing technologies to promote optimal care of
populations with unique health care needs, including AYAs.

Limitations

The user-centered design process outlined here is both a strength
and a limitation of this study. Our study included a small number
of participants from a single geographic area and practice within
a specific clinical context. This allowed the creation of a tailored
e-consultation system that may be readily implemented within
our local health system but which may lack generalizability or
acceptability for other health systems broadly, including those
without compatible EHR systems across general pediatric and
adolescent medicine specialty practices (although the lessons
learned about needed content in these notes could apply to other
systems as well). As a result, the themes identified from this
development process should be viewed as starting places for
conversations in systems other than final recommendations. We
also note that the years in practice for PCPs and adolescent
medicine specialists varied from phase 1 to phase 2. As this
analysis focused on design rather than the implementation of
e-consultations, it does not include the evaluation of quality or
outcomes of use. Although e-consultations were perceived to
have high usefulness and usability during the design process,

new concerns may arise during implementation [34,35]. In
addition, this study was conducted before dramatic increases
in the use of live-interactive telemedicine during the COVID-19
pandemic [8], which may alter the perceived usefulness and
intention to use e-consultations in a shifting pediatric care
delivery landscape. Finally, we did not include AYAs or
caregivers in the design process. Both groups may have
additional preferences regarding system design, as evidenced
by work with pediatric patients and caregivers [36,37], such
that additional work specifically with AYAs and AYA
caregivers is warranted.

Conclusions

In conclusion, we used an iterative user-centered design process
to develop and refine e-consultations for use by general pediatric
PCPs and adolescent medicine specialists. We used qualitative
analysis of user feedback elicited during the design process to
identify themes relevant to the development and implementation
of similar e-consultation systems for use in other health systems
or among other patient populations. By engaging experts in the
care of children and adolescents in the design process, we
identified both opportunities and risks related to confidentiality,
communication, and the use of tailored documentation prompts
that should be considered in the development and use of
e-consultations with AYAs.