Using human-centered design to develop a
nurse-to-family telehealth intervention for
pediatric transfers

Jennifer L Rosenthal1,2
, Audriana Ketchersid1, Elva Horath1,
April Sanders1, Thomas A Harper2, Adrienne E Hoyt-Austin1

and Sarah C Haynes1

Methods

Overview

A core team was convened to lead the inspiration and idea-
tion phase HCD procedures from July 2022 to December
2022. This team was comprised of two research analysts,
a pediatric hospitalist, a telehealth researcher, a general
pediatrician, and a telehealth program manager. The inspir-
ation phase consisted of a qualitative study using a cross-
sectional case study design.20 The cases of interests were
events, speciﬁcally parents and providers who experience
the event of caring for a child during an inter-facility trans-
fer. Over a period of 3 months, we used semi-structured
interviews and thematic analysis with the framework
approach.21 The ideation phase consisted of a stakeholder
design workshop followed by stakeholder feedback meet-
ings with iterative improvements over a 2-month period.
The qualitative ﬁndings from the inspiration phase informed
the content of the workshop in the ideation phase. An over-
view of the HCD phases is shown in Figure 1.
Eligibility requirements for participation in interviews,
the workshop, and feedback sessions included being at
least 18 years old and having English language proﬁciency.
Participants had to be a parent or guardian, nurse, physician,
or telehealth expert. Parents and guardians had to have
experienced
an
inter-facility
transfer
of
their
child.
Nurses, physicians, and telehealth experts had to work at
either the post-transfer hospital or a referring ED site;
they had to have a current role in caring for transferring
children or facilitating the use of telehealth for pediatric
transfers. We excluded individuals’ age less than 18
years, because the focus of the study was to design an inter-
vention that would be used by parents and providers. Thus,
the perspectives of children in designing this intervention
were beyond the scope of this present study. The number
of individuals who participated in each human-centered
design phase was determined differently for each phase.
For the inspiration phase, sample size of interviewees was
based on reaching thematic saturation. For the ideation
phase workshop, we aimed to have 20–25 stakeholders to
allow for a diversity of perspectives while still maintaining
a group size conducive to active participation. For ideation
phase feedback sessions, we continued soliciting feedback
from stakeholders until no further improvements were
identiﬁed.
The inspiration phase of this study was approved by the
University of California Davis Institutional Review Board.
The ideation phase – which did not meet the deﬁnition of
research involving human subjects – was exempt from
Institutional Review Board review.

Setting

The post-transfer, accepting hospital is a metropolitan ter-
tiary care children’s hospital within a university hospital.

2

This 129-bed children’s hospital is in Northern California.
It is the referral center for children across a 33-county
region covering 65,000 square miles. The children’s hos-
pital receives transfers from over 130 EDs and hospitals
in the region and accepts over 2500 patients as transfers
annually.

Inspiration phase: interviews

Data collection. The inspiration phase used one-on-one
interviews with parents, physicians, and nurses. We used
convenience sampling and snowball sampling to recruit
participants. Eligible parents were those with a child who
experienced an ED-to-inpatient inter-facility transfer. A
core team member recruited parent participants in-person
during
the
post-transfer
hospitalization
and
obtained
informed
consent. Parent interviews were conducted
in-person; the hospitalized child was present for most
parent interviews. Eligible physicians and nurses were pre-
transfer ED providers or post-transfer children’s hospital
providers. Physicians and nurses were recruited by email
or in-person. Physician and nurse interviews were con-
ducted either in-person or via videoconference. Sampling
continued until we reached thematic saturation.21 We con-
ducted 33 total interviews, including nine parents, 11
nurses, and 13 physicians. Most interviewees identiﬁed as
not Hispanic/Latino, identiﬁed as female, and were 31–40
years of age. Interviewee characteristics are shown in
Table 1.
A core team member (AK) conducted the interviews
using
a
semi-structured
interview
guide
to
explore

domains described in the Consolidated Framework for
Implementation Research (CFIR).22 The CFIR is a widely
used determinant framework to assess contextual factors
that can inﬂuence the outcome of implementation efforts.
The interview guide solicited information on the following
CFIR constructs: innovation (evidence base, relative advan-
tage, complexity), ﬁnancing, pressure (external, perform-
ance measurement), infrastructure (physical, information
technology), compatibility, available resources, access to
knowledge and information, need, motivation, and asses-
sing context. The interview guide was not tested prior to
use. Interviews were audio recorded, professionally tran-
scribed, and de-identiﬁed. Interview participants received
a $50 gift card.

Analysis. Data collection and analysis occurred concur-
rently. Data were analyzed using thematic analysis follow-
ing the principles of Braun and Clark’s approach21 with the
framework approach.23 The framework utilized the CFIR
domains. Five team members independently performed
open coding and analytic memo writing of the transcripts
to identify potential ﬁndings that did not ﬁt into the prede-
termined framework categories. These researchers agreed
that the framework adequately represented the major ﬁnd-
ings. Subsequently, the team independently memoed and
manually coded; the deductive codes pertained to the
CFIR constructs. The team then met as a team to ensure
consensus on application of codes, develop tentative cat-
egories, and examine the data for patterns and variations.
A participants’ role-ordered matrix was created to explore
relationships between constructs and participants’ role

Figure 1. Overview of the activities comprising the human-centered design phases.

Rosenthal et al.
3

types. Tentative hypotheses were formulated regarding
relationships among categories. The team searched for
negative and qualifying evidence and adapted the interview
guide to further explore topics. Recurrent unifying concepts
and identiﬁed linkages and patterns between the categories
became analytic themes. We worded the themes as insight
statements. Insight statements are used in human-centered
design to represent user perspectives, motivations, and ten-
sions.19 We used ATLAS.ti to organize and store coding
and data analysis.24

Ideation phase: stakeholder design workshop

The ideation phase began with a stakeholder design work-
shop. Workshop participants were identiﬁed by suggestions
from
interview
participants
and
recruited
by
email.
Participants included parents, nurses, physicians, telehealth
experts, and hospital transfer center staff. We purposively
recruited participants representing diversity in roles and
hospitals. The workshop was held via videoconference to
promote participation from diverse participants, including
those residing in remote locations or those with competing
work or home responsibilities. Participants received a $100
gift card for this 2-hour workshop. The compensation of
$50 per hour was offered to stakeholders to acknowledge
the time they dedicated, recognize their valuable expertise,
and offset any potential expenses incurred from their
participation.

Table 1. Interview participant characteristics.

Role

Characteristic
Parents
(n = 9)
Nurse
(n = 11)
Physicians
(n = 13)

Race, n (%):

Multiracial
0 (0)
2 (18.2)
2 (15.4)

White
4 (44.4)
8 (72.8)
5 (38.5)

Asian
2 (22.2)
1 (9.1)
5 (38.5)

Other
3 (33.3)
0 (0)
1 (7.7)

Ethnicity, n (%):

Hispanic
3 (33.3)
3 (27.3)
0 (0)

Not Hispanic
6 (66.7)
8 (72.7)
13 (100)

Age (years), n (%):

20–30
1 (11.1)
2 (18.2)
2 (15.4)

31–40
6 (66.7)
6 (54.5)
8 (61.5)

41–50
0 (0)
1 (9.1)
2 (15.4)

51–60
2 (22.2)
2 (18.2)
1 (7.7)

Gender, n (%)

Male
2 (22.2)
0 (0)
3 (23.1)

Female
7 (77.8)
11 (100)
10 (76.9)

Highest education, n (%)

Less than high school
graduate
2 (22.2)

High school graduate
2 (22.2)

Some college
2 (22.2)

2-year college degree
2 (22.2)

4-year college degree
1 (11.1)

Years of experience after training (years), n (%)

0–5
3 (27.3)
2 (15.4)

6–10
0 (0)
6 (46.2)

(continued)

Table 1. Continued.

4

A core team member (JLR) with experience facilitating
stakeholder engagement sessions led the workshop; other
core team members facilitated the workshop small group
sessions. The workshop began with core team and partici-
pant introductions, followed by explanation of the value
of stakeholder engagement and human-centered design.
We discussed principles of effective communication to
promote learning about each other’s priorities and ensuring
all partners’ voices were heard and respected. We shared
that the goal of the workshop was to work together to
develop strategies that will be used for a future pediatric
inter-facility transfer trial; the future trial purpose was to
improve care delivery by making pediatric hospital-to-
hospital transfers more family-centered.
We subsequently presented an overview of the knowl-
edge gained from the inspiration phase. Speciﬁcally, we
shared the insight statements (i.e., qualitative themes) and
corresponding “How Might We” (HMW) statements that
were developed by the core team. Adapting insight state-
ments into HMW statements is a strategy used in human-
centered design to create brainstorming prompts phrased
as questions.19 In doing so, workshop participants could
generate solutions to the insights that were generated
during the prior inspiration phase.
We divided the workshop participants into three small
groups of seven or eight stakeholders for the brainstorming
session. Individuals used Google Jamboard to brainstorm
their solutions to the HMW statements. The small groups
discussed the generated ideas and then revised and added
to the ideas. Workshop participants rejoined as a larger
group to report back, discuss solutions, and categorize
and prioritize the solutions. To prioritize the solutions,
each stakeholder was asked to select their top 3 solutions
they perceived should be prioritized in designing the feasi-
bility and pilot trial. Speciﬁcally, stakeholders anonym-
ously placed images of award ribbons over their top3
solutions. The number of ribbons per strategy was
counted to determine perceived priority.

Ideation phase: stakeholder feedback sessions

After the design workshop, the core team incorporated the sta-
keholders’ solutions to draft trial workﬂow and materials to be
tested in a future implementation phase. Feedback was soli-
cited from workshop participants and subsequently from add-
itional nurse and physician providers. Iterative changes were
made, and stakeholders were invited to provide feedback,
until feedback supported that no further adaptations were
needed to improve the workﬂow and materials.

Results

Inspiration phase: interviews

We identiﬁed four themes from the inspiration phase inter-
views. Each theme, worded as an insight statement, is

presented in Table 2, along with categories and supporting
quotes. These themes are also further explored below.
Theme 1: Virtually connecting receiving providers to
parents before transfer is a promising intervention.
Parents and providers universally perceived that telehealth
use during pediatric inter-facility transfers could help
prepare parents for the transfer process. Parents explained
how virtual connections would be very helpful for them
to be aware of the next steps and to understand the logistics
surrounding the transfer process and procedures. Example
topics shared by parents included what items to bring to
the hospital, where to park, and COVID-19 vaccination pol-
icies. Nurse participants similarly mentioned that telehealth
would help prepare parents. The most expressed beneﬁt
shared by nurses was about informing parents of the visit-
ation policy that prohibited children visitors.
Parents, nurses, and physicians also shared how tele-
health could provide support to parents during a stressful
event. Participants spoke about ways in which telehealth
use during a transfer could strengthen parent–provider rela-
tionships. Nurses explained how connecting with parents
before the patient and family arrives at the post-transfer hos-
pital would also be beneﬁcial for the nurses, as they could
better prepare for the child’s arrival by gathering additional
history and information that is not shared during the
nurse-to-nurse
handoff.
Nurses
explained
how
a
nurse-to-family telehealth visit would be especially helpful
for situations when parents are unable to be physically
present with the child during transport; nurses could learn
from parents how to best support the child’s unique needs.
Theme 2: Clearly messaging the purpose and expectations
of the telehealth visits is necessary to avoid unintended con-
sequences. Many physician participants expressed the need
to distinguish this nurse-to-family telehealth intervention
from existing telehealth services. Multiple physicians raised
concern that a new workﬂow to implement a nurse-to-family
telehealth intervention could trigger confusion given the
existing physician-to-physician telehealth consultations that
could be requested for pediatric inter-facility transfers.
Participants emphasized the importance of clearly communi-
cating that the nurse-to-family telehealth intervention was an
additional resource to the existing physician-to-physician
telehealth consultations. Nurses and physicians raised
concern that parents and providers might misunderstand
that these nurse-to-family telehealth visits were replacing
physician-to-physician
telehealth
consultations.
They
expressed concern that parents might expect nurses to
provide medical advice during the telehealth connection;
however, expectations should be established that medical
decision-making is beyond the scope of this intervention.
Providers also highlighted the importance of anticipat-
ing that some pediatric inter-facility transfers might not
be conducive to a nurse-to-family telehealth visit. The
timing of the child leaving the pre-transfer hospital and
the availability of the post-transfer provider were two

Rosenthal et al.
5

Table 2. Themes and supporting quotes.

(continued)

6

Table 2. Continued.

(continued)

Rosenthal et al.
7

Table 2. Continued.

ED: emergency department.

8

commonly
mentioned
issues
that
could
impede
a
nurse-to-family telehealth visit. Participants explained that
it would be crucial to anticipate such potential problems
and create workﬂows that account for dynamic and unique
circumstances to minimize unintended negative effects.
Theme 3: Creating a user-friendly workﬂow is necessary
to minimize provider burden in order to increase adoption.
Nurse and physician providers unanimously stressed the
importance of implementing the nurse-to-family telehealth
intervention without imposing additional burdens on the
pediatric providers. Providers shared how competing
demands have left the nurses with limited ability to take
on additional tasks. Therefore, adoption of the telehealth
intervention would remain low unless workﬂows could
be streamlined. Additional resources that providers men-
tioned as requirements to support a nurse-to-family tele-
health intervention were dedicated equipment such as
video-enabled computers and headsets. Providers also high-
lighted the need for quiet space to conduct the visits. While
some providers identiﬁed the need for private locations to
minimize interruptions and distractions, other providers
identified the need to conduct the telehealth visits in a loca-
tion that was not isolated but rather allowed them to remain
accessible and visible to team members.
Regarding the ideal post-transfer provider to conduct the
telehealth visit with the parents, multiple nurses and physi-
cians suggested the receiving unit’s charge nurse. Nurse
participants explained that, in current practice, charge
nurses review the available information about the transfer-
ring child prior to their arrival. Charge nurses also speak
by telephone with parents of children being admitted
from home. They are also most knowledgeable about
their hospital unit’s policies and procedures and thus best
positioned to share such relevant information with the
parents of transferring children.
Theme 4: Ensuring the intervention equitably beneﬁts
diverse populations is a priority to all users. Parents and
providers ubiquitously expressed various concerns about
the equitable reach and impact of a nurse-to-family tele-
health intervention for families with a language preference
other than English. Participants stated the importance of
including medical interpreters for telehealth connections,
when applicable. Some participants identiﬁed the potential
challenges of parents navigating the English language tele-
health platform. Multiple participants also expressed con-
cerns about digital literacy, health literacy, and literacy
impacting parents’ ability to access this intervention. Lack
of a functioning smart phone was another stated barrier.
Furthermore, poor cell phone service and no Internet con-
nection were additional identiﬁed challenges. Providers
spoke about locations in their ED that lacked cellular
service. Other providers spoke about having free Internet
in their ED, but how parents might need assistance in con-
necting to the Internet. A universal perspective shared by all
participants was the need to address these access issues to

optimize equitable reach and impact across our diverse
groups of patients and families.

Ideation phase: stakeholder design workshop

Using the insight statements from the inspiration phase, the
core team developed three HMW statements. These state-
ments asked the following: (1) HMW best explains these
nurse–parent telehealth visits to everyone, (2) HMW
creates a user-friendly workﬂow, and (3) HMW delivers tel-
ehealth equitably. We presented these statements to the 22
workshop participants. Participants included four parents,
ﬁve nurses, seven physicians, four telehealth experts, and
two transfer center staff representing four different hospi-
tals. The HMW statements and corresponding solutions
developed by the stakeholders are shown in Table 3.

Ideation phase: stakeholder feedback sessions

The core team used the solutions from the workshop to draft
a ﬂow diagram of the proposed telehealth intervention
workﬂow as well as a parent-facing informational ﬂyer.
The ﬂow diagram and parent ﬂyer were distributed by
email to the workshop participants. Feedback suggesting
adaptations was received from a children’s hospital
charge nurse, telehealth expert, and transfer center staff.
Concerns about the workﬂow were raised regarding the
use of a fax machine as the way for pre-transfer ED staff
to communicate to the children’s hospital charge nurse
that a parent wanted a telehealth visit. In response, we
added to the workﬂow a phone call to notify the children’s
hospital charge nurse that a fax was being sent. Another
suggestion that we incorporated was to specify that the
charge nurse should wait at least 5 minutes after initiating
the telehealth connection for the parent to join the visit.
Regarding the ﬂyer, we received and incorporated feedback
on wording of the text and feedback to add a picture of a
nurse using telehealth with a family. We emailed the
revised versions of the ﬂow diagram and parent ﬂyer to
the workshop participants. Feedback suggesting adapta-
tions was received from a parent and a pre-transfer phys-
ician conﬁrming that no further adaptations were needed.
In response to the workshop solution to offer multiple
training options, the core team drafted two versions of train-
ing videos and written instructions, one for the pre-transfer
ED providers and one for the post-transfer children’s hos-
pital providers. We subsequently solicited feedback and
iteratively made improvements to the trial workﬂow,
parent ﬂyer, and training materials. Feedback was obtained
from 67 total stakeholders. We conducted three group feed-
back sessions with pre-transfer ED nurses, advanced practi-
tioners, physicians, and clerks. We also conducted 12
individual sessions with post-transfer children’s hospital
charge
nurses.
Feedback
received
and
incorporated
included providing children’s hospital charge nurses with

Rosenthal et al.
9

Table 3. Workshop How Might We statements with corresponding proposed solutions.

(continued)

10

a list of potential topics to discuss with parents during the
telehealth visits. In response to feedback, we also conducted
additional trainings with pre-transfer ED unit clerks. No
further improvements to the trial workﬂow and materials
were deemed necessary. The resulting trial protocol was
registered in ClinicalTrials.gov (NCT05593900) and pub-
lished separately.25

Discussion

Telehealth use during pediatric inter-facility transfers is a
promising intervention to promote more family-centered
care and to mitigate parent distress and triage issues.
The optimal design and implementation of a telehealth
intervention that brings a pediatric provider virtually to
the child’s bedside in the ED depend on local contextual
factors. These factors include, but are not limited to, com-
ponents such as infrastructure, available resources, provi-
ders’ motivation, and parents’ needs and values. In this
study, we engaged stakeholders in the inspiration and
ideation phases of a HCD approach. In doing so, we
gained
valuable
information
from
individuals
with
diverse perspectives who represent the people – parents
and providers – that the telehealth intervention is intended
to beneﬁt. Importantly, these stakeholders represent the
providers who will be involved in implementing the inter-
vention. Including a variety of stakeholders in the iterative
design procedures unveiled potential barriers that were
unforeseen by the core research team alone. Our HCD
approach facilitated the design of a feasibility and pilot
trial comparing nurse-to-family telehealth communication
to standard of care for pediatric patients being transferred
between hospitals.25 This feasibility and pilot trial is the
next step for this research and represents the implementa-
tion phase of HCD.
Themes from the inspiration phase aligned with existing
telehealth research. The insight that the intervention work-
ﬂow must minimize provider burden is a topic that presents
repeatedly in the telehealth literature. Previous qualitative

and mixed-methods research have revealed that technology
obstacles are seen as hindrances by pediatric nurses and
physicians when it comes to utilizing telehealth for inter-
facility transfers.11,26 Described telehealth technology bar-
riers include challenges with navigating the telehealth plat-
forms, large or stationary equipment restricting provider
mobility, connectivity delays, and poor integration with pro-
fessional interpreters.27,28,11,26 Providers described that their
lack of conﬁdence in using the telehealth equipment left them
feeling vulnerable and “silly,” thus reducing their willingness
to use telehealth.11 Additional workﬂow concerns expanded
beyond the technology to include duplicative processes and
unclear roles and expectations.11,29 Providers’ competing
demands and limited availability to use telehealth exacerbate
the importance of streamlined workﬂows that minimize pro-
vider burden.29,30

The insight that the intervention needs to equitably
beneﬁt diverse populations is another ﬁnding from the
inspiration phase that is consistent with existing telehealth
research. Telehealth has the potential to enhance equitable
access to healthcare services by addressing barriers related
to geography, time, and ﬁnances.31 However, despite its
promise, this resource has exacerbated care access inequities
for socially marginalized groups.32 Under-resourced popula-
tions have disproportionately lower access to telehealth ser-
vices.33–36 Research focusing on the issues and dimensions
that impact the reach and adoption of telehealth among
diverse groups is critically needed.37,38 Research emphasizes
that individuals with a language preference other than
English experience reduced access to telehealth services in
comparison to those with English language preference.34

Earlier studies also describe low digital literacy and limited
Internet access as additional barriers restricting its accessibil-
ity and adoption.39 Designing telehealth interventions that
equitably beneﬁt diverse populations is a commonly shared
priority, and the use of HCD approaches is a strategy that
can be used to achieve this important goal.
This study focused on designing a nurse-to-family tele-
health intervention to be used during pediatric transfers,

Table 3. Continued.

TH: telehealth; ED: emergency department.

Rosenthal et al.
11

which is an understudied application of telehealth. The
body of literature on pediatric inter-facility telehealth
research mostly examines physician telehealth use.40–43

The limited research studying telehealth use by nurses has
examined nurse-to-nurse telehealth use for the inter-facility
handoff.44
The
potential
beneﬁts
of
our
proposed
nurse-to-family telehealth intervention are supported by
existing research that suggests parents of transferring chil-
dren seek information that nurses are well-positioned to
provide, such as logistical information and what to expect
at the post-transfer hospital.15 The ﬁndings from the inspir-
ation phase of this present study are consistent with this
prior research and further support the promise of this
nurse-to-family telehealth intervention. Our parent partici-
pants shared that the intervention would help them under-
stand the logistics surrounding the transfer process and
procedures. Furthermore, our participants explained how
the intervention could provide support to parents, mitigate
parent stress, strengthen parent–provider relationships,
and better prepare the nurses for the child’s arrival.
Future research testing the impact of nurse-to-family tele-
health can include outcomes identiﬁed by our participants
as potential beneﬁts, including parent stress, parent–pro-
vider relationships, and nurse preparedness.
The next step from this present study is to conduct the
nurse-to-family telehealth feasibility and pilot trial.25

Consistent with HCD principles, our future implementa-
tion phase will engage stakeholders throughout the trial.
In doing so, likely beneﬁts include improved protocol
adherence, external validity, and ultimate uptake of the
evidence into practice.45,46 Brieﬂy, stakeholders will
assist with trainings during the pre-trial preparation
phase, site visits during the intervention period, trouble-
shooting of challenges that arise, data interpretation, and
disseminating trial ﬁndings.
This study is not without limitations. While recruitment
for the interviews and the stakeholder design workshop pur-
posively sought to include a diverse range of roles and
experiences, the participants were limited to those with
English proﬁciency. We also limited participants to adults
and thus did not obtain the perspectives of the pediatric
patients. Another limitation was that the setting of this
study was at a single telehealth program at a children’s hos-
pital. Although we included participants from only one post-
transfer hospital, we included participants from three refer-
ring ED sites. Nevertheless, this study had a local focus;
thus the ﬁndings from this study may not be generalizable
to other hospitals. Additionally, this HCD process included
the perspectives of 33 interview participants, 22 workshops
participants, and feedback from 67 other stakeholders. The
insights from these collective 122 individuals might not be
representative of other individuals. Despite these limitations,
this HCD study provided valuable information that could be
considered by others in designing nurse-to-family telehealth
interventions for pediatric inter-facility transfers.

Conclusion

The use of HCD phases facilitated stakeholder engagement
in developing a nurse-to-family telehealth intervention for
pediatric inter-facility transfers. This telehealth intervention
will be tested in an implementation phase as a feasibility
and pilot trial. The insights and strategies identiﬁed in this
study can be adapted to meet the local needs and contexts
of other hospitals seeking to improve effective communica-
tion and engagement among providers and parents during
inter-facility transfers.