User-centered design of a scalable, electronic health
record-integrated remote symptom monitoring interven-
tion for patients with asthma and providers in primary
care

Robert S. Rudin
1, Sofia Perez,2 Jorge A. Rodriguez
,2,3 Jessica Sousa,1 Savanna
Plombon,2 Adriana Arcia
,4 Dinah Foer,3,5 David W. Bates,2,3 and Anuj K. Dalal,2,3

1Health Care Division, RAND Corporation, Boston, Massachusetts, USA, 2Division of General Internal Medicine, Brigham and
Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA, 3Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA, 4School of Nursing,
Columbia University School of Nursing, New York, New York, USA, and 5Division of General Internal Medicine and Division of Al-
lergy and Clinical Immunology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA

Received 7 April 2021; Revised 6 July 2021; Editorial Decision 7 July 2021; Accepted 13 July 2021

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Overview and framework
To elicit user requirements for the intervention, we conducted a sec-
ondary analysis of interview transcripts from our prior feasibility
study. We then employed user-centered design (UCD) methods: de-
sign sessions, surveys, stakeholder meetings, and iterative prototyp-
ing.37,38 To ensure the user requirements could be supported by the
technology, we sought to determine EHR integration requirements
as part of the design process. We developed the patient-facing mo-
bile app and clinician dashboard while planning to integrate the
technology with our institution’s EHR (Epic Systems, Inc.).
To ensure scalability, we used the Non-Adoption, Abandon-
ment, Scale-up, Spread, and Sustainability (NASSS) framework to
formulate pertinent research questions.21 NASSS is an evidence-
based framework specifically designed to go beyond adoption to in-
clude scale, spread, and sustainability of health technology innova-
tions. Empirical application of NASSS shows that innovations with
more complexity are less likely to be mainstreamed.39 We therefore
used NASSS to anticipate potential complexities, and identify the
simplest, and thus, most scalable, requirements along each dimen-

2434

sion and at each stage of our UCD process (Table 1) and analysis
(Table 3). We designed the intervention with the NASSS framework
in mind from the beginning and used it throughout.

Setting and participants
Our study was approved by the Institutional Review Boards of Mass
General Brigham (MGB) and the RAND Corporation and was per-
formed between January 2019 and November 2020. The study was
conducted at 5 primary care clinics affiliated with Brigham Health,
an academic health system in Boston, Massachusetts. All clinics
were members of the Primary Care Practice-Based Research Net-
work and used a single EHR (Epic Systems, Inc.). Clinics ranged in
number of physicians (8 to 37 per clinic), physician clinical effort
(part-time vs full-time), patient populations (majority Spanish vs
English-speaking), and clinic type (teaching vs non-teaching).

Data collection and analysis
As part of our UCD process, we elicited patient and provider
requirements sequentially using the 3 methods described below. Be-
cause the requirements for each user type and for EHR integration
were interdependent, we considered all of them during each stage of
data collection and analysis.

Secondary analysis of exit interviews from prior feasibility study
At the conclusion of the prior feasibility study, we conducted inter-
views with participating patients and providers about their experi-
ence with the intervention.26,27 For the current study, we re-
reviewed transcripts of these interviews to identify new technical
requirements and user interface enhancements that would improve
upon the original intervention and would be appropriate for primary
care. Two research team members independently reviewed tran-
script excerpts to identify new and relevant features. From these
data, we assembled a preliminary list of user requirements. We then
assessed each requirement based on the interview data and NASSS
domains for inclusion in subsequent design sessions.

Design sessions and stakeholder meetings
We conducted a series of in-person design sessions with patients and
providers. We aimed to recruit a diverse range of patients and pro-
viders in terms of age, gender, race, and ethnicity. One or 2 research
team members conducted each design session, lasting approximately
60 minutes for patients and 30–60 minutes for providers. All design
sessions were audio-recorded. Participants were shown wireframes
developed using an app prototyping tool (Fluid UI) for user interface
design40 and were encouraged to “think aloud” to describe their
reactions to questions about each app feature.41 We alternated de-
sign sessions with patients and providers to ensure we reconciled
both perspectives. For Spanish-speaking patient participants, 1 or 2
native Spanish speakers conducted the design sessions. We aimed to
keep the reading level for the patient participants at the 6th grade
level and assessed patients’ comprehension during design sessions.
We gathered additional input through informal meetings with clinic
medical directors, nurses, and 2 nurses in system leadership posi-
tions. Provider design sessions and meetings with clinic medical
directors included questions about workflow and EHR integration.
We met weekly with a user-experience expert to advise on interface
considerations. We continued recruiting until we no longer identi-
fied any new requirements for features those users considered to be
critical (saturation).

Audio recordings were independently reviewed by 2 research
team members. We used conventional content analysis methods to
identify user reactions which fell into the following categories: spe-
cific functionality, usability issues, and suggestions for changes to
app wording, functionality, or workflow.42 After the team members
reviewed the recordings, they recorded a bulleted list of findings
within each of these categories in Microsoft Word documents, dis-
cussed and resolved any differences considering relevant NASSS
domains, and applied changes to the wireframes for future design
sessions.

PCP survey
To quantify the scope and prevalence of the broad range of preferen-
ces identified in PCP design sessions, we developed a survey for
PCPs who treat asthma patients from the 5 study clinics. We drafted
survey items based on findings from the design sessions and refined
the items through cognitive testing with 3 practicing PCPs. Survey
question topics included preferences for reminders that PROs were
available in the EHR, graphical presentation of PROs, and antici-
pated benefits of the intervention. We distributed the survey using
REDCap.40 PCPs were offered a $25 gift card upon completion. We
calculated aggregate results of discrete items. For open-ended ques-
tions, 2 research team members independently reviewed and coded
all responses into 2 categories: provider notification of asthma data
within workflows and visual display of asthma data. The research
team members then discussed each response individually and se-
lected representative quotes that explained quantitative survey find-
ings.

Software development, enterprise data service
provisioning, and EHR app user interface integration
We used an agile software development approach to translate user
interface and EHR integration requirements that emerged from our
UCD process to ensure that our application would be delivered
within the constraints of our study period and MGB’s emerging gov-
ernance process for digital health.43 We met regularly with our app
developer (First Line Software, Inc.) and MGB’s EHR governance
teams to determine the most feasible strategies for implementing our
technical and functional requirements. We identified key EHR appli-
cation programming interfaces (APIs) that were required to pull cer-
tain data elements into the application; initiated the enterprise data
service provisioning process for requesting APIs; identified graphical
user-interface constraints for provider access to third-party applica-
tions via the EHR; and finally, iteratively refined the user interface,
developed using React Native, an open-source mobile application
framework.44 To ensure security of the protected health information
(PHI) collected by the app, the application was hosted inside the
health system’s firewall on a secure server and underwent a rigorous
security review as required by our institution’s Research Information
Security Office.

RESULTS

We analyzed 26 exit interview transcripts (21 patients, 5 providers)
from our prior feasibility study, conducted 21 new design sessions
(15 patients, 6 providers), and analyzed results of 55 survey
responses from 78 PCP (71% response rate), all of whom were
physicians. The demographic characteristics of these participants
are summarized in Table 2. Prior feasibility demographic data was
reported previously.26

2435

Patient-facing, PCP-facing, and nursing-facing requirements in-
formed by the corresponding NASSS domain(s) are described in Ta-
ble 3. Given the interdependencies and interactions among the 3
types of users, requirements based on each user’s experience were
reconciled with the perspectives of other users. For example,
requirements for patient-facing components were identified based
on input not only from patients but also from PCPs and nurses. We
note divergences in requirements within and among the 3 user
groups (eg, different preferences among PCPs regarding PRO dis-
plays). Specific EHR integration requirements (eg, EHR inbox mes-
saging), were necessary to support certain critical user requirements
(eg, callback requests routed to a triage nurse). Many of the require-
ments were determined by a combination of results from the prior
study, design sessions, and survey results.

Patient-facing requirements
Results from the UCD process and application of NASSS translated
into requirements for the patient-facing app, which were largely
consistent for English and Spanish-speaking patients. Feasibility test
data and design sessions suggested strong user support for adminis-
tering the questionnaires on a weekly basis with 48-hour deadlines
(eg, “I think it’s great that you give that amount of time. I just did it,
because once it pops up, I just do it just to get it off my. . . to do list.”
[Test Patient exit interview]). However, for patients with well-
controlled asthma over several weeks or months, feasibility test and
design session participants suggested that completing all 5 questions
was too burdensome. Consequently, we designed a modification to
allow patients without symptoms during the preceding week to com-
plete a single question, addressing whether patients had any relevant
symptoms, instead of the entire 5-item PRO questionnaire. An affir-
mative response prompted the 5-item PRO questionnaire (Figure 1).
Patients participating in design sessions viewed this feature favor-
ably: “I like the option of putting ‘no’ and then you’re not going to
answer all these other questions.” (Design Patient)
Secondary analysis of our prior feasibility study data demonstrated
support for an app feature allowing patients to request callbacks for
deteriorating PROs: “I would always answer ‘yes’ [when the app
prompted me to request a call] . .. after a couple of hours, someone
from the staff would call me to see how I was doing and if I needed to
go in to see the doctor” (Test Patient exit interview). However, the
“mandatory callback” feature, in which patients with poor asthma
control are automatically called by a nurse, were perceived as too bur-
densome to nurses and low-value by patients: “it was just annoying,
because I’m dealing with asthma. .. I’m going to call my doctor. I
don’t want you [the app] to call my doctor for me” (Test Patient exit
interview). Specifically, patients and the nurse participant from our
prior feasibility study suggested removing the mandatory callback re-
quirement and only including the optional feature which allowed
patients to decline to request a callback. Therefore, we removed this
feature and did not assess it further in design sessions.
Other patient-facing requirements included: ability to record
notes (prior feasibility study test patients, design sessions); triggers
and peak flow measurements to engage some patients with poor
asthma control (prior feasibility study test patients, design sessions);
previsit reminders to discuss asthma data with providers at upcom-
ing clinic visits (design sessions); and educational information—vid-
eos, brief tips about asthma, and general medical care (design
sessions). The latter requirement was also reflected in feedback dur-
ing design sessions from PCPs who supported empowering patients
through education, which could then be reinforced during clinic vis-

its. PCPs provided guidance on high priority education topics for
patients to view on the app, including how to use an inhaler and
how to distinguish rescue from controller inhalers. Two Spanish-
speaking patients in our design sessions requested that the app of-
fered faster response times for requested calls. One suggested allow-
ing the app user to enter a level of urgency for the call. However,
this request could not be reconciled with existing clinics workflows
for responding to patient queries.

PCP-facing requirements
We identified 2 PCP-facing requirements from design sessions and
the PCP survey (Tables 3 and 4). The first requirement was a dash-
board containing patients’ asthma data that would be accessible
with minimal effort from the patient’s chart in the EHR. An interac-

2437

tive graphical display of PRO data (Figure 2) was iteratively devel-
oped with input from PCPs. In this display, survey responses were
almost evenly divided regarding preferences for whether higher
numbers of the graph should mean better asthma control (47%, eg,
“I’m trained to think about asthma in terms of ACT scores, so to me
a higher number is better”), or worse asthma control (40%, eg, “I
usually think about asthma control in terms of how frequent and se-
vere are symptoms–so the higher [the score] ¼ red ¼ bad–fits my
general mindset”).

Design sessions with providers yielded several enhancements to
the PRO dashboard: an auto-generated text summary of the
patient’s recent asthma data that could be incorporated into notes,
and point-of-care access to evidence-based guidelines for asthma
management (a statement summarizing asthma control goals and a
link to more detailed guidance—the statement was developed by a
pulmonologist with expertise in asthma from our institution and in-
corporated guidelines from the National Heart, Lung, and Blood In-
stitute, the Global Initiative for Asthma, and recent asthma

2438

literature). In free-text comments and in the design session, PCPs
suggested additional types of EHR data that could be incorporated
into the display to make it more useful (eg, current asthma medica-
tions and refill data, recent ED visits or hospitalizations, name of
asthma specialist treating patient). However, other respondents pre-
ferred to access these data through current EHR locations (eg, “I
don’t need other data. I have a routine for following/checking other
data that works for me.”)
The second requirement was previsit reminders: all 6 PCPs in de-
sign sessions endorsed the idea of having the app remind patients to

bring their phones and medications to their visits. Of the 55 pro-
viders who responded to the survey, 53 (96%) wanted to be
reminded to check the PROs. Of other options offered, 35 (64%)
PCPs preferred to receive an EHR inbox message as a previsit re-
minder; 23 (42%) preferred in-person reminders from a nurse or
medical assistant; and 17 (31%) wanted to receive a clinical decision
support alert (ie, “Best Practice Alert”) during the encounter. In
written survey comments, 3 PCPs suggested adding the reminder in
the “huddle note” (ie, a short note within the daily clinic schedule
view in the EHR).

Nurse-facing requirements
We identified 2 requirements for nurses to be able to feasibly re-
spond to callback requests in their existing workflows. First, nurses
in all 5 clinics required all patient callback requests to be sent in the
form of EHR inbox messages to the individual nurse or nurse pool
assigned to the requesting patient and affiliated with the clinic. Be-
cause nurses’ workflows were centered around responding to EHR
inbox messages, nurse managers suggested that other methods for

delivering the requests (eg, email) would not be reliable. Nurses
requested that these messages include the patient’s responses to the
recent questionnaire, directions for how to access the asthma data
within Epic, and other key information to assist with prioritizing the
callback request (eg, if they had already called the clinic about their
asthma).
Second, nurse leaders suggested that a prespecified nurse-driven
clinical protocol designed specifically for asthma would be most ef-

2440

fective for triaging callback requests. Otherwise, nurses would de-
fault to referring patient-reported issues they identify to the PCP
rather than addressing these issues themselves, creating an inefficient
workflow.

EHR integration requirements
We identified 3 EHR integration requirements (Figure 3). First,
PCPs indicated that the asthma PRO dashboard must be easily ac-
cessible from patients’ charts before or during a visit. To address
this, we were required to register the third-party application as an
“extension.” The PRO dashboard could then be added to the main
navigation bar for all PCP users, and individual PCP users also had
the option of customizing their patient chart view to include the
PRO dashboard as a default tab (Figure 2). When selected, the PRO
dashboard application reads credentials of the current PCP user (eg,
username) and selected patient (eg, MRN) from the EHR, rendering
the appropriate patient’s dashboard in context of the current PCP
user and selected patient. The PRO dashboard automatically
authenticates the current PCP user using our institution’s Single
Sign-On (SSO) process, thereby eliminating a second login step.
Second, a data services API was required to send EHR inbox
notifications to nurses and PCPs for patient callback requests and
previsit reminders, respectively. Since a standards-based API that
supports EHR inbox messaging did not exist, we used a custom API

built by our institution that allows a third-party app to send an
EHR inbox message to any specified EHR user or pool of users.
Third, to send previsit tips to patients and reminders to PCPs, the
application required access to visit schedules and the identity of the
PCP. While visits schedules and PCP identity could be accessed via
Fast
Health
Interoperability
Resources
(FHIR)
APIs
(“Appointment” and “Care Team” resources, respectively), we ini-
tially decided to use our institution’s custom APIs (given our soft-
ware
vendor’s
experience)
while
exploring
the
feasibility
of
transitioning to FHIR APIs supported by US Core profiles as part of
our scale and spread efforts.

DISCUSSION

Using the NASSS framework to guide our UCD process, we identi-
fied user and EHR integration requirements for the design of a scal-
able, remote symptom monitoring intervention for primary care.
Patient-facing requirements included allowing patients with no ac-
tive symptoms to answer only 1 item per week instead of 5; allowing
patients to view educational videos and enter notes, triggers, and
peak flows; and sending relevant visit-related tips to encourage the
patient to discuss their asthma with their PCPs. PCP-facing require-
ments included allowing the dashboard to be viewed in the EHR
with 1 click from the patient’s chart and sending the PCP an EHR

2441

inbox message preceding patient visits. Nurse-facing requirements
included receiving requests for callbacks via EHR inbox message,
and a clinical triage protocol for handling such calls. While we were
able to integrate the application’s PRO dashboard into our institu-
tion’s EHR for clinician access, requirements for sending EHR inbox
messages could not be addressed with current open standards, re-
quiring us to use our institution’s previously developed custom APIs.
By applying research methods in each NASSS domain, we were
able to identify requirements that would be pertinent to the potential
broad use of our original intervention for asthma in a primary care
setting once adapted. We were able to reconcile requirements eli-
cited from English- and Spanish-speaking patients, PCPs, and
nurses. Inconsistencies in PCP preferences may reflect variations in
PCP workflows identified in prior studies.45,46 Several preference
variations could be addressed through configuration options. For
example, most PCPs preferred receiving an EHR inbox message re-
minder regarding available asthma data, while others preferred an
alert or to be told by clinic staff. “Alert fatigue” may be the reason
most prefer not to receive an alert.47–50 PCPs differed regarding the
dashboard’s purpose, whether to solely display asthma PROs or to
serve as a comprehensive dashboard for all asthma-related data in
the EHR. While clinicians may distrust data sourced from third
party apps, this may become less of a problem as these users become
accustomed to integrated apps. The most striking variation we
found was divergent preferences among PCPs for the direction of
better or worse asthma control on the dashboard, suggesting the
need for more standardized presentations to enable consistent com-
munication among patients and providers.51–54

Our study addresses a notable gap in prior literature by identify-
ing requirements for a scalable digital remote monitoring interven-
tion for adult asthma patients that may have relevance to other
clinical domains. As care is increasingly delivered remotely, which
has accelerated due to the COVID-19 pandemic, such requirements
are likely to become more important.9 By applying NASSS frame-
work
domains—especially
technology,
value
proposition,
and
adopter systems for patients and providers—we were able to priori-
tize scalability throughout our requirements elicitation process. Our
effort is distinct from other reported efforts at developing clinically
integrated remote monitoring interventions, which lack prioritiza-
tion of requirements,55 require additional clinical staff, such as care
managers, to monitor data,56 or require a device (eg, for measuring
inhaler usage).57 These alternate approaches may encounter scalabil-
ity issues, such as extra complexity due to prioritizing less important
requirements, or costs challenges for using devices where they aren’t
necessary. Furthermore, we provide new knowledge regarding how
a third-party application can be integrated into an EHR with pa-
tient- and provider-facing components to enable the use of PROs for
between-visit monitoring, complementing our previous work in the
hospital setting.6,58–61 Even with recent advances, FHIR standards
could not address all of our requirements for this application, sug-
gesting a need for additional standards, specifically for sending mes-
sages to EHR inboxes.

Limitations
Our study has several limitations. First, our remote monitoring in-
tervention is restricted to a single condition. Additional UCD is re-
quired to understand requirements for other medical conditions (eg,
mental health, rheumatological diseases). Second, clinical users were
affiliated with 1 academic health center that used a single EHR
(Epic Systems, Inc.). Requirements may vary for other health sys-

2442

tems and EHR vendors. As described in the NASSS framework,
organizations with lower capacity to innovate may have more com-
plex requirements. Also, organizations without a clearly defined
governance process for integrating third party apps into the EHR
will likely encounter challenges. Third, our app is dependent on
smartphone ownership and use by patients. Although a growing ma-
jority of patients have smartphones, some may have difficulty using
them (though many may have a caregiver who uses a smart-
phone).7,62–64 Fourth, the PRO data was stored in the app server
and not written back to the EHR database. However, institutions
are currently considering how to integrate and utilize high-value pa-
tient-generated data into the EHR.65 Finally, EHR functionality and
clinician use of EHRs are evolving. As PRO functionality within na-
tive EHRs is increasingly adopted, user requirements for clinicians’
engagement with these data may change, and future validation and
replication of our findings is necessary.

CONCLUSION

We determined user and EHR integration requirements for a clini-
cally integrated remote symptom monitoring intervention for
asthma using PROs. The requirements reflect the NASSS framework
and are designed to scale across primary care. This study demon-
strates how third-party apps can be used for PRO-based between-
visit monitoring in a real-world clinical setting with the goal of max-
imizing use, usability, and scalability in parallel with native EHR
functionality and patient portal offerings.6,58–61,66–68 We identified
gaps in current technical and graphical standards that would facili-
tate spread of this intervention. Although we focused exclusively on
asthma, these findings may generalize to other chronic conditions
that benefit from routine symptom monitoring using standardized
PROs, such as rheumatologic disease, mental health illness, and irri-
table bowel disease.69 Similar requirements elicitation approaches
also have the potential to develop scalable interventions for moni-
toring overall health of patients with multiple chronic conditions,
such as captured by global health PROs which measure general
physical, mental, and social health.70–73 With further testing, itera-
tive development, and continued attention to scalability, the rapidly
evolving efforts of digital remote monitoring between visits may be
achievable at the population level for patients with chronic condi-
tions.