RESEARCH ARTICLE
Alternative Ultrasound Gel for a Sustainable
Ultrasound Program: Application of Human
Centered Design

Margaret Salmon1☯*, Christian Salmon2☯, Alexa Bissinger3‡, Mundenga Mutendi Muller4‡,
Alegnta Gebreyesus5‡, Haimanot Geremew6‡, Sarah Wendell7‡, Aklilu Azaza8‡,
Maurice Salumu9‡, Nerys Benfield10‡

1 University Health Network, University of Toronto, Department of Emergency Medicine, Toronto, Canada,
2 Western New England University, Department of Industrial Engineering and Engineering Management,
Springfield, Massachusetts, United States of America, 3 University of California San Francisco, Department
of Emergency Medicine, San Francisco, California, United States of America, 4 HEAL Africa Hospital,
Department of Emergency Medicine, Goma, Republique Democratique du Congo, 5 Black Lion Hospital,
Department of Emergency Medicine, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, 6 Black Lion Hospital, Emergency Medicine
Research Center, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, 7 Georgetown University, School of Medicine, Washington, D.C.,
United States of America, 8 Addis Ababa University, Tikur Anbessa Specialized Hospital, Department of
Emergency Medicine, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, 9 Kindu General Hospital, Department of Internal Medicine,
Kindu, Democratic Republic of Congo, 10 Albert Einstein College of Medicine of Yeshiva University,
Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, New York, New York, United States of America

☯These authors contributed equally to this work.
‡ These authors also contributed equally to this work.

Methods

Concept of Human Centered Design

Human Centered Design (HCD), also called user-centered design or design thinking, is a solu-
tion-design process of user empathy, purposeful design, rapid successive prototyping and itera-
tion, integrating user feedback to generate feasible, desirable, and practical solutions. The

IDEO HCD Tool Kit is a process guide focused on creating solutions for low-resource settings.
The guide outlines the stages of the HCD process and suggests potential methodology and
exercise for these settings. This specific guide divides the design process into three phases:

1. “Hear:” Understand and empathize with end-users using participant observation, site visits,
and ethnographic interviewing. These materials are then used to define a design challenge.

2. “Create:” Apply brainstorm techniques, visual layout and needs statement synthesis to
guide rapid prototyping to elicit feedback from end-users.

3. “Deliver:” Provide prototypes to end-users to react to and incorporate their feedback into
the next cycle of iteration.

Identification of Design Challenge

Design Team.
Our design team was made up of a diverse group of six individuals from
different professional and national backgrounds: an MD-MPH emergency medicine physician
and ultrasound expert, Canada (F); an MD, emergency medicine house staff and ultrasound
user, from Democratic Republic of Congo (M); a civil engineer, from USA (M); a filmmaker,
Democratic Republic of Congo (M); a business student, Democratic Republic of Congo; a phy-
sician and entrepreneur, DRC (M) in order to bring multiple perspectives to the table to diver-
sify solution generating perspectives. An additional HCD trained emergency medicine
physician MD MBA, USA (F) was available to advise on the HCD process.
Based on prior interviews and in-field experience, we defined our design challenge as:

How might we create an alternative ultrasound gel that would be locally available and
affordable, that will yield a functional alternative to commercially produced gel for use in
ultrasonography in low-resourced African environments?

Study Participants

End-Users and Sites. We defined our End-Users as local clinicians who use point of care
ultrasound (POCUS) from sites representative of low-resource clinical environments with
broad geographic distribution for Sub-Saharan & Horn of Africa. Clinical field visits and inter-
views took place in the departments of obstetrics and emergency medicine at Heal Africa Hos-
pital, trauma center Goma, Eastern DRC; Kindu General Hospital, Ministry of Health regional
hospital, Maniama Province, DRC; and Black Lion/Tikur Anbessa Specialized Hospital,
Department of Emergency Medicine, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia. Forty-nine healthcare providers
participated. Thirteen staff emergency physicians in Ethiopia, twenty-six resident staff physi-
cians and orthopedic officers in DRC and ten staff physicians in Kindu, DRC contributed their
ideas and feedback to this project, over the course of several site visits.
Background Knowledge Experts.
Background knowledge experts of POCUS ultrasound
were identified as members of the ultrasound section of American College of Emergency Physi-
cians (ACEP). ACEP is one of the most recognized professional emergency medicine organiza-
tions and the United States is a world leader in POCUS application.
Local Experts.
Local supply and production experts were identified as local market ven-
dors because of their in-depth knowledge of locally available starches and food products. Mar-
ket vendors were recruited at Virunga Market, Goma DRC, City Centre, Kindu, DRC; Merkato
in Lideta Subcity and Addis Ketema, Addis Ababa Ethiopia, and Banankabougou and Sébéni-
koro Quarter Market, Bameko Mali. While there were no End-Users in Mali, we felt it was

important to include this market in order to ensure solutions include the region of West Africa.
Only vendors who sold bulk starch-like grains and flours were recruited.
Reviewers.
Two emergency medicine physicians with specialty training in ultrasound and
a nurse radiologist with ultrasound training.

Data Collection Methods

All information from brainstorming sessions and interviews were recorded as written notes in
either English or French. The notes were used as working documents and no further transcrip-
tions were done. Note takers were design group members during the brainstorm sessions and
research assistants during the interviews.
Hear.
The Design Team conducted field visits for one month in Goma (DRC) and Addis
Ababa (Ethiopia) each and nine days in Kindu (DRC) to observe End-Users in the clinical set-
ting. Both participatory observation and group interviews were conducted with the objective of
obtaining existing knowledge of limitations to local POCUS use and challenges to using com-
mercial ultrasound gel. The team then identified a group of Background Knowledge Experts
and requested suggestions for alternatives to commercial gel for use in low-resource settings.
The request was sent via email by ACEP organizers.
Create. A total of thirteen brainstorm sessions were held in the field. The first three were
dedicated to describing product metrics. Metrics were gleaned from previous literature, (5)
commercial ultrasound gel websites and conversations with End-Users. Brainstorming sessions
were held in a designated meeting space with all Design Team members. A project leader
recorded ideas and suggestions by written text. Ideas were discussed and if rejected through
consensus crossed off the list, if approved they remained active until the next session. A labora-
tory was simultaneously established with hot plate, cook stove, ultrasound machine, vascular
and abdominal probe, bottle, & ingredients (suggested products from the market, salt, water,
spoons, pot) for prototype development. A designated project engineer prepared all prototypes
recording ingredient combinations in a notebook. If a prototype was deemed acceptable by
Design Team members it was presented to End-Users. If not, a line was crossed through the
formula. Before any 3rd party was exposed to any solution, Design Team members were
recruited as proxies for prototype testing and scans for the project were done only on Design
Team and End-Users.
Results of the online survey from Background Knowledge Experts were then queried for
ready commercial gel alternatives that met those metrics and potential materials selected. Local
Experts were then identified based on these results and interviewed by research assistants to
query for local suggestions that were similar to the materials selected. 72 vendors in Kindu &
Goma, Democratic Republic of Congo, Addis Ababa Ethiopia and Bameko Mali were then
interviewed in groups. The women were shown photos of physicians performing ultrasonogra-
phy and given samples of commercial gel and the design challenge was discussed. (Fig 1) Par-
ticipation was determined if a vendor commented either to the research assistant or other
vendors to discuss the topic. Interviews were done at the market place with suggestions col-
lected in written format, and the interaction in still photo and video format.
Deliver.
Local Expert interviews were reviewed and a prototype was developed from the
suggestions. The prototype was first tested on Design Team members and then over the course
of 10 days, presented to End-Users for feedback through discussion using the desired product
metrics as a guide but with no particular objective scoring system. End-Users discussed metrics
and each cycle of iteration incorporated the feedback from the previous cycle.
Once End-Users decided a prototype was sufficient, Reviewers evaluated the images.
Reviewers were blinded and evaluated eight paired comparison images taken with prototype

and commercial gel that had been recorded and downloaded to a laptop. Images were the 4
FAST views, hepato-renal, splenic renal, subxiphoid cardiac and pelvis FAST, median nerve
block images and lung sliding video. No scoring system was incorporated into the review rather
a qualitative assessment was made if the image was of equal quality as the images with com-
mercial gel showing the organs or structure described in the International Federation of Emer-
gency Medicine (IFEM) Point-of-Care Ultrasound Curriculum Guidance. [11] Costs per
250ml for manufacture were also calculated.

Results

Hear

End-Users consistently described lack of ultrasound gel due to both cost and local access as a
major limitation during field visits. When commercial ultrasound gel was used it was often is
small quantities that image quality was compromised (HEAL Africa Hospital, Black Lion Hos-
pital). Design Team members also witnessed local physicians attempting to utilize ultrasound
with low-viscosity oils and lubricating gels with poor image results (Kindu General Hospital).
End-Users at Black Lion Hospital in Ethiopia performed twice as many scans (30/day) as either
site in DRC (5–10/day).
Twenty responses were received from Background Knowledge Experts with nine potential
alternatives suggested. Alternative One: Water, which the Design Team determined not of suf-
ficient viscosity for clear quality imaging. Alternative Two: Shampoo, determined more expen-
sive than gel, Alternative Three: Guar Gum, unavailable for purchase in local markets of Kindu
and Goma; Alternative Four: cornstarch slurry, determined too expensive. Alternative Five:
gelatin, not available, Alternative Six: lotion, determined too expensive, Alternative Seven:
Betadine, determined too expensive and could possibly damage the ultrasound probe. Alterna-
tive Eight: surgical lube, determined too expensive. Suggestions were narrowed down to best
chance ingredient based on determinates of cost and availability.
Cornstarch was the most likely solution, given the abundance of corn in central and eastern
DRC and Addis Ababa and previous validation for use. Cornstarch availability in the local
market, however, ranged from limited (Addis Ababa) to non-existent (rural DRC). Further,
research suggested that its production is a resource intensive industrial process to extract the
germ from the grain before grinding. These considerations negated cornstarch as a viable solu-
tion for End Users.

Create

Product metrics chosen were consistency/viscosity: equivalent to commercial gel by sight and
feel. Durability: Maintain consistency while unrefrigerated with no separation of materials
for > 48 hours. Practicality: Manufactured using locally available equipment, including electric
heating element or open charcoal flame, in a time duration that can be reasonable performed
on a daily basis. Cost: 1/100th cost of commercial gel as relative to cost on local market (arbi-
trarily selected). Image acceptability: Reviewers noted no visual differences in image quality in-
side by-side comparison with conventional gel.
Early in the brainstorming process, both cornstarch and other cooking products and food-
stuffs came up as products with analogous physical properties to ultrasound gels. Given the
familiarity of market vendors with local food products and their preparation, they were selected
as an Expert Group (focus group) for interviewing and identifying possible local materials that
could be prepared as ultrasound gel alternatives.
During group interviews (minimum two visits each market), market vendor suggestions
included:

• Kindu and Goma DRC vendors: sorgum, mixture of egg/lemon/cassava, aloevera, plantain
flour, cassava root flour, and hand sanitizer

• Addis Ababa, Ethiopia vendors: selit flour (sesame), telba, bula (flour from ensset), ajji, gon-
dare and ret.

• Bameko Mali: suggested: Cassava, sorgum, banada flour and ripe fruit from the Mali Yurni
tree.

Deliver

Plaintain & sorgum flour, cassava root flour, bula and selit were the only suggestions which
when mixed with water and heated formed a consistency similar to commercial gel. On day
one, DRC EUs chose cassava root flour from the other mixtures as the most practical and viable
on all metrics.
Six different prototypes of cassava-root were developed by heating varying concentrations
of ground cassava root, salt and water, brought to a low boil while mixing. Samples were
allowed to cool for 2 hours before testing. End-Users chose the mixture of 1 part salt, 8 parts
cassava root flour and 32 parts water for the preferred mixture. Stir the mixture while bring to
boil. Place pot aside and when cool fill bottles by spooning mixture. Ethiopian End-Users
chose bulla, a flower derived from Enset (banana like plant) via a similar process. (Fig 2)
Image evaluation via eight paired comparison images taken with prototype and commercial
for comparison showed no preference between images from three independent evaluators.
Views were typical hepato-renal FAST images, right upper quadrant, median nerve block
images and lung sliding video. There were no skin reactions to gel prototypes reported. (Fig 3).
Per unit cost was calculated using the average price as quoted by market vendors in each
market. Capital costs of the heat source, specifically an electric hot plate were not included.
Local cost of an electric hot plate (stove) averages $50 (USD). While seemingly inexpensive,
this belies the reality of the situation on the ground, in that the local health infrastructure is in
such disrepair that even this cost might be considered ‘out of reach’. Therefore, the manufac-
ture process was done using a simple charcoal heat source. Labor costs were also not included
as radiology staff manufactured the prototype during the study period and continue to do so to
date. The cost was absorbed into their existing salary. Cost per bottle (one days use) was calcu-
lated using 600 Congolese Francs per $1.00 and 20.1 Birr per $1.00. (Table 1)

Discussion

Ultrasonography is one of the most important diagnostic tools for clinicians in low-resource
settings. Increasingly higher resolution machines are being developed at lower costs and in por-
table sizes, and can be found many areas traditionally termed low-resourced. However, limited
supply and recurring cost of consumables required to operate the equipment, such as ultra-
sound gel, is a barrier to sustainable use.
Research presented here describes the application of HCD process to generate gel alterna-
tives from readily available low-cost ingredients in local markets that required minimal pro-
cessing resources in time or energy to manufacture. We created prototypes from cassava flour
(widely available through the Great Lakes Region and Western Africa), and bula in Ethiopia
(most widely used food staple in Ethiopia). [13]
Both cassava and bula manufactured gel are practical alternatives from a cost perspective.
The cost of commercial gel is $5.00 to >$15.00 per bottle and user groups often do limited or
compromised quality scans to conserve its use. The cost of production for alternative gel in
DRC was approximately ~$0.09 (USA) per 500 ml bottle. For hospitals with limited budgets,
access to cheap gel could literally help sustain an ultrasound program. Indeed, Kindu General

Hospital, a site with the most difficulties, now uses the cassava-root based gel for all its clinic
and hospital ultrasound needs. The alternative had been no gel.
As multiple countries on the African Continent are considered low-income countries, we
chose to map a broad geographic range to give health care providers alternatives. While only
Ethiopia has bula (unique growing conditions), cassava appears to be ubiquitous and is
reported in over 40 countries. As well, the countries not known to have cassava as a staple do
have sorghum in common. One could extrapolate that sorghum could similarly be used to
manufacture gel.

We found HCD methodology helpful in this setting as our user group had the opportunity
to clearly state their problem contextualized to their needs and then provide feedback through-
out the design process. This kept our design process on a path to a user-centered solution. A
multidisciplinary team was also essential as HCD is specifically engineered such that different
perspectives keep the team thinking outside the box and contribute multiple perspectives and
funds of knowledge to the discussion.
Future research will extend in-field testing to include a more intensive review of image qual-
ity, as well as considerations of potential bacterial load and effects on bacterial load of in-field
processing options (such as boiling time and ingredients), and potential for allergic reaction or
skin irritation. The Gynecology and Radiology Department of Albert Einstein School of Medi-
cine are currently completing these studies) As previous publications noted, starch like gel
alternatives such as cornstarch show excellent ultrasound imaging quality however this raw
material is not universally available. Ultimately, we hope to source local knowledge to create an
interactive map of the African continent where clinicians can link to manufacture instructions
as we have done in Fig 3 based on the region of interest but also to include validity testing
results.

Limitations

Neither bacterial, skin irritation / allergic reacting, nor image quality testing was conducted
with complete scientific rigor. The alternative gels outlined here are intended as a pragmatic
solution to a chronic resource problem witnessed in-field. All the processes outlined above will
be repeated in laboratory conditions, with guidance documents released with tested and vali-
dated results.
Repeatability is a question due to the potential for inconsistent condition of the raw mate-
rial. Using Cassava Root as an example; the process is feasible because finely ground cassava

root is ubiquitously available across central and eastern DRC in flour form at local markets for
a low cost. Consistency of the grinding process is, however, a question and wholly dependent
on local conditions. Thus, the mixture identified as preferred in this paper might have to be
adjusted based on locally available supplies.
The ultrasound image quality was judged qualitatively with loose criteria and there is risk of
poor interobserver variability. The cost metric of 1/100th the value of commercial gel was an
arbitrary selection. It is quite possible that the final costs calculated will continue to be a barrier
to utility.

Conclusion

Using HCD methodology, we determined that with exceedingly low cost and ubiquitous avail-
ability of both cassava root flour in the Great Lakes region of Sun-Saharan Africa and bulla in
Ethiopia there are possible low cost attractive alternatives to commercial gel. Preliminary tests
show each to be equal in image quality to currently available commercial gel.