Original Paper

A Digital Cognitive Aid for Anesthesia to Support Intraoperative
Crisis Management:Results of the User-Centered Design Process

Stefanie Schild1, MSc; Brita Sedlmayr2, PhD; Ann-Kathrin Schumacher1, MSc; Martin Sedlmayr3, PhD; Hans-Ulrich
Prokosch1, PhD; Michael St.Pierre4, MD; German Cognitive Aid Working Group5

1Department of Medical Informatics, Biometrics and Epidemiology, Chair of Medical Informatics, Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nürnberg,
Erlangen, Germany
2Center for Evidence-based Healthcare, Carl Gustav Carus University Hospital, Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany
3Carl Gustav Carus Faculty of Medicine, Institute for Medical Informatics and Biometry, Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany
4Anästhesiologische Klinik, Universitätsklinikum Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany
5Berufsverband Deutscher Anästhesisten, Nürnberg, Germany

Stefanie Schild, MSc
Department of Medical Informatics, Biometrics and Epidemiology
Chair of Medical Informatics
Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nürnberg
Wetterkreuz 13
Erlangen, 91058
Germany
Phone: 49 9131 85 26785

Methods

User-Centered Design

The development of this cognitive aid is based on the UCD
process of the International Organization for Standardization
(ISO) norm 9241-210 [7], which has recently been performed
for the development of other applications in the medical context
[8-10]. This process comprises the analysis of the context of
use, the definition of user requirements, the development of
prototypes, and tests with representative users.

For this study, a thorough analysis of the physical and
organizational environment, the application context, and the
technical and task-specific requirements of the end users was
performed. These requirements were implemented in an initial
prototype and evaluated with a user test. The evaluation was
used to query the user requirements regarding their prioritization
and, if necessary, to adapt them accordingly or add new derived
ones. With the user requirements revised in this way, a second
prototype was created, which in turn was evaluated with a user
test. This iteration step was repeated with a third prototype.

The study process design [7] is presented in Figure 1. Owing
to its scope, only the more significant parts of the process are
described in this paper.

Analysis of the Context of Use

A brainstorming session was held with 7 members of the
German Cognitive Aid Working Group present at an initial
meeting to identify users’ expectations regarding a digital
cognitive aid and develop a first set of ideas concerning its
functionality. Furthermore, context interviews with 4
anesthesiologists and 3 anesthetic nurses were conducted at the
anesthesia departments of 3 project partners (University Hospital
Erlangen, University Hospital Dresden, and Trauma Hospital
Berlin). Personas, that is, written representations of the intended
end users of the application, were developed to give a clear
picture of the characteristics of the users within the project
group.

On the basis of the results of the above methods, storyboards
were developed for 3 different use cases (intraoperative
management of malignant hyperthermia, management of
ventricular fibrillation, and a local user editing the content). To
visualize the respective stories, the interaction between users
and the application was illustrated by images and accompanying
text. The 3 storyboards were shared with all members of the
project group to get general feedback on the stories. They were
asked to indicate how well the application met their needs to
derive additional requirements for the application. Feedback
was given in free-text form and aggregated afterward.
Subsequently, the storyboards were slightly modified by the
additional requirements identified.

Specification of User Requirements

The collected information by the various applied methods was
consolidated and recorded in individual documents. The main
requirements document contained the results of the user context

analysis and evaluation of the first prototype together with the
specification of the respective derived and prioritized user
requirements. In addition, 2 further documents included the
evaluation results of the second and third prototype and the
respective derived or revised requirements.

If the evaluation result of a prototype regarding the need for
revision was ambiguous in some aspects, relevant issues were
identified and prepared both textually and visually.
Subsequently, the points of discussion were jointly reviewed
with the project group until a consensus was reached.

Development of Design Solutions

An initial interaction design was developed that described the
functions and processes in the interaction between the system
and user. For the development, requirements identified by the
analysis of the context of use and a literature research as well
as international recommendations for navigation and user
dialogue design [11-13] were taken into account. In addition,
the results of a competitor analysis and existing paper-based
checklists served as sources of information. The medical content
was based on a checklist provided by the German Cognitive
Aid Working Group for the intraoperative emergency of
malignant hyperthermia. On the basis of the initial interaction
design, the first prototype was built in Balsamiq Mockups 3
(Balsamiq Studios, LLC) [14]. Subsequently, a demonstration
video was created, describing the individual screens of the
prototype regarding their functionality and navigation options,
and was made available online.

A revised interaction design was developed, considering the
results of the evaluation of the first prototype and the
specifications of the main requirements document. On the basis

of the revised interaction design, the second prototype was built
using PowerPoint. The development was realized by the creation
of a separate slide for each view and each function call within
the application. Furthermore, an audio track was recorded for
every slide, describing the respective screen regarding the
functionality and navigation options. Subsequently, 3 separate
demonstration videos were produced (for desktop/tablet general
structure, desktop/tablet exemplary run with checklists, and
smartphone general structure), which were made available
online.

The third prototype was created for tablets. The process was
identical to the second prototype concerning the graphical
generation. This time, however, most of the elements were
hyperlinked to other slides, allowing logical navigation between
the different screens of the prototype. As a result, once the PDF
had been opened with a PDF reader, the user could interactively
navigate the prototype.

Evaluation of Design Solutions

Web-Based Questionnaire

To evaluate the first and second prototype, corresponding
Web-based questionnaires were developed. Except for the open
questions, the items were answered on a 5-point Likert scale,
ranging from 1=strongly disagree to 3=neither agree nor disagree
(neutral) to 5=strongly agree. For some items, respondents were
asked to justify their response should the rating be neutral or
negative (ie, rating 1 to 3). The evaluation of the first prototype
included the System Usability Scale (SUS) [15,16]. The final
questionnaires (adapted from the German versions) can be found
in Multimedia Appendix 1.

For evaluation purposes, the developed questionnaires were
provided via the platform SoSci Survey [17], including a link
to the respective demonstration videos. The links to the SoSci
Survey portal were distributed to the German Cognitive Aid
Working Group via email. Project partners were encouraged to
forward the links to interested colleagues to increase the number
of respondents. For the analysis, the average rating and the SDs
were calculated for all closed questions. The answers to open
questions were grouped by topic, and the number of participants
mentioning the topic was counted. The identified issues to
improve the cognitive aid were prioritized to indicate the most
urgent areas for revision. The prioritization was based on the
frequency of mention, the severity of the problem, and the
requirements to better adapt the application to the medical
workflow without overloading it. The results of the evaluations
were summarized in tables and text form, and aspects for
revision of the application were listed by thematic classification.

Think-Aloud Protocol and Paper Questionnaire

The third prototype was evaluated by means of a
laboratory-based think-aloud protocol as a well-established
method to capture all actions and thoughts when using a system
[18-20]. The think-aloud study was led by a researcher of the
Chair of Medical Informatics and conducted at a single
institution (Department of Anesthesiology, University Hospital
Erlangen). The department’s library provided an undisturbed
and quiet environment for the study. The related institutional
review board approved the investigation. Participants were end
users who were neither familiar with the project nor with the
interface design. The individual meetings were scheduled to
last for about 20 to 30 min.

All participants were introduced to a medical emergency
(malignant hyperthermia) and asked to imagine themselves
being in the situation. In addition, the test persons were
confronted with 4 tasks that had to be solved using the prototype.
After all test conditions were explained, participants were asked
to work on the tasks in the given order. At a test session, all
verbal statements and screen actions were videotaped via the
device.

After completing the think-aloud protocol, a test person was
asked to complete a paper questionnaire related to the previous
use of the prototype. The questionnaire included the SUS.
Following the evaluation, the recorded videos were transcribed
and the results were thematically summarized and compiled
together with the evaluation of the questionnaires in tabular
form.

The test instructions and tasks for the think-aloud protocol as
well as the questionnaire (adapted from the German versions)
can be found in Multimedia Appendix 2.

Results

Analysis of the Context of Use

Anesthesiologists in the inpatient and outpatient area were
identified as the primary target group for the digital cognitive
aid. Anesthesia nurses as part of the anesthesia team are
considered secondary users. Figure 2 shows an excerpt of the
storyboard for emergency malignant hyperthermia (adapted
from the German version), which describes the use of the
cognitive aid on a tablet device. In the presented scenario, an
anesthesia nurse takes on the role of a reader.

Specification of the User Requirements

The main requirements document, including the results of the
user context analysis and evaluation of the first prototype, has
52 pages and is available in German only. The document can
be requested from the corresponding author on reasonable
demand.

Development of Design Solutions

First Prototype

On the basis of the initial interaction design, the first prototype
of the digital cognitive aid was created as individual screenshots
of a desktop application. At the time of the creation, colors were
deliberately used very sparingly, as in this first step the focus
was on functionality and screen layout of the cognitive aid.
Figure 3 illustrates the start page of the application. From here,
the respective emergency information can be found via the
different search options offered on the left (keyword search,
search by the airway, breathing, circulation, disability, exposure
(ABCDE) approach, alphabetical search, search via body
navigator, and search for symptoms). Once a checklist is opened,
this area can be used to navigate through various sections of
the emergency information. The central and largest area of the
3-column page structure always displays the essential
information. Here, the user receives a short description of the
various available functions. This is also the section where the
search results are displayed, and after opening a checklist, the

corresponding emergency action steps are displayed. The content
of the right-hand area is variable: on the start page, the area has
a chronological function and displays the recently accessed
checklists. Once a checklist is called up, additional information
about the emergency action steps is displayed at this position.
In the bar at the top right of the screen, the patient’s weight can
be entered for individual drug dosage suggestions and an
emergency call list can be accessed.

Second Prototype

The second prototype was built as a desktop or tablet and
smartphone version. The prototypes were intentionally kept as
similar as possible and differed only in parts of the navigation
and screen layout. The revised interaction design included the
following major changes compared with the initial interaction
design: 2-column layout for the desktop or tablet version,
selection of patient type (infant, adult, or parturient) before
selecting a search option, 4 offered search options (keyword or
free-text search, alphabetical search, ABCDE approach search,
or body navigator search), possibility to check off completed

action steps, illustration of checklist content by different tabs,
and display of the elapsed time since opening a checklist.

Third Prototype

The third prototype was modified in accordance to the revised
and supplemented requirements resulting from the evaluation
of the second prototype. Figure 4 illustrates the start page of
the third prototype with the opened alphabetical search. In the
left area, different search options to find emergency checklists
can be selected, and except for the keyword search, the patient
type has to be chosen first. On the right, a corresponding letter
can be marked, to which the respective search results are listed
in the area below.

An example of how a checklist (malignant hyperthermia) is
displayed in the cognitive aid prototype is shown in Figure 5.

The checklist title is centered at the top, and the time elapsed
since the checklist was opened is positioned to the left, together
with the selected patient type and optional patient weight. To
the right, an emergency call list and the menu icon are depicted.
In the middle of the screen, the emergency action steps are
displayed on the left side, with different sections being selectable
via the tabs above. Completed action steps can be marked as
performed by ticking off. Additional information on individual
items is provided in the right-hand area. Furthermore, related
symptoms and differential diagnoses can be accessed via tabs
on the right. In the bottom bar, the navigation path to the
checklist search and information concerning the last update of
the checklist content are displayed.

Additional screenshots of the third prototype (adapted from the
German version) can be found in Multimedia Appendix 3.

Evaluation of Design Solutions

First Prototype: Web-Based Questionnaire

Sample description: A total of 12 anesthesiologists participated
in the Web-based survey, whose affiliation was either the
Hannover Medical School, the Hospital Munich, the University
Hospital Erlangen, the Trauma Hospital Berlin, or not specified.
The participant structure consisted of 5 senior physicians, 6
resident physicians, and 1 specialist, with an average
professional experience of 12 years (range: 1 to 25 years). Half
of the participants had already gained experience with paper
checklists, but no comparable systems or applications had been
used so far. The general computer literacy level was rated
medium to high.

The evaluation of the SUS scores resulted in an average value
of 74 (SD 12), indicating good usability of the prototype.
Thereby, 2 participants rated the application less than 60
(considerable usability problems), 6 participants between 60
and 80 (borderline to good usability), and 4 participants over
80 (good to excellent usability).

The analysis of the questionnaire resulted in a prioritized list
of identified topics and requirements to be clarified. After

discussion with the project group, the following final list of
modifications and additional requirements emerged:

•
The additional information should continue to be listed in
the right-hand area.
•
No scrolling should be offered, as otherwise the user could
lose track or miss important points.
•
A combination search of symptoms is not desired as the
application is not intended to be a decision support system.
•
The ABCDE approach and symptom search provide
redundant information. As a result, the symptom search
should be completely removed.
•
The body navigator should not allow the simultaneous
selection of multiple organ systems.
•
An additional subdivision of the search into the patient
categories Infant, Adult, and Parturient, intended as a
preliminary query right after the start of the application,
should be included. After selecting one of these categories,
an automatic query of the patient’s weight should appear,
which is only optional.
•
On the start page, one of the search categories should be
displayed in the middle area instead of a short explanation
of the individual functions.

Table 1. Average time required per task during the think-aloud protocol.

Time (seconds), mean (SD)
Task

19 (11)
Find the checklist for malignant hyperthermia using the alphabetical search and open it

6 (4)
Mark the first 3 emergency action steps as completed

44 (8)
Navigate back to the start page and use the body navigator to find other emergencies or symptoms that can cause
circulatory problems

20 (6)
Open the malignant hyperthermia checklist and inform yourself about possible differential diagnoses via the
respective tab

Second Prototype: Web-Based Questionnaire

Sample description: A total of 8 anesthesiologists participated
in the Web-based survey, whose affiliation was either the
Hannover Medical School, the University Hospital Erlangen,
the University Hospital Heidelberg, or not specified. The
participant structure consisted of 2 senior physicians, 4 resident
physicians, and 2 specialists, with an average professional
experience of 10 years (range: 1 to 25 years). On average,
respondents rated their computer literacy level as medium
(advanced user). Furthermore, 2 of the participants already
worked with paper-based checklists and 5 with electronic
checklists (eg, apps or own checklists of the university hospital).
In case of an emergency, the intranet (n=3) or colleagues (n=2)
were mainly used for further information. The desktop
computers (n=7) or smartphones (n=6) are mainly used to search
for information in everyday life. Furthermore, the participants
preferred to use a digital cognitive aid for the desktop computer
(n=6) and smartphone (n=6).

The page layout, design, search options, positioning of the
elements, and the way the information is presented were
predominantly positively evaluated for both prototype variants
(desktop or tablet and smartphone). Especially, the uniform
design of the different variants was appreciated, as it allowed
easy orientation and comparable handling across different
devices. The presentation of an open checklist was perceived
to be helpful, as it resembled an open book with indexes.

The revised requirements that resulted from a joint discussion
in the project group on the results of the questionnaire were,
among others, the following:

•
Add quick selection for cardiopulmonary resuscitation
checklists to the search options.
•
When selecting an organ system in the body navigator, the
associated symptoms as well as the corresponding checklists
should both be listed.
•
Crew resource management (CRM) and literature tab should
only be available via the menu button.
•
The size of the top bar and the tabs should be slightly
increased.
•
Tabs and times should additionally be marked with
pictograms.
•
A stopwatch should only be displayed when one of the
resuscitation emergencies is selected.

Third Prototype: Think-Aloud Protocol and Paper
Questionnaire

Sample description: A total of 9 anesthesiologists participated
in the think-aloud protocol and completed the questionnaire.

The participants had an average professional experience of 8
years (range: 1 to 20 years). All respondents rated their computer
literacy level as medium. Furthermore, 6 of the participants
already worked with paper-based checklists and 4 with
electronic checklists. The majority stated that they were familiar
with the use of a tablet in everyday life (mean 3.33 [SD 1.56]).
It was almost a unanimous agreement among participants that
they could well imagine using a tablet in the operating room
(mean 4.44 [SD 0.96]).

The evaluation of the SUS scores resulted in an average value
of 77 (SD 15). One participant rated the application less than
60, 4 participants between 60 and 80, 4 participants over 80,
and 1 of them 95 (almost perfect application).

Overall, the application was rated positively by the participants
regarding the concept (n=2), design (n=3), function (n=2),
intuitiveness (n=5), and structure (n=3). Furthermore, it was
easy to understand after a short practice (n=3). Participants
noticed that the button for start page navigation was too small
(n=4), a home button was missing (n=3), the areas of the body
navigator were confusing (n=4), training was necessary (n=2),
and too many clicks and tabs existed (n=2).

The participants needed an average of 88 seconds (SD 19) to
complete all tasks set for the think-aloud protocol. The results
of the individual tasks are listed in Table 1.

Discussion

Principal Findings

Discussion of Results

This study addresses our research questions on the clinicians’
demands on the digital representation of a cognitive aid for
emergency situations and how its user interface can be best
developed that meets user requirements, is highly user-friendly,
and is easy to navigate.

Within a UCD process, requirements were identified and refined
step by step, resulting in a user-centered development of a digital
cognitive aid for intraoperative crisis management in anesthesia.

Storyboards were developed to create a common vision for
developers and end users about the context of use and enabled
the specification of the first user requirements. The content for
the storyboards was based on initial requirements defined in a
brainstorming session with the project group and context
interviews that identified the characteristics of future users as
well as the peculiarities of the anesthetic workplace. In addition,
a competition analysis and literature search contributed to the
development of a first interaction design, facilitating the creation

of a first prototype. A user evaluation of the first prototype
helped to define and prioritize further requirements. Considering
these new requirements, a revised interaction design was
developed. On the basis of this design, a second prototype was
created, which in turn was evaluated in a user test. Subsequently,
this process was repeated with a third prototype.

The evaluation of the SUS scores of the first and third prototype
proved that the iterative process described above improved
usability. Furthermore, the number of requirements to be revised
was reduced from step to step. The evaluation of the third user
test also revealed that the application was highly intuitive even
without previous instruction. The search options allowed the
user to find a checklist in a relatively short time and to check
off the action steps quickly and easily. In addition, some of the
test persons indicated the feeling of being familiar with the
application after a short training period. This test result provides
a solid basis for a subsequent test of the application under
real-life conditions, associated with the high stress of an
emergency situation. For this purpose, the project plan stipulates
the evaluation of the cognitive aid during simulated scenarios
of an intraoperative crisis. This evaluation may identify further
requirements for the application that could not be determined
with the previous evaluation methods.

The development of the cognitive aid needs to focus primarily
on the main user of the application, which in the context of the
German health care system would be the physician
anesthesiologist. In contrast, anesthesia nurses as part of the
anesthesia team play an assisting role and are considered as
secondary users. However, the usage requirements identified
were largely identical for both user groups. Major differences
between both user groups only exist with regard to the handling
of the cognitive aid. As the use of a digital cognitive aid for the
management of intraoperative crises is not yet established in
Germany, the question is yet unresolved whether anesthesia
nurses will be given the task of taking the team through the
checklist (ie, as readers) or whether they will continue to merely
carry out the required treatment steps. In a simulation study,
the presence of a reader improved the performance in crisis
situations and the completeness of task execution [21].

At present, knowledge concerning the actual use of cognitive
aids for crisis management in anesthesia is limited. Chances are
that only a few anesthesia departments have implemented the
use of paper-based checklists in their crisis management
approach. Available data are mainly derived from simulation
studies [5]. Although the use of the World Health Organization
Surgical Safety Checklist is mandatory in Germany [22], this
type of checklist only refers to the perioperative standardization
of procedures. However, for the treatment of intraoperative
emergencies, there exists no such mandatory regulation.
Emergency checklists are therefore only available as a voluntary
hospital-based measure for patient safety.

This study was able to identify the following main requirements
for a digital cognitive aid: intuitive operation and error tolerance
of the design, short navigation paths, full functionality for offline
use, and the provision of an educational concept for those
anesthesia departments that decide to implement the cognitive
aid. These results are confirmed by data from other studies. In

the manual by Crosland et al for the development of digital
emergency checklists, the aspects of error tolerance and
navigation are already provided with short implementation
conditions [23]. Marshall et al concluded that the roles for the
use of a cognitive aid must be clearly defined to help all team
members to perform their tasks in a coordinated order [24]. The
implementation of a cognitive aid should always be preceded
by appropriate introductory training: on the one hand, because
users can experience the physical limits of the application in
the real environment and, on the other hand, because familiarity
with the application increases both effectiveness and frequency
of use. To overcome the concern that an application might lose
its functionality in case of internet connection failure [25], it is
recommended to ensure functional independence from the
internet [26].

There are not many recent publications on digital cognitive aids
for crisis management in anesthesia. However, it is striking that
the majority of digital emergency checklists found on this topic
relate mainly to the field of resuscitation. One of these
publications is the tablet-based Decision Support Tool
application for the management of advanced life support
activities developed by McEvoy et al [27]. The functionality is
comparable with that of the developed third prototype. Thus,
the application also features a 2-column layout and includes an
initial selection of the patient type and to check off action steps.
In comparison, the application mainly differs in the navigation
concept, which is far less clear and is associated with poorer
use of the screen space. Information about the development
process or the evaluation of user satisfaction is not available.
An innovative concept of the cognitive aid described in this
paper is that it aims to cover all emergencies, non-normal
situations, and symptoms encountered during an intraoperative
crisis in the future. Along with non-normal events, the list is
expected to include 80 to 100 topics. In addition, an editor
functionality is considered, which would enable the user to tailor
the checklists to local conditions (eg, trade names of available
drugs, depositories of critical drugs, location of the nearest
defibrillator, and emergency telephone numbers).

Another point that distinguishes this paper from the publications
mentioned is that none of the applications address issues of
CRM, such as provision of role clarity, distribution of work
load, identification of all available resources, reevaluation of
the situation, and clear communication. This finding was also
confirmed by Evans et al, who conducted an evaluation of the
content and usability of the checklists and complained about
the lack of explicit statements on responsibility [28]. The
requirement analysis for the cognitive aid confirmed the initial
idea that the integration of team management aspects was indeed
a desirable feature. Although this requirement was already
considered in the first prototype (as a placeholder), the
development of a concrete concept for the implementation of
CRM support in the application turned out to be a major
difficulty. This challenge became apparent in the different
development stages of the prototypes. The first version included
a switch for activating or deactivating CRM prompts
implemented as pop-ups. A separate tab was provided for CRM
in the second prototype, which could be used to read relevant
notes. In the third version, CRM was no longer available as a

switch or button, but it was intended to integrate the relevant
information directly into the action points. As the elaboration
of medical contents is a task in itself and is therefore not a part
of this study, the elaboration of CRM support will not be further
discussed. It should be noted, however, that a regulated
distribution of tasks is essential for effective emergency
management to be supported by a cognitive aid.

Discussion of Methods

The prototypical development of the digital cognitive aid for
anesthesia to support intraoperative crisis management was
based on the UCD process [7] described by the following main
subactivities: analysis of the context of use, specification of
usage requirements, development of design solutions and
evaluation from the user’s perspective, and extension of usage
requirements. With the UCD, the end users play a key role in
the development process right from the beginning, enabling
optimal adaptation of the application to their specific needs.

The lack of usability can lead to rejection of the system or, even
worse, to treatment errors that jeopardize patient safety [29].
The working context of the cognitive aid may further aggravate
usability problems as a result of the cognitive limitations that
occur during an intraoperative emergency.

The majority of diagnosis and treatment errors in anesthesia
occur as a result of a mismatch between situational requirements
and the actor’s mental model of the current situation (ie, the
so-called human error) [30]. Fortunately, human performance
in time-critical situations can be enhanced by the use of medical
applications that have been developed with user-oriented
methods [31].

Finally, a user-oriented development process is a prerequisite
for approval as a medical device [32]. Development according
to the UCD process is therefore an established and thus suitable
method for the conception of a digital cognitive aid for crisis
management in anesthesia.

The usability of a software product always depends on the real
operating conditions, making an analysis of the working context
an indispensable prerequisite [7]. Herczeg recommends a
combination of empirical and analytical methods for a
comprehensive analysis [33]. In this study, the characteristics
and requirements of the user groups and the user environment
were analyzed by means of several different methods. The
knowledge gained helped to understand anesthesiologists’
working practices and needs as well as the complexity of the
anesthesia workplace in routine and emergency situations.

By user tests of the different prototypes during the iterative
UCD process, each development step was evaluated regarding
its usability. Thus, the application was checked with each step
for suitability to the intended purpose and adapted accordingly.
This enables a high user acceptance of a future application.

Limitations

Throughout the entire development process, participants were
only anesthesiologists from hospitals but not from outpatient
departments. As a result, it is possible that the requirements for
intraoperative emergencies in the outpatient and inpatient
settings only partially overlap.

In addition, only physicians as the primary user group
participated in evaluations. The requirements of nurses may
therefore differ from those identified.

Furthermore, all evaluations of the prototypes took place in
theory, that is, without dealing with a real emergency situation.
However, these disadvantages are counterbalanced by future
plans to evaluate the cognitive aid during performance of an
anesthesia team in a simulation study.

Conclusions

Anesthesiology—as an acute medical field—is particularly
characterized by its high demands on decision making and action
in uncertain, dynamic, or time-critical situations. The fact that
emergency checklists for anesthesia have so far only been
available as paper versions has prompted the BDA to develop
a national digital cognitive aid for crisis management in
anesthesia.

Applications intended for use in stressful and time-critical
situations pose special demands on their development. The
integration of usability aspects is essential for everyday and
emergency suitability. For this reason, a user-centered
development was chosen according to the UCD process model
as defined in ISO 9241-210 [7].

The UCD process allowed us to develop a prototypical digital
cognitive aid, exhibiting high usability and user satisfaction in
the demanding environment of anesthesiological emergencies.
Both aspects are essential to increase the acceptance of the
application in later stages.

The presented study approach, combining many different
methods for determining user requirements, may be useful for
other implementation projects in a highly demanding
environment.