Design, development and deployment of a hand/wrist
exoskeleton for home-based rehabilitation after
stroke - SCRIPT project
F. Amirabdollahian†,∗, S. Ates‡, A. Basteris†,
A. Cesario§, J. Buurke¶, H. Hermens¶, D. Hofs¶,
E. Johansson∥, G. Mountain††, N. Nasr††,
S. Nijenhuis¶, G. Prange¶, N. Rahman†, P. Sale§,
F. Sch¨atzlein††, B. van Schooten¶ and A. Stienen‡

†University of Hertfordshire, United Kingdom
‡University of Twente, the Netherlands
§San Raffaele Pisana, Italy
¶Roessingh Research and Development, the Netherlands
∥User Interface Design, Germany
††University of Shefﬁeld, Shefﬁeld, UK

(Accepted July 29, 2014. First published online: September 23, 2014)

2. Design Methodology
We employed an interdisciplinary research design to co-design and evaluate the SCRIPT system with
people with stroke, carers and stroke professionals in three clinical sites in the United Kingdom (UK),
the Netherlands (NL) and Italy (IT). The user-driven system development framework comprises of
two main phases. In phase 1, we engaged with potential users of the SCRIPT system to create a clear
picture of the target users and the context in which the system intends to operate. The aim of this
phase was to provide the technology developers with a detailed knowledge of the diversity of users
of the system. A mix of health and social sciences and design methods were used to collect data in
this phase including focus groups, in-depth interviews and cultural probes.33

The ﬁndings of the focus groups, which showed participants’ general attitude and feelings toward
technology, were further explored and reﬁned by conducting in-depth interviews and cultural probing
during two successive home visits (Fig. 1). Cultural probe materials such as diaries and photography
activities gave us an opportunity to observe participants’ behaviours between two home visits whilst
the outcome of the probing was used to prompt participants during the interviews. The ﬁndings of
this phase were summed up to create a collection of persona-based scenarios34 as representatives of a
range of users and their social and personal contexts, their experiences of stroke and technology use,

1334

Fig. 1. (Colour online) Home visits with cultural probes and in-depth interviews.

their needs, activities and goals. These user models served to identify user requirements and informed
design of the iterative prototyping.
In phase 2, the resulting prototypes were evaluated across three clinical sites using participatory
formative evaluation methods such as cognitive walkthrough and cooperative evaluation.35 Different
components of the SCRIPT system including the orthosis, user interface and games were tested
out with the members of the steering group committees. In addition, the system was evaluated in
participants’ homes in which people with stroke and their carers were encouraged to think aloud
while trying out the system in order to identify main usability problems. The identiﬁed problems
were summarised and fed back into the process of design to improve the next iteration of the system.
The resulting prototypes are tested, redesigned and developed in iterative cycles.

3. Hardware, Software and System Architecture

3.1. Mechatronic device
SCRIPT Prototype 1 (SP1) is a wrist, hand and ﬁnger orthosis that assists individuals after stroke that
suffer from impairments caused by spasticity and abnormal synergies (Fig. 2). These impairments
are characterised in the wrist and hand by excessive involuntary ﬂexion torques that prevent the hand
to be used for many to most activities in daily life. The SP1 can passively offset these undesired
torques, but it cannot actively generate or control movements. The user needs to use voluntary muscle
activation to perform movements and thus needs to have some residual muscle control to successfully
use the device. A passive actuation mechanism is chosen so that devices are inherently safe and can
be integrated into home-use easier.
The hardware components of the SP1 are:

• Physical interfaces to the user: forearm shell, hand plate, and digit caps with Velcro straps. These
physical interfaces are the only components of the SP1 that come in contact with the user.
• Wrist-torque transfer mechanism: double parallelogram between forearm shell and hand plate that
allows wrist ﬂexion-extension but blocks all other wrist rotations.
• Torque-generation mechanisms: digit leaf springs and adjustable tension cords.
• Device controller: micro-controller board that reads the sensors and converts these readings to
physiological relevant parameters and transfers them to the main unit. Arm support: commercially
acquired arm support (Saebo MAS) that supports the arm against gravity to enable arm movements
in individuals after stroke.
• State sensors: integrated measurements units (IMUs) with which the forearm posture can be
estimated.

The SP1 physically interfaces with the forearm, hand and ﬁngers of the users using respectively a
forearm shell, a hand plate and individual digit caps. To guarantee safe and comfortable interaction, it

1335

Fig. 2. (Colour online) SCRIPT Prototype 1. From left to right: blue digit caps, steel leaf springs, black
ﬁnger tension cords, red/white/black bending sensor, blue hand plate, black tension-cord stops, metal wrist-
torque transmission, black wrist tension cords, blue forearm cuff. The thumb cap, leaf spring, tension cord and
additional rotation joint are visible below the wrist joint. All the sensors are connected to the computer interface
via electric sensor wires.

uses commercially available physical interfaces with a proven track record from Saebo Inc. (Charlotte,
NC, USA). The Saebo forearm shells, hand plates and caps are available in multiple sizes and for
both left and right hands, that are needed to custom ﬁt the SP1 to a wide range of body dimensions.
The SP1 applies the external extension torques on the ﬁngers via passive leaf springs and elastic
tension cords. The leaf springs allow the extension force to be applied perpendicular to the ﬁngertip
for most of the range of motion, but cannot be directly attached to the ﬁnger due to the misaligned
digit axes of the ﬁnger and the device. The leaf spring has cord guides through which the tension cord
is routed and is covered in a shrink-wrap to protect the patients against its sharp edges. The tension
cord is used to give the ﬁnger freedom of movement relative to the leaf springs. The cord is also used
to adjust the amount of support by tensioning it more or less using the tension-cord stops on the top
of the hand plate.
The force generation and application mechanisms for the thumb are identical to the ones for the
ﬁngers. To allow additional freedom of movement in the thumb needed for thumb opposition, the
thumb mechanisms has an additional rotational degree of freedom that coincides with the wrist axis,
with any misalignment being allowed for by the ﬂexibility of the tension cords.
The wrist mechanism uses a double parallelogram between forearm shell and hand plate that allows
wrist ﬂexion-extension but blocks all other wrist rotations. The double parallelogram is needed to
prevent misalignment between human and device axes and makes the device comfortable to use.
Through the parallelogram, the rotation of the hand around the wrist ﬂexion-extension axis of the
wrist is transferred to the parallelogram clamp at the forearm. There this rotation is actuated using an
elastic tension cord. The tension in the cord can be adjusted using the cord stops at the elbow end of
the forearm shell.
The external extension force in the digits and the wrist can be adjusted by tensioning the elastic
cords. The digits and the wrist have a single tension cord each, and each cord has multiple knots on
it. These knots can be clamped in the cord stops on the device and tensioning the cord will produce
more external extension force. The user is instructed to change the tension based on his impairment
and his therapy progress via the physical therapist and the graphical user interface.
The SP1 closely follows the contours of the human body. Most components stay within a volume
less than 30 mm away from the body. The wrist parallelogram, needed to allow wrist ﬂexion/extension,

1336

requires 75 mm from the body at maximum wrist extension. The device is not overly disruptive when
used as a therapy tool, but it is too bulky to be a permanent aid for daily use.
To improve patient comfort, all sharp edges of the devices are either sanded down or covered using
protective material such as plastic shrink wrappers. All electrical components (sensors and wirings)
are covered using cable sleeves.
The SP1 is equipped with sensors to measure the joint rotations and the applied external extension
torques. On the digits this is realised by measuring the deﬂection of the leaf spring using ﬂexible
bending sensors. This deﬂection can be converted to both an angular deﬂection of the digit and
the applied extension force using the known stiffness properties of the leaf spring. The integrated
bending sensors in the leaf springs at the ﬁngers are good enough to differentiate between different
grasps,36 and can detect small changes of motion, but are only able to resolve between large absolute
angle deviations of roughly 20 degrees.37 These limitation are caused not by the mechanism itself,
but by the type of bending sensor used: the ﬂexible resistance-based sensors suffer from natural
decay in step response that makes it hard to get accurate absolute values from the sensors. In the
wrist, the ﬂexion-extension axis rotation is measured using a potentiometer at the forearm link of the
parallelogram.
Finally, the hand position in global space is approximated using the UM6 ultra-miniature orientation
sensor (Integrated Measurement Unit) from CH Robotics placed on the forearm that uses rate gyros,
accelerometers, magnetic sensors, and an onboard 32-bit ARM Cortex processor to compute sensor
orientation. The orientation and acceleration of the forearm are used for the estimation of slow and
fast movements and movement directions.
In order to extract MCP, PIP, and DIP rotations from a single measurement with the help of one
bending sensor, a simple angle estimation algorithm is derived. Each ﬂex sensor provides one bending
angle reading to each individual ﬁnger. In order to extract each digits angular position (MCP, PIP,
DIP rotations) from one sensor reading, some assumptions have to be made. It is assumed that there
is no dead zone with the ﬂex sensors and rotation of each phalanx is linear and covers the full range of
motion except the distal phalanx. Finger caps overlap distal phalanx and middle phalanx at the same
time and limit the range of motion of distal phalanx drastically. Abduction and adduction movements
are neglected, as well. In addition, a simple initialisation/calibration procedure is required to measure
the maximum and minimum sensor values. A similar approach can be easily applied to thumb and
wrist.
The bending sensors at the leaf springs and the potentiometer at the wrist mechanisms are sampled
using the analog-digital converters in the Arduino Nano microprocessor board. The Arduino passes
on the sampled values to the main PC using a Universal Serial Bus (USB) connection. The IMU is
connected to a serial-to-usb converter and again connected to the main PC using a USB connection.
For both, custom Windows 7 drivers were written to make the signals available to the connected
software.

3.2. User interfaces
The interface of the SCRIPT system consists of two separate parts: a user interface (UI) for the
patient (Patient UI) and a UI for the health care professionals (HCP UI). Two separate concepts were
developed since the parts are targeted for different user groups, performing different tasks. Also the
choice of the platform required a different design, as the Patient UI is based on a touch screen and
the HCP UI is controlled with keyboard and mouse using a conventional display.

3.3. User interface for the health care professional
An important screen for the HCP UI is the patient overview (Fig. 3), which is presented directly
after login. The table lists all patients, and presents an overview of the current state of the patients’
training:

• Patient’s name, age and week of therapy
• The development of the game scores, using simple colour coding (red, yellow, green)
• Patient’s own rating of current condition, using a simple colour coding and smileys
• The latest training session
• The total length of this week’s training sessions
• New messages received from the patient

1337

Fig. 3. (Colour online) Health care professionals’ user interface - patient overview screen.

In this overview the therapist can immediately recognise patients that need further care, e.g. due
to a patent’s negative condition rating. A double-click on a cell will lead the HCP directly to the
corresponding page, where he has access to detailed information and functionalities. To work with a
patient, the HCP UI consists of four main areas:

1. Messages: The message area allows the therapist to exchange text or audio messages with the
patients.
2. Progress: The progress area consists of several pages with different charts, e.g. active range of
motion (aROM) in-Game (Fig. 4), aROM during Calibration, Move Count, Training Duration,
Training Session and Game Score. This area provides the therapist with a detailed feedback on the
progress of the patient, using visualisations.
3. Games: The games area contains the basic functionality for the therapy with SCRIPT. In this
area the therapist assigns games to the patients and adapts the difﬁculty level of the game. The
difﬁculty set here relates to selection of game levels requiring more difﬁcult to achieve gestures,
for example game difﬁculty increases when lateral movement of the arm are added to the ﬂexion
and extension of the hand. This follows a system similar to Gentile’s taxonomy of motor skills
where Stationary actions are classiﬁed as simplest skills while In Motion functions are thought to
require more complex skills.38

4. Condition: The content and design of the “condition” area is currently under progress, In this area
the therapist will receive feedback on the status of the patient (presented on the left hand side of
Fig. 4) in terms of affected side and diagnosis as well as other performance metrics allowing them
to set the therapy plan with these considerations.

3.4. User interface for the patient
To ensure consistency between the Patient and HCP UI, the same design concept was applied to
both interfaces. Also, the areas in the patient UI are mainly the same as in the HCP UI, but with

1338

Fig. 4. (Colour online) Patient progress shown in aROM tab highlighting changes in active range of motion
during game play.

Fig. 5. (Colour online) Progress screen highlighting progress across the 6 weeks of study.

relevant content important to patients. A requirement for the Patient UI was to offer quick access
to the recommended games and to be experienced as “easy to use” by the patients. Due to these
requirements, the UI provides direct access to the games on the home screen after login. Patient UI
consists of three main areas:

1. Progress: In this section (Fig. 5) the patient can check the training progress, e.g. game scores and
training duration. Scientiﬁc statistics like the aROM are not needed for the patient. Design of the
charts is adapted to the target users and target system, by reducing the amount of information

1339

Fig. 6. (Colour online) Tele-robotic support platform and its components. The platform comprises of the blue
components.

and increasing the size of the interaction elements. Motivational messages are displayed within
and after the games, to motivate the patients to continue with the training. Example messages are
“Maybe you can come back for more practice soon?”, “Target time has been accomplished”, “You
have just ﬁnished training for N minutes”, “N minutes more to reach your target this week”.
2. The patient can choose between different games, assigned by the therapist. For each game, detailed
information on how to play the game is available to the patient.
3. Messages: As for the HCP UI, the patient can exchange textual or audio messages with the therapist.
The patient enters the message using a touch screen keyboard.

3.5. Tele-robotic support platform
The tele-robotic support platform concerns the implementation of remote access to the patient’s
system. This enables HCPs to create and change exercise plans during the therapy, to check on
the patient data and progress, and communicate with the patient. The platform consists of three
components: a replicated database, a HCP webportal, and a decision support system. See Fig. 6.
The patient’s computer communicates with a central server through a replicated database. On
the central server there is a webportal and a decision support system. HCPs can access the data
through the webportal. Authentication for both patients and HCPs is performed through a regular
username-password combination. All network communication is secured through SSL.

3.5.1. Database (remote management interface). Communication between the patient computer and
the central system proceeds entirely through a replicated database, implemented in MySQL. The
database is accessed locally through an XML-RPC API. When a new patient system is deployed,
as 9 prototype systems are re-used, the replication process wipes any old data and loads essential
data like the patient’s information and the initial exercise plans from the central server. From then
on, the patient system can function autonomously, but will sync data when an Internet connection
is available. It replicates only the data belonging to that patient, so that privacy of other patients is
ensured. The local database also has a development mode, which allows functioning without a central
server altogether.

3.6. Adaptive and therapeutic human-robot interaction
An important goal of the project is its focus on adaptive and therapeutic human robot interaction
(THRI). The objective here is to cater for inter-individual differences sensed in interaction. To
make this possible, a dedicated component is placed in the software architecture (see Fig. 8), which
constitutes a middleware between the orthosis and the games. Indeed, the THRI processes the signal
generated from the device and delivers to the games information about movement’s performance of
the subject. Such information can be of analog type, as angular or positional coordinate of a joint,
or discrete, as the message that a speciﬁc pattern of movement (gesture) has just been performed.
Gestures currently available relate to hand state (open, close or in a grasping position), or the wrist
(extended, ﬂexed, prone or supine). Also, we included the recognition of gross arm movements

1340

Fig. 7. (Colour online) Three prototype exercise games, top: Sea Shell; bottom left: Super Crocco; bottom right:
Labyrinth.

(antero-posterior and lateral displacement of the hand) as those normally performed during activities
of daily living by using accelerometers on the forearm part of the arm-cuff.
These movements are matched with actions within the games that are intended for providing
therapeutic exercise. Three games were designed and tested within years 1 and 2 of the project: “Sea
Shell”, “Super Crocco” and “Labyrinth” as shown in Fig. 7.
In the Sea Shell game, the patient operates a shell by his/her hand in order to catch ﬁshes. In
the Super Crocco game, in addition to grasping, wrist ﬂexion and extension are performed to avoid
obstacles, and lateral movements of the hand to move the character on the screen. The Labyrinth
game offers, in addition to this, training of forearm prone/supination and antero-posterior movements
of the hand.
One of the major challenges in performing gesture recognition with stroke survivors is the inter-
individual variability in motor symptoms. For instance, while normative data about range of motion
(ROM) for the upper limb joints is available for healthy subjects,39,40 each patient constitutes a per
se case. Considering this, we developed a calibration procedure which measures range of motion and
duration of movements.41 In a preliminary analysis of the data from seven subjects, we showed that
such a procedure was effective in 85% of the attempts (1044 out of 1229 tests) with durations differing
across movements of up to 30 s for hand opening.42 This procedure, potentially exploitable for other
various movement signals, is run ahead of any practice sessions for the movements which will be
required within the game. In this way, the gesture recognition is tailored on the individual patient

1341

capabilities. For instance, wrist extension is marked by reaching the 90% of the ROM measured
during the calibration. This approach has been effective for all the 23 patients included. In total, the
calibration procedure has been successful in 88% of the attempts (3791 out of 4298). Considering as
an instance wrist ﬂexion/extension, median values ranged across subjects from 0.4 to approximately
135 degrees (97% of the device ROM). Overall, considering all subjects involved in the study, the
gesture recognition has identiﬁed 558449 movements.
Another requirement for the therapeutic human robot interaction is to be adaptive. In the domain of
rehabilitation robotics, a fundamental principle is that the robot should “assist-as-needed”.43 However,
the passive device does not allow any automatic regulation of the physical support provided, which
is set by the therapist. Hence, the THRI further modulates the task difﬁculty using the speed of the
game to prolong interaction time.
At the beginning, movements are required at a speed matching the time measured during the
calibration. At the end of each movement, patient’s performance is assessed by considering whether
he/she is lagging or leading with respect to a model-generated movement proﬁle44 which matches their
own movements in terms of amplitude and duration. The lag/lead score is the fraction of trajectory
in which the subject was anticipating the reference trajectory. The speed of the game is then rescaled
based on the last 10 lag/lead scores, in order to make the exercise nor too challenging nor too easy,
according to the challenge point framework.45 Future development will include the support for the
active-actuated device to allow for changing assistance/resistance, recognition of functional type of
gestures and an alternative method to estimate the subject’s contribution to movement, based on the
energy ﬂow between the patient and the device.

3.7. Architecture
The system has a wide range of software which needs to meet very different requirements, such
as distributed fault-tolerant communication, real-time control and monitoring of the devices and an
intuitive, responsive, and graphically rich therapeutic user-interface. The system adopts a modular
component-based architecture, as shown in Fig. 8, which supports software that is scalable, reusable,
lightweight, dynamically reconﬁgurable and portable between platforms. The architecture allows
ﬂexibility in terms of choice of operating system, programming languages, tools and libraries. The
architecture is open and ﬂexible, but at the same time clearly deﬁnes the interfaces, which facilitate
distributed system development with periodic integration cycles.
The patient’s system runs on Microsoft Windows 7 Professional, as this meets the needs of being
responsive to user actions, while at the same time providing a rich graphical interface and simplifying
the design and development of software. Windows 7 also provides a rich set of communications
and data storage mechanisms. It does not offer deterministic timings, but experimental results have
shown that, coupled with a multi-core PC and sufﬁcient memory, it is adequate for the performance
requirements of SCRIPT. The therapist’s system can run on Windows and Linux systems.
Software components are implemented as independent co-operating processes, using a variety of
programming languages and tools, such as MySQL, Apache, C++, Python, PHP, Java, Javascript and
JMonkey. The SCRIPT project uses Google Protocol Buffers to deﬁne and manipulate message data
sent using stream and datagram sockets between software components on the patient PC. Protocol
Buffers provide a ﬂexible, efﬁcient and automated mechanism for serialising structured data in C++,
Java and Python. Using protocol buffer is lighter weight than manipulating XML data structures and
allows changes to message data structures without breaking existing code. Communication between
the patient PC and the remote server is via XML-RPC.

4. Experimental Validaiton
Although it is assumed that patients will practice independently when provided with the opportunity,
this is a highly relevant question when deploying a technology-supported system for training of the
arm and hand in the home setting. Therefore, this is one of the main issues addressed during evaluation
and impact assessment of the SCRIPT system.

4.1. Feasibility evaluation
Besides Formative Evaluation (FE) focussing on user-engagement in design and system development
to enhance the acceptability and usability of the system, the clinical study design applied in this

1342

Fig. 8. (Colour online) SCRIPT System Architecture, low-level system components include actuator (R), sensors
on the orthosis (S1) and external sensors (SN).

project (Summative Evaluation (SE)) involves evaluation of the SCRIPT system in a situation where
treatment protocols haven’t been ﬁxed or personally supervised. On the contrary, except for the
recommendation to practice 30 min per day for 6 days a week, participating chronic stroke patients
are left entirely free in their choice on when and for how long they want to practice with the SCRIPT
system during the 6 weeks deployment at their home. During these 6 weeks, patients are remotely
supervised on their progress by a healthcare professional (HCP) through the HCP portal. The progress
in terms of game scores serves as the basis for the HCP to select appropriate exercises targeting e.g.,
wrist ﬂexion/extension movements combined with grasping/hand opening gestures. This decision is
reﬁned, if needed, during short weekly home visits by the HCP to check on the patient.
The summative evaluation assesses feasibility of the self-administered telerobotic devices on
several levels across three European-wide user-evaluation centres (University of Shefﬁeld in the
United Kingdom, San Raffaele S.p.A. in Italy, Roessingh Research and Development in the
Netherlands), which allows validation of effectiveness of the SCRIPT system. In terms of user
acceptance, actual amount of use, usability and patient’s motivation are examined during and after
the use period.

4.2. Results
To date, 23 of the intended 30 chronic stroke patients have been included (see Table 1), who had to
be between 6 and 60 months post-stroke and display at least 15◦of active elbow ﬂexion and a quarter
range of active ﬁnger ﬂexion. Of these, data for 12 patients is available from baseline and post-training
evaluations, conducted 1 week before and then after the 6-week training period. Seven male and ﬁve
female chronic stroke patients were included, with mean age of 54 years (± 12 years) and mean time
post stroke of 11 months (± 6 months). The group involved 25% mildly, 25% moderately and 50%
severely affected stroke patients, based on a categorisation of initial Fugl-Meyer (FM) score.46

Among the ﬁrst 12 patients were two dropouts, because of their inability to work with the SCRIPT
system due to technical problems, or no desire to work with the SCRIPT system anymore. The
preliminary ﬁndings of the ongoing study suggest that deployment of self-administered training is
feasible, as reﬂected in actual use of the system by the majority of the patients, as monitored in terms
of training duration. The actual amount of training, measured using system logs created during game
play, was on average 94.4 (±43.6) minutes/week across the ﬁrst 10 patients (ranging from 34 to

1343

Table I. Subject characteristics and outcomes before and after training.

Characteristics and outcomes
Mean (±SD)
Range

Gender (male/female)*
7/5
Stroke severity (mild/moderate/severe)*
3/3/6
Age (years)
54 (±12)
32–69
Time post stroke (months)
11 (±6)
6–26
Training duration (minutes per week)
94.4 (±43.6)
34–166
System Usability Scale (0–100%)
69.3 (±20.0)
38–100

∗absolute numbers

166 min per week between patients), which comes down to an average of 14 min of self-administered
training each day for 6 weeks. The group average of the System Usability Scale was 69.3 (±20.0),
indicating that usability of the SCRIPT system is promising, with a good chance of acceptance in
the ﬁeld.47 This further supports the feasibility of the SCRIPT system to be used independently for
training at home so far.

5. Discussion
The present ﬁndings suggest that independent home-based training with the SCRIPT system is
feasible. Patients are choosing to exercise by themselves for about 15 min a day for 6 weeks on
average. It has to be noted that this is without external motivation such as ﬁxed appointments
with healthcare professionals for online remote supervision during exercise, which distinguishes the
SCRIPT application from recent telerehabilitation approaches in stroke.48 Moreover, this type of
training so far shows potential to enhance sensorimotor function of the affected arm. Due to large
variations observed across patients, speciﬁc attention needs to be paid to relations between outcome
measures and patient characteristics on an individual basis (as illustrated in Figure) in ongoing work.
However, the present research is the ﬁrst exploration of independent arm/hand training at home
using a physical hand/wrist orthosis combined with remote monitoring (telerehabilitation). Ongoing
analysis of the clinical outcomes, as well as the amount of use, intensity of training, usability and user
acceptance of the complete sample allows for a comprehensive analysis of relations between these
characteristics. Early results from these evaluations are presented in a subsequent paper showing
larger variations amongst patients concerning clinical gains when using the SCRIPT system.49 With
such information, the group of patients that might beneﬁt most from this type of intervention may be
identiﬁed. One particular question of interest concerns the relation between the amount of use and
clinical changes, to explore whether patients will actually use a telerehabilitation system provided to
them and whether more use will actually result in larger clinical gains. This will inform our future
developments.

6. Conclusions and Future Work
The design, development and deployment of a home-based rehabilitation device for mediating
repetitive exercise via a passive-actuated hand/wrist exoskeleton device was presented here. Aspects
highlighted included the importance of user-centred design and inclusion of potential users as co-
developers and co-designers. This was made possible by employing multiple phases of interaction
during the design cycles. A critical step here was to start with understanding the potential users and
their diversity using in-depth interviews and cultural probes. These culminated in system requirements
that were used for developing the prototype system. The prototype was then assessed against those
user requirements using formative evaluation cycles often consisting of focus groups and steering
group meetings.
This manuscript highlights different aspects of development, ranging from the hardware including
the mechatronic device, to software components such as patient and health care professional user
interfaces.The objective of this evaluation was to assess the feasibility of a home-based rehabilitation
device. Although early, preliminary results obtained from 12 patients that participated in this
evaluation phase indicate supportive evidence for feasibility of such devices for home use.

1344

Future work focuses on active-tuning of the amount of assistance provided to the hand and wrist,
while providing an additional six exercise games with a more versatile set of gestures incorporated
within the new games. This is to enhance the functional and goal-oriented nature of the exercises.
Also, the decision support system under development will provide a chance to assist in monitoring
patients’ remotely using performance benchmarks and by detecting sudden and slow changes in
progress. A second summative evaluation phase is planned to test the resulting system.