METHODOLOGY

Using Human-Centered Design to Adapt Supply Chains and
Digital Solutions for Community Health Volunteers in
Nomadic Communities of Northern Kenya

Sarah R. Andersson,a Sarah Hassanen,b Amos M. Momanyi,c Danielson K. Onyango,c Daniel K. Gatwechi,d

Mercy N. Lutukai,c Karen O. Aura,d Alex M. Mungai,d Yasmin K. Chandanic

METHODS
HCD is not explicitly a research methodology but
incorporates a series of mixed qualitative methods
to achieve design objectives.13 HCD is a multistage
problem solving process that requires designers to
conduct research to understand the users and sub-
sequently test solutions in real-world scenarios
with actual users. The HCD process for this 3-year
project took more than 7 months (February to
August 2019) in 4 phases: (1) understanding intent,
1 month; (2) research and insights, 3 months; (3) ide-
ation and prototyping, 2 months; and (4) supply
chain design and requirements building, 1 month
(Figure 2). Recognizing the context was challeng-
ing, we expected from the project’s outset that the
first year would be dedicated to designing the inter-
vention and that it would take time to understand
and design a suitable system.

1. Understanding Intent
The intent phase resulted in a 1-page intent state-
ment, documenting the shared understanding
among the design team of the broad questions,
objectives, target groups, approach, risks, and

aims. The intent identified was to design a supply
chain and digital solution that addresses the CHV
challenges, facilitate their commodity manage-
ment responsibilities, and recognize the broader
cultural and societal beliefs, norms, and rituals.
This statement was used as a living document and
iterated upon throughout the project.
Then, the design team developed personas
based on our target community for this project:
CHVs, women of reproductive age, community
leaders, and husbands. The design team was pri-
marily composed of Kenyans with representation
from our target regions. Through the personas, the
design team captured what they thought they

knew about the motivations, challenges, and
beliefs of the community based on their personal
experience. The personas were used to create lines
of inquiry for the research, and research guides
and tools were designed for each persona group.
The design team continued to iterate on the perso-
nas throughout the research phase and refine
their personas during their insight generation ses-
sions to ensure they reflected the types of people
they talked to (Box 2).

2. Research and Insights
Data were collected in 2 of the 4 project counties,
Wajir and Samburu. The research centered on 4

objectives to understand: (1) infrastructure, ac-
cess, capabilities, and the current state of the
health system; (2) decision making, knowledge,
and sources of influence; (3) gender dynamics
and cultural norms; and (4) technology aware-
ness, capabilities, preferences, and usage.
A combination of methods was used, including
one-on-one semistructured interviews; observation
and shadowing of supply chain actors, end-users,
and county beneficiaries; and usability testing using
the original cStock application from Siaya County.
For both interviews and observations, a mixture of
research guides and user mapping activities was
used to help generate deeper insights.
We conducted interviews with 1 national MOH
representative, 34 people in Samburu Central and
East, and 27 people in Wajir Central and East
(Table 1). The interviews were conducted in a loca-
tion of the participant’s choosing, such as health fa-
cilities, CHVs’ houses, and walking with CHVs
during community visits. Interviews began with
trust-building techniques such as asking personal
questions. Open-ended questions were used to dis-
cuss job requirements and challenges, supply chain
challenges, health behaviors and preferences, and
social networks and preferences in communica-
tion. Interviews also incorporated storytelling to
bring out the nuances of the participants’ lives,
work, and motivators. “Day in the life” mapping
tools were used; these included templates to map
out daily routines and network mapping templates
to map important nodes within their social
networks.
Observation was used to validate the findings
from interviews by noting any differences be-
tween words and actions. This provides insight
into relevant behaviors that the individual could
not
articulate.
The
design
team
conducted

immersive observations of participants within
their natural environments in an unobtrusive
manner for periods ranging from several hours to
half or three-quarters of a day at a time. Team
members followed CHVs on their community vis-
its, including into remote mountainous regions in
Samburu and seminomadic settlements in Wajir,
staying in the background and taking the time to
gain empathy, garner insight, and put themselves
into users’ shoes to incorporate their observations
into the design phase. It is understood that partici-
pants likely alter behavior while being observed,
however, this method in conjunction with usabil-
ity testing and structured interviews can cross
check
data
across
methodologies
and
their
limitations.
Our team also observed the usability of the
original cStock app with CHVs in migratory com-
munities. Usability testing guides with expected
scenarios were developed to guide the testing.
The design team loaded the original cStock appli-
cation onto their personal phone and handed the
phone to the CHV to observe how they navigated
the application. A similar process was observed us-
ing short message service (SMS). Table 2 describes
the original solutions and Table 3 outlines the sce-
narios used for the different rounds of usability
testing.
Data from interviews, observations, and us-
ability testing were analyzed using a HCD tech-
nique called “insight generation” — a set of data
that clusters around an observation and gives a
new (or validated) perspective. For example, an
insight on the CHV supervisor’s role in reporting
captured that CHVs verbally reported to their
supervisors, who would then complete the report
on the CHV’s behalf; in other situations, the CHVs
entered the data, but the supervisor validated the

data. Through a process of rapid synthesis in the
field and extended office-based synthesis, the de-
sign team “made sense” of the data by connecting
and consolidating the raw data into meaningful
insights. Each individual captured their observa-
tions from the field research on sticky notes, with-
out any analysis or interpretation. The design
team then found themes by grouping similar
insights together. Once observations were cap-
tured into themes, the design team identified sim-
ilarities and differences across the counties and
developed
targeted
insights
that
guided
the
designers to ask questions about the design and to
devise innovative strategies.

3. Ideation and Prototyping
A 2-day ideation and prototyping workshop was
held to validate, iterate, and create solutions based
on the findings. The workshop brought together
35 representatives from a variety of stakeholder
groups to redesign cStock: government officials,
national medical stores, county pharmacists, digital
solution providers, industry experts, implementing
partners, and project staff. The facilitators shared
insights and the refined user personas to bring the
users’ voices into the process and closely reflect
their needs in the design of the prototypes.
Based on the findings, the workshop partici-
pants identified 3 of the existing tools used in
Siaya County required redesigning and 1 new
tool needed to be designed to support supply chain
data collection and strengthen supply chain mon-
itoring and decision making. The participants
used a prototype development worksheet to
draw their designs. The participants were also giv-
en storyboard templates, wireframes for both un-
structured supplementary service data (USSD)
and smartphones, and pictures of already existing
tools such as paper-based forms and the existing
cStock application. Table 3 outlines the 4 solutions.
After the workshop, the design team devel-
oped higher-fidelity prototypes using different
software and tools. One prototype of a paper-
based stock record was developed in Excel and
printed so users could be observed completing the
form. For the 2 smartphone apps, clickable proto-
types were developed using JustinMind software,
which enables developers to create a prototype
that simulates how the app would function on a
phone, which in turn, enables the design team to
observe the user experience.14 The prototype of
the hybrid
SMS/USSD system
using feature
phones (earlier-generation phones with button
keypad) was illustrated on paper, and pre-

populated messages were loaded on a real phone.
The CHVs were asked to “press” the buttons on the
paper phone, and this would lead them to differ-
ent screens. To enter their data, the CHVs were
instructed to enter messages in a feature phone pro-
vided by the design team. Depending on the user's
choice, the design team would send an SMS of
what a real message response might look like.
Usability testing was then conducted using the
high-fidelity prototypes of the 4 new and redesigned
tools. The testing was conducted in Samburu East in
4 rural community units that tend to migrate more
often and in areas of low internet connectivity and
included 27 CHV supervisors and CHVs. Table 2
shows the scenarios used in usability testing.

4. Supply Chain System Design and
Requirements Building
The HCD research focused on paper-based and
digital tools for improving supply chain data visi-
bility, recognizing that good supply chain data for
decision making are essential for a strong supply
chain. In addition to using the HCD approach, it
was essential to design the supply chain procedures
and processes to align the flow of community-level
data and health commodities. A supply chain design
methodology typically includes 4 key activities:
scoping, analysis, design, and implementation.15

HCD provided the required information for the
scoping and analysis phases of supply chain design.
As the supply process from the national warehouse
to health facilities is well-established in Kenya, the
focus was primarily on the last step in the supply
chain—from health facility to CHV. The design
team held a separate 2-day workshop with stake-
holders including national-level representatives,
county pharmacists, community health coordina-
tors, and partner organizations. Using the personas
for CHVs and facility-level staff generated earlier
through the HCD process, the participants mapped
how information and health products would flow
from the central warehouse to the CHVs, taking
into consideration any unique requirements for mi-
gration. The supply chain design provided the in-
ventory rules needed to develop the requirements
for rebuilding the cStock application.

RESULTS

1. Understanding Intent
The design team agreed the intent of the research
was to understand how to design a supply chain
and digital solution that addressed the challenges

of nomadic CHVs; facilitated their commodity man-
agement responsibilities; and recognized the broader
cultural and societal beliefs, norms, and rituals.
Personas were developed by the design team that in-
cluded motivations, challenges, and beliefs. One ex-
ample of a common assumption was that children
and livestock were primary motivators for decision
making in this community, and that women had a
limited role in decision making especially regarding
health and family planning.

2. Research and Insights
The research team identified insight summaries or
themes that were derived from more detailed
insights (Table 4). The insights are categorized
into behavioral, supply chain, information system,
human resources, service delivery infrastructure,
and connectivity. Insights include specific insights
for CHVs but also general insights for community
members recognizing that CHVs are also members
of the communities, and these constraints impact
their ability to perform their role as a CHV.

Behavioral Insights
Behavioral insights played an important role in
understanding migration behaviors across the
2 counties, elucidating similarities and differences.
Migration behaviors are a key consideration for
the design of the supply chain and the digital tools
as it is important to design for the different loca-
tions where a CHV might be based. Communities
in both contexts migrate in search of water and
pastures. In Samburu, however, men move with
their animals, leaving their women and children
behind, meaning that CHVs will also likely stay be-
hind. In Wajir, nomadic communities live in isola-
tion from the general population; and once a
decision to migrate is made, the whole community
moves and establishes a settlement in the new lo-
cation. Members from the community do visit
nearby centers to trade and get basic supplies,
offering
opportunities
to
also
collect
health
products. Nomadic migration has dramatically de-
clined as members from the communities have
children in school and take on casual jobs to earn
a living. Mobile phones are the main mode of
communication between the people who move
and those left behind. Insight into health-seeking
behavior explained that among nomadic commu-
nities, visiting health facilities is a collective (and
rarely women-led) decision, requiring communi-
ty endorsement before the visit to the facility.
Insights into health-seeking behavior are noted;
although they are less important to the design of

digital solutions, these insights highlighted the im-
portance of CHVs especially regarding accessing
family planning for the women in this community.

Supply Chain Insights
These insights described key drivers and causes of
stock imbalances—under- and overstocking—at
health facilities that will be or are responsible for
resupplying CHVs. One reason for stock imbal-
ances at the health facility is that staff were not al-
ways using past logistics data (consumption and
stock on hand) to calculate supply requirements,
and as a result, the county pharmacists reported
that they do not always trust the accuracy of the
report.
A reason for low stocks was insufficient
county-level budget allocations that resulted in
an undersupply of commodities to facilities. Some
overstocking of contraceptives was explained as
being due to low demand, which sometimes
resulted in expiries. These products are considered
public health priority products and provided free
(counties do not have to purchase them) and
have in the past been distributed to the counties
from the central stores regardless of demand. As
partners work to address the factors behind low
demand, the supply chain needs to be ready with
good data visibility to respond to changing
demand.

Information System Insights
Information system insights described poor use of
national reporting tools for both service and sup-
ply chain data. Low literacy combined with the
complexity of tools and insufficient quantities of
forms resulted in low levels of reporting. Oral
reporting is common, and CHVs rely on their chil-
dren to help complete reports. Currently, no stan-
dardized CHV supply chain reporting tool exists
that all communities use to report logistics data.
The capacity to analyze and visualize data was in-
consistent at supervisory and management levels
of the system. Counties do not have the budget
and capacity to maintain separate information sys-
tems and use the national health information
system.

Human Resource Insights
Human resource insights reflected both common
challenges across the public health system and
those exacerbated by or unique to ASAL counties.
Norms and standards in recruitment policies and
processes were inconsistently applied. Both ASAL
counties were characterized by severe shortages
and
inadequate
distribution
of
health
care

workers at facility and community levels. Human
resource shortages are exacerbated during the
rainy seasons when the communities migrate
closer to the towns, resulting in long queues at
health facilities and burnout among health care
workers. High attrition among CHVs, who receive
inadequate support and stipends, affects service
provision at the community level. In both coun-
ties, CHV training often relies on externally
funded activities, and recognition and award sys-
tems are in place but do not always function,
even for health facility staff.

System-Related Insights
System-related insights described the reality of
current structures and where opportunities and

gaps existed. Mobile clinics have been set up in
both counties to support nomadic and semino-
madic communities at strategic locations, such as
community watering points. At the time of re-
search, most clinics were either not operational or
not fully used due to inadequate funding and sup-
port. However, efforts to strengthen these clinics is
underway and could supply CHVs with supplies in
the future. In contexts where communication is
constrained by distance, connectivity, and other
inhibiting factors, meetings tend to happen with
or without external partner support. However,
community-level meetings may occur irregularly
due to connectivity challenges and the distances
CHVs must travel.

Connectivity Insights
Connectivity insights showed that 63% of the
CHVs engaged during the first round of usability
testing in the research phase had or regularly used
a feature phone, 27% used a smartphone, and
9% did not use any type of phone. It should be
noted this project did not include funds for pro-
curement of devices so only existing devices could
be used. Network connectivity was poor, and elec-
tricity to charge phones was sporadic. Many CHVs
would travel to the nearest urban centers and facil-
ities to charge their phones. Some facilities had no
access to telecom services at all. Use of WhatsApp
was high among facility staff, but they reached
CHVs via phone calls. A few CHVs had smart-
phones issued by partners but struggled to use
them for anything other than voice communica-
tion with family and friends.

Usability Testing Insights
Learnings evolved through the iterative process
for usability testing (Table 2). During the research
phase, the design team conducted usability testing
using the original cStock application. Findings
showed that the original app was not intuitive.
Users struggled to navigate the multiple compli-
cated steps and required guidance. CHVs had lim-
ited understanding of English and Kiswahili, and
so they did not understand the language used in
the app. Users had even more challenges with the
SMS version of cStock and struggled to write
structured messages that required letters, num-
bers, and symbols for sending reports.
We observed that usability varied by literacy
levels among the participants. Literate CHVs were
able to use the application, whereas those with
low literacy struggled. Literacy levels also deter-
mined CHVs’ ability to complete paper-based tools
and understand supply chain terminology. CHV
supervisors and health facility staff demonstrated
higher technology capabilities but had limited
knowledge of the supply chain and ability to inter-
pret simple data visuals, such as graphs and tables.

3. Ideation and Prototyping
The ideation and prototyping workshop resulted
in 4 principles for design.

1.
For the system to be sustainable, it had to be
applicable for all CHVs across Kenya; these
counties alone do not have the capacity or
budget to maintain the software. CHVs would

need to use personal phones as procuring
devices was not possible; county budgets are
limited
and
maintaining
broken
or
lost
devices over the long term was not feasible.

2.
Poor connectivity and limited power sources
would not allow real-time data entry. Thus,
the solution could not be entirely digital, and
paper-based tools would be necessary. However,
the paper-based forms could be designed to be
more intuitive and appropriate for the variations
in skill levels.

3.
Illiteracy was high among these CHVs in these
counties, and supervisors needed to be able to
play a more active role in supporting CHVs.

4.
The digital solution needed to be as intuitive
as possible and should not require major
changes to behaviors and attitudes.

The workshop also led to the development of
2 models for data flow and 4 supply chain tools to
improve data availability and use. In Model 1,
supervisors enter or validate supply chain data on
CHVs’ behalf, using a supervisor’s cStock applica-
tion. In Model 2, CHVs with sufficient literacy en-
ter the data directly into a smartphone application
or USSD (Figure 3). The participants agreed that
the goal should be to graduate all CHVs from
Model 1 to Model 2 over time. Model 1 would be
a temporary solution. After the initial training, the
CHV supervisor would use monthly meetings to
conduct on-the-job training to all CHVs with an
eventual goal that all CHVs will enter their data ei-
ther via USSD or the application. The 4 supply
chain solutions as previously mentioned were a
paper-based stock recording form; a redesigned,
user-friendly cStock app; a supervisor version of
the cStock app; and a SMS/USSD hybrid reporting
prototype (Table 3).
When high-fidelity prototypes of the supply
chain solutions were developed, a second round
of usability testing revealed that the redesigned
smartphone application was easier to use than
the previous cStock. Users found it intuitive and
were able to learn how to use it relatively quickly.
CHVs had the most difficulty using the SMS/USSD
prototype, even when they were more familiar
with a feature phone. Across literacy levels, most
users found it confusing to enter data in the struc-
tured manner required to report by SMS/USSD
and switch between SMS and USSD. Responding
to this finding, the design team decided to remove
the SMS portion of the fourth (reporting) proto-
type and use only USSD. The usability testing also
revealed that literacy and numeracy levels were

not comparable. Most CHVs could count well and
found ways to communicate counted numbers
even if they had low literacy.

4. Supply Chain Design and Requirements
Building
The supply chain design workshop yielded a stan-
dard system design mapping process from national
level to community level, plus alternate processes
for when CHVs were migrating. Figure 4 outlines
the flow of commodities and data as mapped dur-
ing the supply chain design workshop. As the sup-
ply chain processes to the health facility level are
well-established in Kenya, the workshop focused
primarily on the last step in the supply chain. The
commodity list for the CHVs in these counties was
still being discussed at the time of writing but in-
cluded some basic supplies for treating worms, di-
arrhea, and malaria, as well as contraceptives.
Two options were identified for a migrating CHV:
they could receive double the quantity of com-
modities for the migration period or they could
collect supplies from an alternative health facility
during migration. CHVs could choose depending
on what was more convenient: carrying more sup-
plies or accessing another facility. Approval for the
alternative arrangement rested with the CHV

supervisor. The requirements for the application
were developed to allow the supervisor to adjust
the settings in the application to account for the
change.

DISCUSSION
HCD approaches facilitated the design of an inno-
vative supply chain and digital solution to address
challenges faced by CHVs in hard-to-reach areas
and nomadic communities with complex socio-
cultural factors and to support the county govern-
ment in improving access to health care and the
overall health and well-being of these communi-
ties.13 Common methods used for supply chain de-
sign might not have achieved the insights and
empathy gained from the HCD process and the struc-
tured, cocreative process used for translating findings
into feasible, acceptable solutions. Traditionally, sup-
ply chain assessments primarily look to health care
providers as their source of information.16 Insights
generated from interacting with a variety of stake-
holders, not just health care providers, highlighted
contextual barriers that affect nomadic CHVs and
the recurring challenges that influence the supply
chain system generally. HCD enabled the design
team to observe the behaviors, daily challenges, and
motivations of nomadic peoples and the relationships

between CHVs and their community, supervisor, and
health facility.
HCD provided insight into the needs of the
people who would benefit from the innovation
and helped create novel approaches to meet these
needs and deliver solutions that would work in
this socioeconomic context. The research tech-
niques used provided deep insights into this com-
plex community. For example, interviews were
conducted in a place chosen by the interviewee.
This ensured that each interviewee was in familiar
surroundings and felt comfortable, which facilitat-
ed more genuine, meaningful interactions and
responses. Interview guides ensured coverage of
important lines of inquiry, while also enabling
flexibility to dive into and follow the users’ stories.
“Day in the life” mapping tools allowed partici-
pants to visually impart information that would
have been hard for interviewees to articulate or
for the design team to document as observations.
The HCD technique of cocreation supported
stakeholders in a constructive, creative, and inclu-
sive process that encouraged contributions and
ideas from different perspectives. Insights from
the exploratory research were critical to ensure

that stakeholders truly understood the end users.
These insights also informed the overarching prin-
ciples for the design. The 4 design principles
(addressing sustainability, connectivity challenges,
illiteracy, and ensuring intuitive usability) led the
design team to identify the 2 distinct models for
data flow to accommodate differing levels of skills,
motivations, and contextual elements within the
health system in northern Kenya. Model 1, which
includes the supervisor’s app, built on the behavior
observed during the fieldwork, where supervisors
would complete or validate data on paper-based
reporting for CHVs with low literacy. Model 2 was
designed for CHVs who have the capacity to enter
the data directly into a digital solution. The design
team agreed that ultimately all CHVs would gradu-
ate to Model 2 once they had capacity for self-
reporting as outlined in Figure 3.
The iterative usability testing for the 4 proto-
type tools facilitated continuous learning and
adjustment of the design. Table 5 outlines the out-
comes of the usability testing and how it changed
the overall design. Usability testing is a widely
used user-centered technique that evaluates a
product’s design and function and the degree to

which it meets users’ expectations and needs. The
use of high-fidelity, clickable prototypes enabled
early, frequent usability testing before time and
money were spent on software development. For
example, usability testing revealed that CHVs
were able to learn how to use a simpler digital so-
lution that used more visual cues and required less
steps. The testing also demonstrated that CHVs
with low literacy were numerate, which informed
the design team that the solutions could include
tallying of data. For the paper-based forms, the de-
sign team made adjustments during testing to en-
sure that CHVs understood the illustrations and
could navigate the tools. Thus, this iterative, user-
based process resulted in truly innovative tools
that were more user-friendly, more appropriate,
and more likely to be used by CHVs.
Further research is required to fully under-
stand the benefits of HCD in the design of supply
chain and digital health solutions for this popula-
tion. Its benefits might include fewer post-
implementation iterations of tools, better uptake
and acceptance of solutions, and improved sus-
tainability. As the tools and systems are rolled out
to these communities in the ASAL counties of
Kenya over the next year, HCD will continue to
be used during the process of implementation.
The design team will continue to observe and lis-
ten to the users, and will adapt solutions and pro-
cesses to address their needs—and will then
observe the longer-term benefits and potential
cost savings of using the HCD process prior to
implementation.

Limitations
HCD has some limitations. Compared to other pro-
gram design approaches, HCD and systems analysis
can take a greater time investment up front (in this
case it took 7 months). The approach requires

significant time before implementation to conduct
the research (2 to 3 months), thoroughly under-
stand the end users (and establish trust with
them), and develop and repeatedly test the design
and high-fidelity prototypes of the solutions (2 to
3 months). This HCD process was longer than an
average process, as it did focus on a particularly
complex environment, and 4 different solutions
were designed, tested, and iterated. This long lead
time can result in some frustration for users and
partners who are enthusiastic about finding solu-
tions to their challenges. However, the alternative
of quickly developing a product and then testing
usability may result in the solution requiring major
changes since it was designed for the user but not
with the user.17 HCD, which centers on designing
digital solutions in complex environments, may po-
tentially result in less time spent overall since uptake
is faster and more intuitive and fewer iterations to
the tools are required after implementation; howev-
er this needs to be evaluated.18

HCD when implemented in its purest form can
take a long time and is resource-intensive. However,
there are different ways to integrate HCD in a project
that could shorten the time for the design process. In
this instance, it was combined with training project
staff in the methodology; alternatively, an experi-
enced external design team could have been hired
and the process would be faster but more expensive.
It should be noted that HCD requires specialized ex-
pertise to lead the process, and individuals working
in governments of low- and middle-income coun-
tries may not have these skills. At this time, HCD is
a specialized methodology that requires external as-
sistance. HCD is most suitable to solve complex pro-
blems, such as the one described in this article,
where previous health interventions have failed.
In this project, we combined HCD with system
analysis and supply chain design methodologies
that supported the design team to also consider a

wider system strengthening perspective.19 We saw
this as necessary in our highly complex social and
cultural context. However, this approach has the
potential disadvantage that it results in a highly
context-specific solution that may not be applica-
ble in other contexts. For this project, the rede-
signed cStock application and USSD is being
implemented in Siaya County; this will provide
valuable insights into whether the redesigned
cStock is well adopted in more traditional commu-
nity health units or if it is highly context-specific to
the ASAL counties. HCD can also be narrow in fo-
cus, converging on certain complex problems and
specific user challenges and not focusing on the
larger system challenges. Another limitation of
HCD is that it does not entail rigorous research
nor does it provide quantitative data for measur-
ing the impact or outcomes of the program. As
with other social and behavioral methodologies,
HCD may need to be complemented by traditional
evaluation methodologies to generate evidence of
program effectiveness.

CONCLUSION
CHVs in marginalized, nomadic communities live
and work in a complex environments. Health ser-
vices and tools need to be designed to address the
unique needs of these communities if health sys-
tems are to improve universal access to health
care and reduce health inequities. By incorporat-
ing the voice of CHVs and their communities,
HCD approaches facilitated the design of innova-
tive digital health solutions to support a data-
driven supply chain that reflected the needs and
expectations articulated by the CHVs and thus is
more likely to be used and owned by CHVs.
Further evaluation is required at the end of project
to assess and reflect on the value of HCD in design-
ing effective digital solutions that have high rates
of uptake in complex settings. To ensure that the
larger goal of improving access to health commod-
ities and contributing to improved health out-
comes of the population is reached, an evaluation
should also consider standard performance metrics
to assess the supply chain and availability of essen-
tial medicines.20