A Technology-aided Multi-modal Training Approach to Assist Abdominal
Palpation Training and its Assessment in Medical Education

Ali Asadipoura,b,∗, Kurt Debattistab, Vinod Patelc, Alan Chalmersb

aComputer Science Research Centre, Royal College of Art, London, United Kingdom
bVisualisation Group, WMG, University of Warwick, Coventry, United Kingdom
cWarwick Medical School, University of Warwick, Coventry, United Kingdom

3. Methodology

Elicitation of user requirements (or extracting human factors) is a compulsory step to predict the aspects of us-
ability and usefulness of a technique in human-centred research studies (Martin et al., 2012). Thus, qualitative and
quantitative data have been collected in diﬀerent stages of this research via a series of User Centred Design (UCD)
methods. Also, to elaborate the user and domain needs, a team of medical tutors and their ﬁrst year students were
actively involved in this study. Figure 2 shows the step-by-step design of this research methodology.
The approach proposed in this paper has been developed in consultation with experts with speciﬁc emphasis in
improving clinical competency in palpation (use of the correct part of the hand to aid the quality of palpation and not
cause patient distress) in order that no signiﬁcant intra-abdominal pathology is missed, whilst still preserving patient
dignity and comfort. Three key steps are deﬁned by the senior clinical tutors to ensure that each student participant
was able to examine the abdomen with the correct amount of pressure for competent superﬁcial and deep palpation.
These formed the basis of our methodology:

• Full coverage of the abdominal surface,

• Diﬀerentiation between superﬁcial and deep palpation, and

• Prevention of leaning on abdominal surface with thenar and hypothenar eminences

Diﬀerent stages of this research methodology are brieﬂy discussed in this section. More detail about each stage is
presented within its representative section.

Figure 2: Research Methodology - procedures are presented by solid rectangles and predicted outcomes are illustrated by dashed ellipses

3.1. Prototyping the Educational Interface
Design of an early prototype for palpation training was planned due to a lack of available oﬀ-the-shelf measure-
ment interfaces with the ﬂexibility required for this study. Moreover, additional factors such as budget restrictions and
time commitments were inﬂuential in making this decision. Cognitive Walkthrough was used to evaluate the early
prototype, when an end-user is not available with the help of proxies (e.g. fellow colleagues) to ensure it complies
with the domain principles which were extracted via literature reviews and process observations.
The early version of the prototype was made to demonstrate the concept of a technology-aided training interface.
It was evaluated by a team of medical tutors (Focus Group) to identify a list of design reﬁnements before the data
collection stages.

3.2. Exploration of Study Requirements
In a follow up communication with Pro Dean and head of the undergraduate studies (Bachelor of Medicine,
Bachelor of Surgery) a team of medical experts who teach physical examinations within a current curriculum was
identiﬁed.
A Focus Group (FG) method was used with a seat-back strategy (collecting data by listening to the group discus-
sions) to extract experiences via discussions between medical tutors and to identify current challenges in the abdominal
palpation examinations educational process. User and task requirements were identiﬁed and transcribed in the form
of meeting protocols (or minutes) from verbal discussions and written answers in the tutors questionnaire as part of
the self-reporting technique.

3.3. Creation of a Proof of Concept Model
The knowledge of the dexterous use of the human hands within abdominal palpation examinations is usually
transferred from masters to novices via lifelong rehearsals of clinical skills (Patel and Morrissey, 2011; Macleod
et al., 2009). Thus, it is essential to model the medical tutors palpation skills via a novel quantiﬁcation technique in
order to establish a ground-truth reference. The existence of such a reference model is needed in the evaluation stage
of this research to ensure all students are going to be assessed in exactly the same manner. Palpation metrics (position,
orientation, pressure) were collected via an innovative measurement interface (see section 5) from the medical tutors’
sessions. In this paper we focus on applied pressures at diﬀerent regions of the human hands which were analysed and
employed in the evaluation study. Section 6 presents detailed overview on proof of concept stage and the potential
ﬁndings from the tutors’ performances.

3.4. Evaluation Study

A Usability Test method was used in the ﬁnal stage of this study to evaluate if the proposed method can fulﬁl its
potentials in learning complex motor skills. The impact of real-time multimodal augmented feedback of applied forces
on the medical students’ competency was assessed by this experiment. Consequently, a digital competency report is
provided to evaluate its beneﬁts in the medical tutors assessment process. Therefore, a pilot study was scheduled in
the last FG session to employ this technology-aided training and assessment technique in one of the students formal
training sessions to evaluate its usability and usefulness in a real-world practice. Quantitative measurements were
collected from students’ performances to be compared with the best practice model for each abdominal palpation task
during the assessment process. In addition, quantitative data were collected from students who had had a chance to
learn abdominal palpation skills with the new technique via usability feedback forms, section 7.

4. Study Requirement

Domain requirements were identiﬁed in the Focus Group discussions via open-ended questions and carefully noted
from the discussion. These recommendations were employed throughout the interface prototyping, experiment design
and data collection phases.

4.1. User Requirements

The following user requirements were identiﬁed as key concerns to accept technological interventions in medical
education:

• Complementary Method - the role of medical tutors in conventional medical training is undeniable and could
not be replaced. Hence, new technology-aided interventions should be used in conjunction with the current
practice in the medical curriculum.

• Real-time Feedback and Instant Assessment - instant feedback on competency is highly demanded during the
learning phase. Also, an instant report on students’ overall performance could enhance the existing assessment
process.

• Unintrusive Design - the interface must provide a similar experience to the real-world experience without any
interference in the palpation process.

• Health and Safety - when wearable technologies are in direct contact with human skin, constant use by dif-
ferent medical users on several patients may result in skin infections. Also, an electrostatic shock could occur
and it could put the patient’s safety at risk. In addition, exhaustion caused by the measurement interface in
quantiﬁcation studies could directly aﬀect the user’s competency and experience.

• Time and cost - these are often identiﬁed as the two paramount challenges in the adaptation of a new technology-
aided intervention in current medical education.

4.2. Task Requirements

Three abdominal palpation examination tasks were selected to investigate two important learning objectives; to
highlight the transition between applied forces (superﬁcial vs. deep palpation) and to illustrate the correct formation
of the palpating hand by localisation of the applied forces (locate speciﬁc organ e.g. liver).
Palpation of four quadrants with right hand was chosen by the medical tutors to minimise variations caused by
employment of diﬀerent techniques for superﬁcial and deep palpation tasks. Actor patients were invited from two
genders with three diﬀerent anatomical variations to ensure the proof of concept phase outcomes were reliable. Figure
3 shows the task requirements that were identiﬁed by the medical tutors in group interviews.

5. Palpation Training System (PTS)

The initial wearable prototype which is used in this study was the lightest (70 grams), thinnest (reading pulses on
ﬁngertips), and cheapest version of the data gloves with 12 sensors (three on the radial border of the hand) and long
range high speed wireless communication over Bluetooth. An additional essential requirement in clinical practice is
that the glove has to be able to withstand alcohol sanitising gel for purposes of high standards of hand hygiene (Safety
et al., 2009). Detailed information about characteristics, ﬁdelity and calibration processes of the sensors are provided
in (Asadipour et al., 2016).

5.2. Design

The PTS interface layout and its outputs in diﬀerent stages of this research are highlighted in Figure 4.

5.2.1. Multidisciplinary Design Team
An early version of the measurement interface was evaluated by each member during the ﬁrst FG session and
design reﬁnements were summarised by the interaction between the medical tutors. One tutor who currently teaches
abdominal palpation skills in WMS was invited in a series of follow up meetings throughout the iterative design
process, to advise on detection of potential patterns and knowledge from the captured data from the medical tutors, data
visualisation and further analysis. The medical tutors’ feedback in the design stage was crucial to create assessment
criteria and to generate competency reports prior to the evaluation study.

5.2.2. The Interface Framework
Pressure:. a common technological challenge in force quantiﬁcation studies to measure applied forces during hands-
on interactions is the installation of the transducers (e.g. force sensors) on such an articulated structure (the human
hands) without decreasing dexterity (Jensen et al., 1991). A series of contact points on the human hand for particular
interactions are used as a reference to mount force-sensing transducers with smaller spatial resolution to enhance the
ﬂexibility of the hands.
Twelve contact points were identiﬁed on the right hand’s palmar surface and its radial border of the index ﬁnger,
based on advice given by the medical tutors in the user requirements elicitation phase. These points were identiﬁed
during live demonstrations of target abdominal palpation tasks (superﬁcial, deep, and liver edge) on a dummy man-
nequin with the initial prototype of PTS. Figure 5 shows the contact points’ positions on the right hand as the palpating
hand, for all three tasks.

Orientation:. another important metric to be measured during the abdominal palpation examination process is the
rotational movements of the palpating hand in space (see ﬁgure 1). In order to account for all useful orientations,
a wearable sensory quantiﬁcation tool in the form of a glove was proposed as part of the PTS interface to measure
applied pressures as well as the rotational movements of the human hand during palpation process.
The force and orientation metrics were digitally sampled by two on-board micro-controllers and the raw data
is transmitted from a wearable technology (ParsGloveTM) to the base computer via a wireless solution to provide
freehand interactions in a non-intrusive fashion. Figure 6 shows ParsGloveTM, the prototype based on the feedback
from the medical tutors.

Position:. the position tracking techniques are highly inﬂuenced by the resolution of the target tracking area on the
human anatomy. Vision-based tracking techniques were surveyed to identify the best approach which complies with
the user requirements in this research. A marker-based tracking method, comprising four colour markers, is used to
capture global (palmar) and local (ﬁngers) movements of the human hand since a wearable sensory input is already
introduced to capture other metrics. Colour Markers were attached to the ParsGlove on areas which were deﬁned by
the medical tutors. A Kinect sensor was mounted above the patient’s body and was focused on the abdominal region
to detect the markers and return three dimensional values to represent position of each marker in space. A point cloud
is also captured in each frame for further work on the anatomical variations to form an average body model and locate
organs.

5.2.3. PTS Data Acquisition Application (PTS-DAQ)
The data acquisition user interface is comprised of two panels. The main panel (Monitoring Panel) monitors the
data collection process and an auxiliary panel (Feedback Panel) provides visual feedback on applied pressures on the
patient’s abdomen by the medical user (locations and magnitudes). Diﬀerent force magnitudes are represented by
three colour-coded symbols ranging from small (green), medium (amber) and high (red) based on the information
extracted from the tutors’ best practice model. The captured information could be stored on a local drive (Excel
spreadsheet) or on an online database. Figure 7 shows the PTS data acquisition user interface.

5.2.4. PTS Data Analysis Application (Examogram)
The data analysis user interface (hereafter known as Examogram) was designed, based on the requirements that
were explored in series of meetings with the lead medical tutors. These included the ability to perform preliminary

analysis such as frequency of presses per task, the highest recorded pressure per press, and the duration of each press
on the tutors’ datasets to create a proof of concept model. Examogram was also used to perform similar statistical
analysis and generate digital competency reports on the medical students’ datasets. These outcomes were used to
compare the students’ competency against the proposed best practice model as part of the competency assessment
process.

6. Proof of Concept

This section describes the open-ended exploration and data collection method used to form an understanding of
palpation activities based on the capture of medical palpation experts, from diﬀerent backgrounds, across a number of
palpation tasks.

6.1. Design

As noted in section 2.3.2 four medical tutors experienced in teaching abdominal palpation examination skills were
invited to take part in this research. A theoretical sampling method is used to develop a well-rounded theory with
the help of experienced participants using on-going interpretation of data to identify target information to collect
and to generate key concepts via observations and a series of open-ended questions. The tutors, each with diﬀerent
medical specialities, were invited to explore diﬀerent perspectives on similar subjects. Three abdominal palpation
tasks (superﬁcial, deep, and liver) were chosen by medical tutors to investigate various aspects of abdominal palpation
examination via hands-on practice. Superﬁcial and deep palpations were chosen to study the transition of force
application from soft and moderate presses to much harder presses in the deep palpation case. Liver palpation was
selected to evaluate correct formation of the hand and application of force only by speciﬁc parts of the hand (radial
border, index ﬁngertip and index ﬁnger base).
The interface capabilities were demonstrated to all tutors prior to their data collection session. A list of minor
modiﬁcations were suggested by the medical tutors in the initial research and design meeting. The measurement
interface and its software applications were reviewed based on this list to apply necessary changes. Potential risks
in measurement outcomes were discussed in a series of meetings before the data collection session in this stage.
Anatomical variations between actor patients and employment of diﬀerent techniques were taken into account. Three
diﬀerent body types in two genders were identiﬁed and invited to take part in this study. Also, an averaging method
with help of the medical tutors was employed to resolve the variations.

6.2. Materials
The PTS data acquisition user interface is used to capture three important parameters from the medical tutors. A
TFT display was positioned in front of the investigator to let him monitor the data collection process but no visual
feedback was provided to the tutors or to the actor patients.
The Examogram user interface was used to analyse the medical tutors’ raw data. The analysis results were used to
develop a ground-truth model for each palpation task, subsequently used in evaluation experiment in the next section.
Examination and data capture took place on a mattress provided in the lab. The mattress was covered with a
disposable couch roll for each participant and a medically approved hand sanitiser gel was provided as well as ultra
thin powder coated polyvinyl gloves to be used inside the wearable interface to meet hygiene and safety requirements.

6.3. Participants
WMS medical professionals were invited to take part in this study. The team comprised three male and one
female tutor with diﬀerent medical backgrounds and one Gastroenterologist. All had extensive experience in acute
and non-acute abdominal examinations in various setting.
Actor patients were recruited in this study as substitutes for real patients. The term actor patient refers to a normal
human in average medical condition who has no known disease or abnormality at the time. Five actor patients took
part in this experiment, with ages from 24 to 31 years old. Since this research aims to propose a reliable model
for abdominal palpation examination, actor patients were selected with respect to anatomical variations and genders.
Thus, body Mass Index (BMI) was used primarily to ﬁnd potential participants for the three groups: Small, Medium,
and Large (underweight, healthy weight, and overweight). It was diﬃcult to ﬁnd a female participant in the Large
category as no one within that category volunteered and it was deemed unethical to ask individuals directly.
Other medical indexes such as Body Adiposity Index (BAI) and Waist to Hip Ratio (WHR) were also employed
to calculate excess abdominal fat concentration. Table 1 shows three commonly used indexes to assess healthiness for
participants which were employed during the experiment.
The above metrics (BMI, BAI and WHR) can provide rough estimates of the participants’ body type (National
Health System (NHS) Choices, last visit 2015). The healthy weight region in BMI ranges between 18.5 to 25. Body
Adiposity Index (BAI) was also used to determine the percentage of body fat from size of hip circumference and
height (ShapeSense, 2015). The healthy region for this indicator is dened between 21% to 33% for a female and
8% to 21% for a male (age 20 - 39). Finally, Waist to Hip Ratio (WHR) is also used by some doctors to determine
if a person is carrying too much weight around his/her abdomen. A ratio above 0.85 for females and 1.0 for males
indicates the risk of abdominal obesity in future.
The ﬁnal decision for assigning the participants in the three anatomical categories based on their abdominal obesity
was made by the medical tutors. Just prior to the start of the data collection, the male participant in the medium body
category withdrew.
The reason to choose participants from diﬀerent genders and various body types is to develop a technique to build
an average patient anatomy as well as providing options to be selected by tutees in the future. Another observation
from clinical teaching is that students are apprehensive when examining obese patients because they feel that they
have to dig deeper to overcome the subcutaneous fat to be able to palpate deeper structures such as liver and kidneys.
This fact is not investigated further in this paper.

6.4. Procedures

Four diﬀerent sessions were scheduled according to the tutors’ and participants’ availability. The tutors were
formally invited to take part in this experiment via email invitations with enclosed ethics documentation. The actor
patients also received an invitation email with their speciﬁc version of the ethics documentation.
All participants were introduced to the tutor in an induction meeting prior to the data collection. Participants were
asked to attend in sequential order. It was estimated that the tutors would take twenty minutes for each participant
based on ﬁve minutes per task with two and a half minutes rest intervals between tests. Also, ﬁve minutes preparation
time was permitted between participants. In the preparation intervals tutors had ﬁve minutes to put on a polyvinyl
glove, the ParsGlove, and to clean the ParsGlove surface with sanitiser gel. Meanwhile, the investigator was respons-
ible for preparing the interface and checking the captured data. Tutors were asked to perform the target palpation tasks
(superﬁcial, deep and liver) twice to guarantee sampling reliability.
The tutor and actor patient were surrounded by a curtain during examination and the software application was
focused only on the actor patient’s abdomen (area between participant’s ribs and hip). During palpation tutors were
positioned in the right hand side of the patient using their right hand to palpate. Target tasks shared a common entrance
point: from the right hand side of the patient’s abdomen but the liver palpation had a diﬀerent movement pattern and
hand formation. Palpation was started with a brief introduction from tutors and a short description of the palpation
routine to the actor patient before each task. Data collection was initiated and terminated by the tutor’s verbal signal
for each task.

6.5. Assessment Framework

The captured data was analysed and was used to develop an assessment framework for subsequent use in evalu-
ation. The medical tutors’ palpation data were analysed via the Examogram user interface and electronic reports were
generated to highlight force properties such as magnitude and distribution across the hand surface and around its edge.
Figure 9 shows an electronic report for a superﬁcial palpation.
The raw pressure values were initially analysed in an arbitrary unit format based on 10 bits of data (0−1023). The
applied force upper-bound threshold (600 arb. unit) was chosen from the tutors’ data in the deep palpation examination
task and this region was divided into four quartets to represent very light (Q1), light (Q2), medium (Q3) and hard (Q4)
presses. Figure 10 shows the medical tutors’ raw data on a histogram in superﬁcial and deep palpation tasks.

Force distributions were computed and visualised on a palpating hand ﬁgure. Each sensor’s contribution (Csensor)
in the palpation examination process is computed as a function of the total captured press counts from that sensor
(PCsensor) and the total captured press counts (PCtotal) from all twelve sensors as Csensor = (PCsensor/PCtotal) × 100.
Press frequencies and maximum force applied per press are calculated per sensor on the ﬁrst version of the elec-
tronic reports. This quantity is used in the second set of reports to score students’ performance in each criterion both
in computer-based and human-based assessment methods. Reports were anonymised and presented to a lead medical
tutor in a follow up meeting to interpret and design an assessment framework for computer-based assessment. Three
criteria were deﬁned by the medical tutors to mark students’ performance. Each criteria is allocated ten points for a
maximum score of thirty.

Wrong Use of Hand:. Thenar and Hypothenar eminences (see ﬁgure 5) on the palmar surface of the palpating hand
are not supposed to be used on the patient’s abdominal surface during the palpation examination process, to avoid
patient discomfort and possibly injury especially when they are experiencing pain. Hence, hereafter we call the
sensors that detect these actions, non-permitted or error sensors (Ei). This criterion should be met in all three tasks.

• Thenar eminence (E1 + E2) sensor’s contribution (see Eq. 1):

C(E1) + C(E2) ≤20%
(1)

• Hypothenar eminence (E3) sensors’ contributions (see Eq. 2):

C(E3) ≤10%
(2)

Correct Use of Hand. a good use of the hand refers to an equal balance between applied forces on the three ﬁngertip
sensors (T1, T2, T3) due to the hand’s posture in superﬁcial and deep abdominal palpation. However, in palpation of the
liver edge, it is important to employ only ﬁve sensors out of the nine permitted ones. These sensors are located on the
radial border of the index ﬁnger (three side sensors), the index ﬁnger-tip and the index ﬁnger-base (S 1, S 2, S 3, T1, B1).

1. Superﬁcial and Deep palpation: the variation (δ(Ti)) of each ﬁngertip sensor’s contribution (C(Ti)) from the
ﬁngertip sensors’ mean (µ) are computed (δ(Ti) = C(Ti) −µ). Ten points were given when the diﬀerences are
within an acceptable threshold (see Eq. 3).
δ(Ti) ± 20%
(3)

2. Palpation of liver edge: Ten points were awarded if over half of the sensors’ contribution in the examination
process are focused on the radial border, ﬁnger-tip and ﬁnger-base of the index ﬁnger (see Eq. 4).

C(S 1) + C(S 2) + C(S 3) + C(T1) + C(B1) ≥50%
(4)

Force Magnitude Transition. four diﬀerent force magnitudes were deﬁned based on the tutor’s best-practice model:
very light, light, medium, and hard press (Q1 to Q4). In superﬁcial palpation the main objective is to perform a gentle
examination, covering all regions on the patient’s abdomen. While performing deep palpation the medical students
must apply harder presses in order to locate organs or to identify abnormalities. Therefore, in the superﬁcial palpation
examination the maximum peak of each press must be in the very light or light quartets whereas in deep palpation
examination they need to be in medium to hard quartets.

6.6. Findings and Discussion
The analysed results were used by the tutors to design a framework for further palpation performance assessments.
Variations caused by the tutors and techniques were investigated and interesting patterns identiﬁed in the medical tu-
tors’ dataset. Indeed, quantifying the force needed to appreciate a pathology via a big sample of medical professionals
could help determine the required thresholds to detect that pathology on a wide variety of anatomies.

6.6.1. Variations across Medical Professions
Since the variation between tutors and their techniques is a well-known challenge in the medical domain, the
best practice model is based on averaging the tutors’ overall performance to cope with this problem. In addition,
variation between medical professionals could have an eﬀect on their force application magnitude. According to the
lead medical tutor there are three deﬁnitions for medical professionals: novice, journeyman, and master. Students
are considered as novices and with the help of medical tutors who are in the journeyman category, they will learn
how to perform palpation skills. However, the last group are domain specialists (e.g. Gastroenterologists) who are
considered as masters in abdominal palpation examination skills. Hence, a light to moderate press could give them
enough information about the potential abnormality in a deep palpation examination (see fourth tutor’s performance
in deep palpation ﬁgure 10) but examination with the same force magnitude might be insuﬃcient for a medical student
(novice) to diagnose the condition correctly. Figure 11 illustrates a comparison between journeyman (third tutor) and
master (fourth tutor) performances in our study.

6.6.2. Variations across Genders and Body Types
Slightly higher forces were recorded on the ﬁnger-tip sensors (T1, T2, T3) for male actor patients during superﬁcial
and deep palpation examinations by the lead medical tutor. This could be explained by the anatomical variations
between male and female. The required force to detect organs and abnormalities has a positive correlation with
abdominal obesity because of a thicker layer of fat around the abdomen. This means harder presses are needed on a
larger anatomy in both superﬁcial and deep palpation tasks. Figure 12 shows the ﬁnger-tip sensors’ mean force (in
Newtons) in superﬁcial and deep palpation examinations for diﬀerent body types across genders.

Also, the tutors’ performance in deep palpation examination (ﬁnger-tip sensors (T1, T2, T3), large male category)
were plotted to illustrate the variations between palpation techniques among tutors in current practice. According to
the generated force-time plots which are presented in ﬁgure 13, the ﬁrst tutor had harder presses for longer durations
compared to all other experts with fewer regions to examine (six press-release actions). The second tutor had the
longest examination (twenty one press-release actions) with moderately equal amount of force in each. The press-
release durations and subsequently the total examination time were arguably decreased in the last two performances.
Finally, the last tutor (the Gastroenterologist) had the lowest force readings compared to the others, close to his

superﬁcial levels.

How to resolve the variations between professionals is out of scope of this paper but it will be investigated in the
future to develop a highly accurate palpation model. The following mean force levels were identiﬁed for the index
ﬁnger-tip sensor; superﬁcial palpation (µ = 1.25 N), deep palpation (µ = 2.37 N), and lowest maximum force for deep
palpation as the highest safe threshold for a small-female (µ = 1.65 N).

7. Evaluation Study

The ﬁnal stage of this work involves the evaluation of the impact of the proposed training and assessment technique
in real-world practice. This section presents a pilot study that demonstrates the potential of this work within a formal
training session.

7.1. Design
A between-subject design was chosen for this experiment. A systematic random sampling method (Schutt, 2011)
was used to assign participants to one of the following three groups: A Conventionally Trained (CT) control group
(n = 8) that performed palpation examination in a conventional fashion, a Semi-visually Trained (SVT) group (n = 8)
in which augmented feedback was delivered only during the training phase, and ﬁnally a Visually Trained (VT) group
(n = 7) where augmented feedback was provided in both training and actual test phases.
The motivation of this experiment was to explore the eﬀect of additional sensory information (e.g. visual feedback
on applied forces) via diﬀerent learning styles on cognitive and motor-control abilities to highlight any potential
improvements in learning and performance. This eﬀect was evaluated by comparing the students’ competency in
abdominal palpation examination with the best practice model, proposed in the previous section, as a trusted reference
model.
Our main hypothesis in this experiment (H1) was that additional sensory feedback on applied forces by the medical
students’ hands would improve their competency in abdominal palpation examination. The null hypothesis (H0) was
set to “no diﬀerence between groups in their overall performance scores.

The independent variable is the learning style which varies between groups. The dependent variable is based on an
assessment score given to the students depending on their performance. Details of how the assessment was computed
are given in the following section. Table 2 shows an overview of the experimental design and diﬀerent methods of
training and test phases between groups.

Table 2: Evaluation Study - Experimental Design
Control
Semi-visually Trained
Visually Trained

In addition, to minimise the inﬂuence of additional factors on students’ abdominal palpation competency, e.g.
previous experience in target palpations, the following control decisions were made prior to the experiment:
The PTS interface was used throughout the quantiﬁcation process (Same Quantiﬁcation Tool). Also, all groups
had equal chance prior to their data capturing sessions to acquaint themselves with the interface in the familiarisa-
tion phase. Homogeneity in the target population was a key to recruit participants (Same Level of Knowledge and
Experience). Thus, ﬁrst year medical students were chosen to ensure participants are, on average, at the same level of
knowledge and experience in clinical skills. Moreover, as mentioned in the previous section, the actor patient’s ana-
tomical variations can seriously aﬀect the force requirements for a best practice model (Same Actor Patient). Thus,
the same actor patient was involved in all palpation sessions.
Finally, a feedback form was prepared in two parts (quantitative and qualitative). The ﬁrst section of the feedback
form was adapted from the System Usability Scale (SUS) concept with close-ended rating scales to let the students
rate usability of the new learning style. Open-ended questions were presented in the last part of the form to collect
students’ feedback about their experience in a self-reporting fashion. The usability feedback form was given to the
participants in the SVT and the VT groups (n = 15) since they have had a chance to try the technology-aided method
as a learning tool.

7.2. Competency Assessment
Students’ competence in performing target abdominal palpation examination tasks is deﬁned as their performance.
Medical tutors currently assess students’ performance by skills observation and question/answer techniques as part of
a conventional assessment method. As mentioned previously, an assessment criteria was designed and proposed with
the help of a lead medical tutor.

7.2.1. Computer-based Assessment Method
A second version of the report was generated by Examogram using a computer-based assessment approach to
visualise the analysis results for diﬀerent criteria in the assessment framework. Apart from the last criteria in which
only two palpation tasks were assessed (Superﬁcial and Deep), the overall score is computed by averaging scores
for all three tasks. In this method ten points in each category was awarded if the target assessment criteria was met
otherwise the absolute error was computed to reduce the ﬁnal score.
Three randomly selected competency assessment reports that were generated in computer-based assessment phase
are presented in ﬁgure 14.

7.2.2. Human-based Assessment Method
The computer-based assessment second reports were given to two medical tutors for a human-based assessment
session. Tutors were not aware of students’ names or their group and computer generated scores were also removed
to avoid any bias. All reports were individually assessed by the two medical tutors and a ﬁnal score out of thirty was
given to each participant. The ﬁnal score then converted to a representative categorical value (Fail, Borderline, Pass,
Good, Excellent) according to the Objective Structured Clinical Examination (OSCE) global rating template (MRCS,
Updated March 2015). Finally, the two medical tutors made a combined decision for each participant by reviewing
scores together. A one-to-one feedback was provided to those participants who failed or their score was borderline to
highlight their strengths and weaknesses. Figure 15 shows the ﬁnal outcomes for three groups.

7.3. Materials

The primary materials used correspond to the technologies discussed in section 5. Although all three previously
deﬁned palpation metrics for reconstruction of a hands-on practice (Position, Orientation, Pressure) were collected
from PTS interface, this study focused only on the force related information.
The PTS-DAQ was used on a laptop to capture raw digital outputs of the twelve force sensors from the ParsGlove
wearable sensory input. Force-related metrics were illustrated on a secondary panel for technology-aided groups (see
ﬁgure 16).
The laptop monitor was positioned in front of the investigator to let him monitor the experiment’s progress on
PTS-DAQ primary application panel and it was obscured from participants during the whole experiment (see ﬁgure
7). Examogram was used to run the preliminary queries on the captured data to present the information on the instant
electronic reports for further evaluation by the medical tutors (see ﬁgure 8).
A TFT display was used in extended mode to provide visual feedback for participants. This monitor was positioned
in front of each participant to visualising the glove sensors’ force magnitude and its location on the hand (see ﬁgure
7). The students are always advised to look at the patients face for any signs of discomfort. The investigator had
limited permissions to change the room settings to position the TFT display next to the patient’s face. However, PTS
will deliver feedback via Augmented Reality (AR) displays in future to avoid this problem.

A Kinect v1.0 sensor was attached to an oﬀ-the-shelf mounting rack to provide 90 degrees base rotation in order
to capture the patient’s abdomen from the top. Figure 16 shows the experiment settings.
A hospital bed with the ability to electronically adjust the height was used in the training room. To meet hygiene
and safety requirements in this study, an ultra thin powder coated polyvinyl glove was provided to each participant be-
fore asking them to wear ParsGlove to avoid skin irritations and electrostatic shocks. Moreover, a medically approved
sanitising hand gel was used on the ParsGlove surface before each examination similar to the real-world practice to
avoid skin irritations or infections.

7.4. Participants

Twenty three participants took part in this experiment with twelve females and two left-handed subjects. Except
for the Visually Trained group (n = 7) each group had eight participants. They all had normal or corrected to normal
vision. All participants were chosen from ﬁrst year medical students in WMS to minimise the inﬂuence of having prior
knowledge and experience on students’ competency results. The investigator’s colleague took part in this experiment
as the actor patient.

7.5. Procedures
Prior to each session a brief description of the experiment was provided in four Power point slides. In each trial
only three people were in the experiment room: the investigator, the actor patient, and the medical student. Each
participant was greeted by the investigator. A signed consent form was taken from each participant and an email was
voluntarily provided for electronic reports.
A training phase and an actual test phase were planned for each target abdominal palpation examination task. Dif-
ferent learning styles were employed in each phase according to the participant’s group. In addition, they were asked
to conduct the examination session for each task similar to its real-world practice. Figure 17 shows the experiment
room and diﬀerent learning styles.

Participants began by introducing themselves to the actor patient followed by a brief explanation on the exam-
ination process. The data collection process was initiated and terminated for each abdominal palpation task by the

students’ verbal signal. Finally, raw data samples were labelled and stored on the investigator’s laptop. The actor
patient had been briefed by the investigator about the experimental procedure at the start.

7.6. Results

A mixed mode assessment approach is used in this study to highlight the impact of the new learning method on
student’s palpation performance and overall experience via quantitative and qualitative research methods.

7.6.1. Performance Assessment
A non-parametric Kruskal-Wallis test was used on categorical results (OSCE ratings) as an equivalent counterpart
for one-way ANOVA to ensure the results are not aﬀected by the small size of samples. Also, equal variances were
reported amongst groups, F(2, 20) = 2.240, p < .05 by a Levene’s test on assessment ranks. Students’ abdominal
palpation performances were reported to be signiﬁcantly aﬀected by the presence of visual feedback on applied forces
H(2) = 6.033, p < .05. Thus, the null hypothesis (H0) is rejected.
A post-hoc pairwise comparison test using Bonferroni correction revealed that the mean score for training and
test phases in the VT group (M = 2.00, SD = 1.53) signiﬁcantly diﬀered from the CT group(M = .38, SD = .74).
However, providing the new learning method only in the training session in SVT group (M = 1.00, SD = .76) did not
show signiﬁcant diﬀerence from the other two conditions (CT and VT groups).
Also, positive trend in students’ performance improvement is reported by Jonckheere-Terpstra test results when
visual feedback on applied forces was used in palpation sessions. The median rank increased in groups, J = 132,
z = 2.62, r = 0.55. Figure 18 shows this trend.

A signiﬁcant positive correlation is reported between computer-generated scores and human-generated scores
using Pearson Product-Moment Correlation, r = .637, p (one-tailed) < .05. This indicates the potential of the
computer-based assessment technique to assist current assessment process in medical education.
Although, both scores were generated according to the assessment criteria, the important role of tutors in as-
sessment process is clearly evident in the ﬁnal results. For instance our last participant in VT group has achieved a
remarkable score of 23.15 in computer-based assessment method and 19.5 in human-based assessment method out of
thirty but since the correct use of hand in palpation of liver edge indicates no reading from target sensors at all a ﬁnal
decision of Fail is given in a combined decision by tutors.

7.6.2. Students feedback on Method’s Usability
Eleven feedback forms out of ﬁfteen were received from the students comprised of seven females with one left
handed subject. The results of subjective assessment by the medical students in the SVT and the VT groups are
presented here:

Likert Scale. In ﬁrst part of the form, students were asked to choose the corresponding number for the most relevant
answer. Figure 19 shows the means for the ﬁve point scale rating system (strongly disagree 1 to strongly agree 5)
which was used in students’ questionnaire.
The vast majority (81%) of the participants in this survey (n = 11) from the technology-aided groups (VT and
SVT) who have returned their feedback forms, agreed that this method has a potential in leaning abdominal palpation
examination skills. The potential usability of this method is also surveyed in a task-speciﬁc level in which majority
of students agreed its potential ( (89%) for Superﬁcial and (94%) for deep palpation). One good reason for a better
score in deep palpation could be the necessity of a clear deﬁnition for a deep press to avoid any hesitation. However,
a lower score of (46%) is achieved for locating organs in the third target abdominal palpation task (liver palpation)
which could be explained by the wearable interface. Fifty eight percent of the students have described their experience
as close to real. Moreover, the measurement interface in this learning method was described as very comfortable and
very light-weight (85%). It was also stated as a potential tool to contribute to patient safety (70%) but less likely to
contribute to patient dignity (35%) and to patient experience (45%). Finally, a very promising score (90%) was given
to this method as a beneﬁcial learning approach to enhance conventional abdominal palpation examination practice
in current medical education. Since only one left-handed person was participated in this survey, it neither agreed nor
disagreed that left/right handedness may aﬀect learning these skills.

Questionnaire. The students gave answers to ﬁve open-ended questions (learning outcomes, strengths, weaknesses
and other comments) in the second part of the feedback form in a self-reporting fashion. Written answers to the
questions were summarised in the following two categories:

• Learning Outcomes: The answers to the ﬁrst question highlight better understanding of force diﬀerentiation
for each abdominal palpation task. One student explicitly discussed about potential hesitation in palpating hard
and deep enough due to lack of a clear deﬁnition for deep palpation. In addition to that, a better understanding
of correct and eﬀective use of the palpating hand per each abdominal palpation task was indicated among the
answers.

• Strengths and Weaknesses: Properties such as enhancing the palpation accuracy, contribution to patient’s
safety, instant feedback on applied forces, navigation based on tutor’s best practice, ease of use and high sens-
itivity to application of force by the palpating hand were discussed as key strengths of this method. Potential
weaknesses were also identiﬁed among the answers. Majority of their comments were focused on design and
room settings. In particular, the following concerns raised among the answers; Paying attention to the patient’s
face during familiarisation stage, glove size for small hands and left handedness, exposure of the electronics to
patient’s skin.

In addition, the actor patient’s (graduated medic, male, 36, BMI of 24.5) feedback was collected to highlight his
experience. His participation added more value to the observation process. The medical students were monitored for
variation of techniques and their performance in conducting examination process. In this section brief review on actor
patient’s experience is presented.

• Feedback on the measurement interface: On examination (superﬁcial, deep, and liver palpation), the sensation
of the glove on the abdominal skin is stated as comfortable with no hard or sharp edges or excessive friction
when used by a competent examiner. In addition, the motion capturing part of interface (Kinect R⃝v1.0 and
aluminum frame) was described as non-intrusive with ability to comfortably lie ﬂat beneath it.

• Feedback on the examination sessions: Despite having just attended a second clinical examination skills tu-
torial, notable variation in the performance and a few competence issues were observed during participants’
examinations. One or two participants were described as very conﬁdent on examination and a lot more skilled
than the others. A few needed reminders on examination technique with two subject who applied a completely
wrong technique in the palpation of liver edge. This may be due to a lack of conﬁdence, enough practice, and/or
previous related experience in palpation examination. Otherwise examination routine was descried as gentle
with the participants checking if the examinee was uncomfortable (i.e. good bedside manner).

7.7. Discussion

The results show a signiﬁcant improvement in learning abdominal palpation examination skills which conﬁrms
the beneﬁts a technology-aided approach can have to enhance conventional teaching methods. Moreover, potential
beneﬁts of such a method were stated in the obtained usability feedback in the qualitative evaluation. Students in both
groups explicitly show their motivation to use this technique as part of their education. A few of these comments are
outlined here:

‘Very good tool which I think has the potential to improve abdominal palpation skills a lot. Excellent
idea. I hope it is used more widely in the future.’ (female,VT group)

‘That my deep palpation wasnt as deep as some of the others’ (male,SVT group)

‘Not to be afraid to palpate more deeply + risk discomfort for the patient’(female,VT group)

‘I learned the parts of my hand that I wasn’t using as eﬀectively as other parts’(male,SVT group)

‘Allow you to compare what you are doing with that of an expert and adjust your technique accordingly.’
(female,VT group)

8. Conclusions and Future Work

Clinical palpation skills are a cheap yet very eﬀective method of diagnosis. Thus, it is crucial for medical stu-
dents to master these core skills and to ensure that they are retained throughout their career. This is very diﬃcult
to achieve without frequent and realistic rehearsals not only during academic training hours but also in the medical
students’ self-study time outside of the classroom. This paper has presented a multimodal technology-aided technique
to enhance conventional training and its assessment in medical education. An extensive literature review on mechan-
ical, biological, psychological, and technological aspects of human motor learning particularly in practical hands-on
interactions was followed by a comprehensive ergonomics study to understand the user and task requirements for
accuracy and reliability of the method. Also, active involvement of medical experts (masters) and students (novices)

in a UCD fashion was a key feature of this study to accurately design the research methodology and to evaluate its
impact through real-world practice.
Palpation metrics were identiﬁed by medical tutors and a proof of concept model was developed by averaging
captured palpation data from a team of four medical tutors in order to minimise the variations in captured data.
Moreover, an assessment criteria was deﬁned with the help of the lead tutor based on the proof of concept model.
Abstract visualisation on location and magnitude of exerted forces by the medical students’ palpating hand were
provided to semi-visually trained (feedback on training), and visually trained (feedback was provided in both training
and test trials) groups to compare their performance with participants in the control group (without any feedback). The
captured data from medical students during the actual test trial were assessed in a machine-based and a human-based
approach using the previously deﬁned criterion. Participants in the visually-trained group signiﬁcantly outperformed
the other groups (H(2) = 6.033, p < .05). The semi-visually trained group performed better than the control group but
it was not signiﬁcant (p > .05). The machine-based assessment results were in a positive correlation with the human-
based results. Positive responses were received from the medical students who had been trained by the multimodal
technology-aided method.
The authors are not claiming that this is the only way to achieve competence since competence will be achieved in
a lifelong journey. This technology provides a platform to allow students to compare their methods with others and to
learn from their mistakes. It will also provide an intelligent autonomous assessment method to suggest improvements.
The intention of this research is to enhance learning and retention levels by providing more access to realistic scenarios
via multimodal simulations in future. It is our intention to suggest various techniques for particular tasks and leave
it to students/experts to decide which method(s) suits them best. Moreover, traditional assessment during formal
examination is subjective purely based on observing students and asking questions to interpret haptics sensations into
verbal descriptions during OSCEs. This method proposed in this paper will assist tutors to measure the students
accuracy in performing these skills in a quantitative fashion.

8.1. Limitations
There are still a number of limitations to our approach.
Ergonomics Method: As noted in section 2.3.2 ethnography (or ﬁeld study) is one of the most eﬀective methods
in ergonomics studies to determine challenges and collect information about conventional practice. However, it is a
costly and time consuming method in which the investigator is physically involved/embedded in the whole training
programme (in medical school) for long-term investigations. As part of the future work participation in several formal
training sessions is planned in order to extend the current knowledge about palpation skills.
Sampling and Data Collection: The proposed interface targets novice clinicians only at the very early stages in
their journey towards full competency on clinical examination. The device provides objective evidence as to whether
the novice student is achieving standards in superﬁcial and deep palpation that approach the method adopted by the
senior clinical tutors. Formal competence can only be gained by how the students assesses and diagnosis a real patient
in a real clinical situation. Four senior clinical tutors were involved in order to develop a ground theory in a limited
timeframe and more collaboration from experts are required to improve eﬃciency and reliability of the proposed
approach.
Development and Implementation: Measuring the human ergonomics demands advancement in sensory techno-
logies and multimodal visualisation displays. Thus, more research is needed in this domain to guide future researchers
and developers towards robust and reliable quantiﬁcation techniques.

8.2. Future Work
Future work will look into enhancing this study by provision of a haptic-enabled visualisation technique (e.g. a
virtual or augmented reality palpation simulator) in future evaluation studies to navigate the medical students’ hand
movements (the capability of the system to capture location and orientation) as well as providing feedback on force
applications (which is proposed in this work). A new version of our wearable solution, an advanced hybrid tracking
system, and an online solution with AI algorithms are currently under development. The online database will be
available to all medical experts who teach palpation skills to remotely acquire their palpation performance with the
ability to compare it with other medical experts as an educational approach for seniors. This will also improve
the accuracy and reliability of the “gold standard model and minimise the variation between tutors’ techniques. In
addition, we intend to investigate the impact of our novel training method in other palpation tasks.

Longitudinal studies are planned to evaluate the learning and retention levels in multiple transfer tests (withdrawal
of the augmented feedback) with short- and long-term intervals. More broadly, the gold standard database will be
used in the development of a multipoint haptic display to enhance the medical students’ performance in a virtual real-
ity environment with adequately realistic kinaesthetic and cutaneous feedback in conjunction with other modalities.
Furthermore, actor patients’ abdominal models from various body types and genders in our proof of concept study
(which is saved as 3D point clouds) are captured by the proposed measurement technique. This information could be
provided as a guideline to researchers and developers to form a virtual patient anatomy with realistic deformations
of the human soft tissue in haptic rendering domain. Finally, a portable measurement technique with access to the
live gold standard model could increase the frequency of rehearsal which is a key feature in palpation training and
enhance the medical students’ experience in their self-study time with accurate assessment and supervision available
in simulation from tutors.