Original Paper

Web-Based Tool (FH Family Share) to Increase Uptake of
Cascade Testing for Familial Hypercholesterolemia: Development
and Evaluation

Hana Bangash1, MBBS; Ahmed Makkawy2, BSc; Justin H Gundelach1, MSc; Alexandra A Miller1, BSc; Kimberly
A Jacobson1, BA; Iftikhar J Kullo1, MD

1Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States
2Saharafox Creative Agency, Rochester, MN, United States

Iftikhar J Kullo, MD
Mayo Clinic
200 First Street SW
Rochester, MN, 55905
United States
Phone: 1 5072845467
Fax: 1 507 266 9142

Methods

Ethics

This study met institutional criteria for Quality Improvement
and thus was not subject to review by the Institutional Review
Board. The study was conducted from January 2018 to March
2021.

Description of FH Family Share

We used a hybrid type 1 implementation science framework
and a collaborative user-centered design process to develop an
interactive website intended to facilitate communication between
familial hypercholesterolemia probands and their family
members. The design was guided by US Department of Health
and Human Services Guidelines [17] and International
Organization for Standardization Quality Standards for Usability
[18]—guidelines that address web design and evaluation as well
as user experience optimization for knowledge dissemination.
Probands can share their familial hypercholesterolemia diagnosis
with relatives via the letter-to-family-member email template.
Email allows for faster communication than that using traditional
postal mail; the email contains information on the relative
likelihood 
of 
family 
members 
also 
having 
familial
hypercholesterolemia (given that it is passed on as an autosomal
dominant trait) and a recommendation to get tested. The proband
can include information about the specific pathogenic variant
that was found in their genetic test report, to facilitate family
member genetic testing. The website also enables probands to
build a family tree utilizing a pedigree tool (AboutMe, Mayo
Clinic) to include first-degree relatives and document family
members who may be at increased risk for familial
hypercholesterolemia. Once a pedigree has been built, it can be
accessed each time the user logs on. The web-based tool also
has a section, called Learn, with educational modules on familial
hypercholesterolemia–related topics: (1) What is Familial
Hypercholesterolemia, (2) Familial Hypercholesterolemia
Considerations in Children, (3) Genetics, (4) Genetic Testing
Frequently Asked Questions, (5) Treatment, and (6) Additional
Resources. Through these modules, users (probands or family
members) 
can 
expand 
their 
knowledge 
on 
familial
hypercholesterolemia and access informative patient education
materials and links to other educational tools and websites.

In its current form, FH Family Share will be available on the
Mayo Clinic intranet and the internet; all aspects of the
web-based tool will be available for public access, with the
exception of the pedigree tool which requires the use of a Mayo
Clinic patient username and password, to ensure security of
protected health information.

Cognitive Walkthrough

The initial proof-of-concept prototype of the web-based tool
was built by an external vendor using open-source PHP
framework (Yii, version 2.0; Take The Wind). The graphical
user interface was designed in HTML5 and CSS3 in conjunction
with Jquery, connected to the MySQL database. It was
developed as a responsive design for multiple screen sizes. The
initial prototype underwent cognitive walkthrough—a technique
applied to evaluate the usability of an app or system in the early
stages of design. The cognitive walkthrough was conducted by
3 usability experts to assess exploratory learning—how well an
end user can navigate the app for the first time without prior
training [19-21]. The usability experts conducted the cognitive
walkthrough at the Mayo Clinic Usability Laboratory and
participated in 11 tasks that a first-time user was likely to
undertake (Multimedia Appendix 1). The session lasted 2 hours
and was observed by 5 study team members. Observers gave
feedback on any difficulties they noted the experts encounter
while navigating the website. The experts and observers
discussed the feedback after each task, and points were
documented on how to further improve the tool (Multimedia
Appendix 2).

Pilot Testing Program With Genetic Counselors

We evaluated user experience, satisfaction, and interface design
of FH Family Share with usability testing that was informed by
quality standards.[18]. A 1-year pilot testing program was
launched in 2 phases (Rochester campus, Mayo Clinic), with
genetic counselors as key stakeholders of the web-based tool.
Purposive sampling was applied to recruit genetic counselors
with varying clinical backgrounds, to obtain information-rich
relevant insights on user experience and interface design.
Genetic counselors were invited to participate in the usability
testing sessions by email. A target sample size of 5 to 8
participants was established based on prior usability studies
[22-25], in which approximately 80% to 85% of usability-related
concerns were identified from the first 8 participants. We

conducted 9 usability testing sessions in phase 1, and we
conducted 7 usability testing sessions in phase 2.

Each usability session was 1-hour long; sessions were
audiorecorded using a handheld recorder and transcribed using
transcription software (version 2018; Otter.ai). Sessions were
conducted by a user experience expert (AM) from an external
company, to reduce any institutional or workflow driven biases.
Study team members (HB and JHG) were also present during
each session to observe and take notes. Participating genetic
counselors were asked to assess educational content and
interface design, as well as to provide insights on how FH
Family Share would be integrated with their usual clinical
workflows.

We used a digital platform (version 2011; InVisionApp Inc) to
build an interactive clickable prototype of FH Family Share and
to conduct user experience testing. The website prototype and
2 case scenarios (Multimedia Appendix 3) were presented to
each genetic counselor; each participant was asked to verbalize
their thoughts while navigating the prototype [26].

To facilitate feedback, genetic counselors were asked
open-ended questions: “How do you feel each of the elements
[on the website] might help you in your role?” “What do you
think you will find when you click into this page?” “How might
you share this website with a patient?” “What are some strengths
and weaknesses [of the website]?” “Clicking that print button,
what would you imagine would print out?”

Each round of user testing informed iterative refinements and
modifications to the features of the prototype. User testing
rounds were conducted until saturation was reached (ie, no new
feedback was obtained) (Figure 1).

At the end of each usability testing session in phase 1, genetic
counselors completed a 7-item satisfaction survey. Based on
feedback from genetic counselors in phase 1, the survey was
refined, and 4 additional questions were added (Multimedia
Appendix 4); therefore, at the end of phase 2, genetic counselors
completed an 11-item satisfaction survey.

Figure 1. FH Family Share development and testing work flow.

Evaluation With Patients

To obtain insights from end users, we conducted usability testing
sessions over a 3-month period with patients with familial
hypercholesterolemia. Patients were recruited using convenience
sampling with a target sample size of 8 to 10 participants
[22-25]. Patients with a confirmed pathogenic/likely pathogenic
genetic variant for familial hypercholesterolemia and who
previously participated in familial hypercholesterolemia–related
research studies at Mayo Clinic were eligible for inclusion.
Patients with a confirmed genetic diagnosis of familial
hypercholesterolemia were selected to participate in this study
as they had either gone through the process of cascade testing

or were currently doing so and could therefore share important
feedback and insights on the usefulness and relevance of FH
Family Share in facilitating cascade testing. Patients received
a request to participate in the study via 1 of 3 methods: the
institutional patient portal, a telephone call, or an email. If
patients indicated that they were interested in participating, they
were contacted by phone to schedule the usability testing
session.

Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, usability testing sessions were
conducted using videoconferencing software (Zoom Video
Communications Inc). Each session lasted 1 hour. Both audio
and video from sessions were recorded; audiorecordings were

transcribed using Office Word (version 2021; Microsoft Inc).
Each session was conducted by a user experience expert (AM);
study team members (HB, AA, and JHG) were also present
during each session. Patients were emailed a link to access the
clickable prototype of the web-based tool and were asked to
think aloud when navigating the prototype. Patients did not
receive any compensation for participating in the study.

At the start of each session, patients were prompted to describe
their 
individual 
diagnostic 
journeys 
for 
familial
hypercholesterolemia and provide insights on their family
structure: “When were you diagnosed with FH (provide your
age at the time of diagnosis or the calendar year)?” “Tell me
about your experience receiving your FH diagnosis (mode and
duration of communication, formats it was received in, and any
patient education material you may have been given at the
time).” “How did the way in which you received your diagnosis
make you feel?” “What resources, if any, did you use to look
up more information about FH?” “How did you find these
resources (did you reach out to providers, search the internet
etc)?” “How many first-degree relatives (parents, siblings,
children) do you have?” “Did you share any of the information
pertaining to your diagnosis with family members (if so, in what
context or format)?” “If you did not share your diagnosis with
family members, were there any barriers that prevented you
from doing so?” “How many of your family members, that you
know of, have completed testing for FH?” At the end of each
session, patients were asked to complete an 11-item survey
using web-based software (QualtricsXM) (Multimedia Appendix
5).

Results

Cognitive Walkthrough

Key themes that emerged from the cognitive walkthrough were
design, format, navigation, terminology, instructions and
learnability (Multimedia Appendix 6).

Pilot Testing Program With Genetic Counselors

Usability Testing

Of 13 genetic counselors who were contacted, 9 consented to
participate in phase 1. In phase 2, all 7 genetic counselors who
were contacted agreed to participate (Multimedia Appendix 7).

Usability testing with genetic counselors resulted in key
workflow insights and highlighted specific modifications that
could be made to FH Family Share. Genetic counselors found

FH Family Share to be a welcome tool for use in disseminating
knowledge and information to patients and facilitating
communication on health risks information between patients
and their family members. In current practice, once patients
receives a diagnosis of familial hypercholesterolemia, they must
use postal mail to send templated letters to family members
informing them of their increased risk and recommending
screening for familial hypercholesterolemia; genetic counselors
indicated that the template email would aid patients in sharing
their diagnosis and other pertinent information with family
members and health care providers. In phase 1, 7 of 9 (78%)
genetic counselors highlighted the need for a template email in
which patients or genetic counselors could enter the name of
the gene, pathogenic variant, and laboratory that conducted the
genetic testing. Genetic counselors indicated that such
information pertaining to the pathogenic variant would be
valuable in enabling health care providers of family members
determine which genetic testing was needed. Based on this
feedback, the FH Family Share prototype was modified to
include entry fields in the template email (Figure 2) that could
be updated with relevant information on the pathogenic variant
obtained from the patient’s genetic test report (this health
information is not stored on the website).

Genetic counselors highlighted the importance of enabling
patients to learn more about familial hypercholesterolemia
because this would increase the likelihood of patients
recommending cascade testing to their family members.
However, all genetic counselors suggested rearranging the order
of the content into a sequence that would be more in line with
how they were likely to approach the conversation during their
usual clinical workflows (Figure 3).

Additionally, 7 of 9 (78%) genetic counselors who participated
in phase 1 of the pilot program recommended replacing stock
photography and detailed medical images with patient-friendly
material. This feedback led the study team to collaborate with
graphic designers to develop medical illustrations for the
physical manifestations of familial hypercholesterolemia, such
as corneal arcus and tendon xanthomas [27].

Genetic counselors appreciated the integration of the pedigree
tool with FH Family Share, particularly for its value in enabling
patients to build their own pedigree and identify family members
who may need to be screened for familial hypercholesterolemia,
thereby facilitating earlier detection and treatment. Genetic
counselors also valued the additional resources included on the
website, such as links to patient education materials and videos.

Survey Results

The majority of the genetic counselors found information within
the FH Family Share website very easy to find (phase 1: 6/9,
67%; phase 2: 6/7, 86%) and very easy to understand (phase 1:
5/9, 56%; phase 2: 6/7, 86%). In both phases of the pilot
program (Table 1 and Table 2), all genetic counselors responded
that the FH Family Share website was a resource worth returning
to. In response to the questions added to the survey in phase 2,

5 of 7 (71%) genetic counselors agreed or completely agreed
that the FH Family Share tool would ease their workflow during
patient encounters, all genetic counselors agreed or completely
agreed that the tool would likely improve follow-up patient
care, 4 of 7 (57%) genetic counselors indicated that patients
would likely use the Learn modules, and 2 of 7 (29%) genetic
counselors indicated that patients were likely to send a letter to
family 
members 
communicating 
their 
familial
hypercholesterolemia diagnosis.

FH Family Share Evaluation With Patients

Usability Testing

Of 28 patients who were contacted, 13 responded with interest,
and of those, 9 patients consented and participated in the
usability testing sessions (Multimedia Appendix 8). The target
sample size for participant recruitment was achieved. Patients
who participated in the usability testing sessions had between
4 and 11 first-degree relatives; the majority of the patients (5
of 9, 56%) had shared their familial hypercholesterolemia
diagnosis with all first-degree relatives, and additionally, 8 of
the 9 patients had at least 1 or more first-degree relatives known
to have undergone cholesterol testing or genetic testing.

Feedback obtained from patient usability testing sessions
covered both content and interface design. Patients highlighted
the need for a new section to be included in the Learn section
of FH Family Share that would address the implications of
familial hypercholesterolemia for children of variant-positive
parents, the age at which children should be screened and
treated, as well as the implications of having familial
hypercholesterolemia when planning to start a family. Patients
wanted to know the next best steps in these situations and
emphasized the need to highlight the emotional motivation for
getting tested for familial hypercholesterolemia and sharing a
diagnosis with family members; children and grandchildren
were identified as being the greatest motivators for patients.
Additional feedback was obtained on the need to expand upon
the 
information 
provided 
on 
proprotein 
convertase

subtilisin/kexin type 9 inhibitors in the Treatment section by
including details on how to obtain insurance approvals. Patients
also shared input on interface design including need for a larger
clearer font, to make content easier to read (using bullets instead
of paragraphs), to use a less formal tone in the family letter, to
add biographies to health care provider names on the Contact
page, and to include more images and illustrations to make the
website more interesting and engaging. Patient feedback led to
further iterations of FH Family Share to incorporate their input.

Survey Results

Analysis of the satisfaction surveys revealed that 5 of 9 (56%)
patients found information within the FH Family Share website
very easy to find, and 7 of 9 (78%) found information very easy
to understand (Table 3). When asked to share their perspective
on how the website would impact patient care, 2 of 9 (22%)
patients responded that it would significantly improve care,
while 5 of 9 (56%) responded that it would somewhat improve
care. The majority of patients agreed that the website would
make it easier for them to understand and share their familial
hypercholesterolemia diagnosis (completely agree: 5/9, 56%;
agree: 4/9, 44%). When asked about the one activity they would
most likely perform while using the website, 3 of 9 (33%)
patients indicated that they would use the risk calculator to
determine risk of heart attack. All patients agreed that the FH
Family Share website was a resource worth returning to.

Patients also gave responses to 4 free-text survey questions
(Table 4).

Discussion

Principal Findings

FH Family Share was designed to facilitate
communication between familial hypercholesterolemia probands
and their relatives, and to increase the uptake of cascade testing.
It was iteratively refined through usability testing with genetic
counselors and patients with familial hypercholesterolemia. The
target sample size for participant recruitment was achieved in
both phases of the pilot testing program, and based on study
team consensus, additional participants were not recruited as
feedback saturation was reached and majority of the usability
issues had been identified.

Usability testing is an integral part of the field of
human–computer interaction and is used to evaluate interactive
health apps to ensure effective design and development
strategies, with a particular focus on the concept of user-centered
design [37-41]. Genetic counselors and patients with familial
hypercholesterolemia are the intended end users of the
web-based tool, and feedback from these groups informed
iterative refinements to FH Family Share after each phase of
testing. Our extensive usability testing with genetic counselors
revealed FH Family Share to be a resource worth returning to,
with easy to find and easy to understand content that would
likely improve patient follow-up care. Genetic counselors
indicated that the tool was something they could share on their
computer screens with patients during pre- and post-genetic
testing counseling sessions. Genetic counselors also highlighted
that the template email would assist patients in sharing their
familial hypercholesterolemia diagnosis with relatives but that
it needed to include sections in which either they (the genetic
counselors) or the patients could insert gene and variant names,
as this would be useful to family members when scheduling
testing.

Usability 
feedback 
from 
patients 
with 
familial
hypercholesterolemia revealed that the majority of patients
found content easy to understand, agreed that the tool could
help them share their familial hypercholesterolemia diagnosis
with family members, and was a resource worth returning to.
A novel insight gained from patient usability testing was the
importance of understanding the motivation for patients seeking
genetic testing for familial hypercholesterolemia. Patients

revealed that concern for their children, grandchildren, and
family planning were the primary motivators. They highlighted
that FH Family Share should contain an education module
focused on considerations for children and family planning.
This feedback led to the addition of a new topic module.

FH Family Share will be implemented at all Mayo Clinic sites
and the Mayo Clinic Health System and will also be available
for public access on the internet. Once deployed, the tool’s
content and resources will be updated as new knowledge
emerges. The impact and metrics of FH Family Share will be
assessed using a pilot implementation study. The findings
described herein could be used to create similar digital apps for
other genomic disorders.

Limitations

Usability testing sessions were limited to genetic counselors
and patients with familial hypercholesterolemia—input from
family members of patients with familial hypercholesterolemia
would be useful in ensuring effective implementation of the
tool in nonclinical settings. Additionally, FH Family Share was

not integrated with the electronic health record to enable ease
of access in remote or underserved communities which may
have different electronic health record systems in place. In some
instances, feedback obtained from genetic counselors and
patients with familial hypercholesterolemia varied on the same
topic, for instance, most patients indicated the need for more
illustrations on FH Family Share to increase engagement and
interest, while genetic counselors suggested limiting the use of
illustrations unless they served a specific purpose; feedback
from both groups was harmonized by adding curated illustrations
to increase patient engagement. Due to the COVID-19
pandemic, usability testing sessions conducted with patients
were virtual and nonverbal cues could not be observed; however,
screen sharing along with open-ended questions allowed us to
obtain sufficient feedback which was often consistent across
participants. The sample sizes for genetic counselors and patients
with familial hypercholesterolemia were modest; however, the
numbers were in line with those of previous usability studies
[22-25] and allowed for thematic saturation to be reached.

Conclusions

FH Family Share can be used by probands to communicate their
familial hypercholesterolemia diagnosis with family members,
encouraging 
them 
to 
seek 
testing 
for 
familial
hypercholesterolemia. Such a tool has the potential to increase
uptake of cascade testing thereby allowing for earlier detection
and treatment of familial hypercholesterolemia.