Participatory Research Principles in Human-Centered
Design: Engaging Teens in the Co-Design of
a Social Robot

Elin A. Björling 1,*
and Emma Rose 2

1
Department of Human Centered Design & Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA
2
School of Interdisciplinary Arts and Sciences, University of Washington Tacoma, Tacoma, WA 98402, USA;

*

Received: 20 December 2018; Accepted: 29 January 2019; Published: 10 February 2019

3. Participatory Method Cases

The following method cases illustrate our use of participatory design in the wild. Within our
methods, we carried out our research to ensure ethical, meaningful, and rigorous interactions. Methods
were constructed with the contextual environment in mind, and thus allowed for ﬂexibility to “iterate
on the ﬂy” when necessary in the ﬁeld. Our methods were also focused on keeping teens central to the
process. This does not just mean capturing data as teens engage as participants in the research, but also
engaging teens as actors and operators in conducting the method itself. Whenever possible, researchers
took the role of instigator and facilitator, but allowed teens to play all roles during interaction, as is
illustrated below. Through the development and implementation of this research, a set of research
principles emerged that now guide our work.

3.1. Methods Case 1: Design Sessions with Teens—Envisioning Robots

Unlike other robot projects that begin with working prototypes or existing robots, our approach
(similar to [71]) was to start from the very beginning and ask teens to envision their idea of what a social
robot to address teen stress would look like. Therefore, we engaged teens in a series of design sessions
to envision robots through sketching, storyboarding, and scenario writing in the ideation stage.

3.1.1. Ideation and Iteration

To explore possible ideas for a robot design, we engaged participants in a drawing activity that
acted as a modiﬁed form of the future workshop [73] from participatory design. The goal of the activity
was to have students envision what a robot, which was designed speciﬁcally for their school, might
look like. Participants were given a blank piece of paper and asked to draw an image of a robot.
After drawing the image, participants were then asked to share their drawing with the rest of a group
of teens and describe their robot. The drawings and articulated rationale for the design were then

collected and analyzed to inform the robot EMAR’s design requirements, principles, and rationale.
For example, almost all teens’ robot designs illustrated the robot as a helper, supporting students at
school and in ways students felt were appropriate.
Beyond these early sessions, each subsequent interaction with groups of teens have included
some form of ideation. After a prototype was developed, teens helped to ideate and iterate on a
rendered robot face. In an effort to give teens control over the robot appearance, we developed an easy
to use, web-based face editor, that allowed teens to customize a face given a particular context or role.
See Figure 2A for an example. Later in the project, as we began to develop the functionality of EMAR,
we engaged teens in ideation and iteration of the user-interface (UI) design to ensure teens felt the
navigation and interaction was feasible.

3.1.2. Collaborative Storyboarding

To further understand appropriate behaviors of a social robot for teens, we asked pairs of teens to
storyboard a scenario in which a robot is interacting with a student in their school. In user experience
design, professionals use a variety of visual tools and techniques for storytelling [74] including
sketching and using storyboards [75] and comics [76]. These techniques are ways to envision and
communicate designs and ideas for a broader audience. After participants completed their drawings,
they were asked to articulate to the larger group what the robot was doing and why. This exercise
was designed to invite teens to consider the speciﬁc context and constraints of their own schools and
how an imagined robot might exist in this speciﬁc environment. By making it a collaborative method,
we increased engagement by adding a social component. In addition, the collaboration allowed
for interesting discussion during design, and thereby rich qualitative data. For example, during
storyboarding, teens often discussed the roles of their robots, the acceptable robot behaviors, as well as
ways in which they felt the robots could be helpful to teens. Some teens even began the process of
problem-solving real world barriers, such as how the robot could navigate crowded hallways and
manage communication during group interactions. During storyboarding, all conversations among
pairs were captured as data in addition to the storyboard data itself.

3.1.3. Outcomes

The methods for design sessions with teens maintain our participatory research principles of
keeping teens central to the process, maintaining contextual validity in both content and environment,
and by creating activities that are engaging and active for teens. The rich data that emerged during
these activities are often qualitative in nature and extremely valuable to inform the design of the robot.

3.2. Methods Case 2: Social Robot Design Challenge

Within human-centered design, it is common to include people in design through research
methods and evaluation of products [77]. In a participatory approach, end users are engaged

meaningfully throughout the design process by having a metaphorical seat at the design table and
working closely on the initial ideas and vision for a product or system. To engage teens as meaningful
collaborators in the design process, we developed a novel approach for engaging them in a participatory
way in the form of a Social Robot Design Challenge.

3.2.1. The Robot Competition, a Familiar Genre

Robot competition, where robotics teams work on a mechanical prototype and then present
the prototypes in a competition designed to highlight their mechanical properties and functionality,
are common in the United States at the university [78] and high school levels [79]. Participating in such
a robotics challenge has a variety of beneﬁts including increasing learning about robotics and positive
attitudes toward robotics and engineering [80] as well as toward science in general [81]. Given these
beneﬁts and the familiar genre, we created a similar design challenge. Ours was unique because it
focused on the use case of a social robot to help teens with stress. Engaging teens in the process of
designing the robots informed the design requirements for Project EMAR. Further, because school
is the place where teens spend a considerable amount of their time and is often a main source of
stress, having teens working on design ideas while at school helped inform that their designs were
ecologically sound, informed by their environment, and take into account the unique constraints of
each school environment.

3.2.2. Participatory Design at Scale

A limitation of participatory design is that is it can be time intensive and often only involve a
small group of people in the design process [60]. From previous research [82], we knew that each
school environment and community is unique and therefore may have different requirements for a
social robot. To strive for a variety of schools in our region, we recruited broadly and partnered with
seven urban high schools spanning two cities. We recruited schools to gain a range of representation
based on demographics, location, and interests. Each school hosted our research team for multiple
visits where we mentored teens in the human-centered design process. Our protocol for working with
teens was designed to be ﬂexible to accommodate each school’s interests and availability. In some
schools, we visited classes and worked directly with teachers and their students. In others, we engaged
with teens after school with extra-curricular clubs.

3.2.3. Providing a Foundation of Human-Centered Design

Visits to each school were structured around the ﬁve stages of human-centered design: research,
ideation, prototyping, testing and iteration. During each stage, we presented short explanatory videos
about human-centered design [83] that had been speciﬁcally designed for teens [84] and a series of
relevant exercises to scaffold the material. While the information in each lesson was similar, the content
was geared and adapted for the individual group based on collaboration with teachers and advisers
and the teens themselves.
In the research stage, teens were asked to gain a better understanding about teens and stress
through a variety of activities in the human-centered design process. Different groups of teens chose
to enact different research methods, including interviewing their peers, conducting surveys of their
peers either on paper or online, or interviewing experts at their schools such as advisers or counselors.
Some groups collected feedback from peers by posting a board where teens could contribute their
ideas anonymously about what calmed them and what stressed them out.
During the ideation stage, teens brought back ideas from the research and in conversation with
their own personal reﬂections on stress, brainstormed different ideas for what a social robot would
do, what features it would have, what some of the constraints are related to robots in their particular
school. To capture their ideas, they created sketches, storyboards, and scenarios. See Figure 3.

In the prototyping stage, teens spent time creating physical prototypes from a variety of materials
including cardboard, soft materials, hardware, paper, and so on. In this phase, teens worked to
approximate both the design and the functionality of their robot ideas. They discussed interfaces,
how the robot would received information and communicate. They approximated mobility through
the use of wheels, created mock ups of interfaces including using white boards for screens.
During testing, teens invited their peers to interact with their robots. To explore the robot
functionality, the teens controlled their robotic prototypes by using Wizard of Oz methods [46–48],
and informal usability testing [85,86], and also solicited feedback and opinions form their peers through
group discussion. As a result, the groups of teens iterated on their designs based on the feedback from
peers, at times modifying ideas and others adding new features.

3.2.4. Showcasing the Teen’s Prototypes

As a culminating event for the social robot design challenge, we invited the schools who had
created robots to attend a Social Robot Design Challenge Showcase, which was hosted on our
university’s campus and was open to the public. Six of the seven participating schools attended and
each team presented their robot designs to a team of experts in social robotics, including researchers
from academia and industry. Each team presented their design that included a description of the
features of their robots and a rationale for why they designed the robot the way they did (Figure 4).
They also prepared and screened a presentation video that documented their design and rationale.
Each team answered questions from the expert judges, other teens, and the general public.

3.2.5. Outcomes

The goal of The Social Robot Design Challenge was to invite teens to be the designers and
co-creators of social robots. This method case had positive outcomes for both the participants and
our research project. The schools, teens, and teachers who participated in the challenge mentioned
that, overall, it had been a positive learning experience for the students who participated. Each school
voiced interest in being engaged in future challenges. For our research team, the designs that the teens
created and their rationale for their design decisions continue to be a signiﬁcant source of information
for our project informing key features of Project EMAR. For example, a theme that crossed all the robots
designed by teens was the concept of reciprocity, meaning that teens expected the robot to provide
support, comfort, or distraction during an interaction. The prototypes created by teens provided
insight into how they anticipate the robot to look, act, and even feel.
The success of the Social Robot Design Challenge and the richness of the data collected can be
attributed to several of our decisions in how to implement the method. First, creating actual designs
placed the teens in the role of key contributors and designers. While we as researchers provided
support to teens to teach them about human-centered designs, they ultimately decided what features
to incorporate, how the robots should look and act, and how to make iterations and changes based
on feedback from their peers. Respecting teens’ perspectives and honoring their expertise about their
lives ensures the designs are an authentic interpretation of teens’ needs, rather than assumptions from
adult designers. Second, conducting this research within the school environment, rather than in a lab
or at our University, provided contextual validity in which teens took into account the constraints
and the experience around them, rather for designing in the abstract. Third, conducting this research
across seven different school settings, required us to bring a ﬂexible approach to the design challenge.
We gave teens similar tools, experiences, and instruction, but encouraged each school and group of
teens to participate in a way that would encourage their unique perspectives and contexts to inform
the design experience. In this way, we were able to provide similar materials to each school, but in
a way that was ﬂexible and adaptable to enable each team to follow their own path and develop a
design that was suitable for their community.

3.3. Methods Case 3: Wizards, Witnesses and Collaborators

Beliefs and speculation about robots do not always inform behavior. In addition, studies utilizing
simple images or videos of robots capture the signiﬁcant effect of robot embodied presence that occurs
when interacting with a physically present robot [87–89]. Therefore, interaction studies, with physically
embodied, and present robots, are ideal to capture valid teen-robot interactions. In our interaction
studies, we also utilize the social nature of teens in order to increase engagement. The use of theatrical
role play as a participatory method has been shown successful even with vulnerable teens [90,91].
Therefore, to make a teen–robot interaction study more realistic, we crafted a role play scenario [92] in
which teens would tell their story of stress to the robot.

3.4. Script Writing

Wanting to keep our role-play scenario realistic, but reduce the pressure on teens to perform or
share personal data in front of their peers, we gave them the option to read a stress story script, which
we crafted based upon qualitative data from teens about their stressors. However, the ﬁrst time we
presented this script, a few teens immediately commented in writing on the script that they found this
script was “insulting” and “fake.” Although based in teen data, our script did not meet the teens’ need
for an authentic story during role play and interaction. This sparked the idea to have teens craft the
scripts themselves in order to create an more authentic interaction with the robot. We asked teens in
groups of two, to craft a story of stress that they or a friend had experienced. We invited them to to
write the story as they would to share with someone else. The teens (n = 39) crafted their stories and
we chose three diverse options (one about a physical injury, one about applying to colleges, and one

about a problem with a teacher) to use in future interaction studies. Given that trust is an important
principle in participatory research, we responded immediately to iterate upon our original scripts,
to ensure teens felt the interaction was more authentic and true to their experience.

3.4.1. Teleoperation of Robotic Devices

Teleoperation is commonly done by researchers during HRI [93–95]. The deception of participants
is also common [46–48], in the Wizard of Oz technique (e.g. [46]) which involves controlling a
robotic device from behind a screen or barrier to create the illusion of autonomous robot functions
and capabilities. When working with teens, authenticity is important and a key component to trust,
therefore we did not use deception in any capacity. Instead, we exposed all of the workings of our robot
prototypes to teens as part of our introduction to the project. This educational outreach ideally builds
robotics literacy while inviting trust and transparency with our participants. After understanding the
devices and how they are operated, we then engaged in the teens in our HRI studies, often including
the operation of the robot.
For example, in order to better understand the importance of movement and voice in teen–robot
interactions, we conducted a study of two distinct robot prototypes. One was Blossom, a soft bodied,
ﬂexible robot with a crocheted outer shell [96] (Figure 5, left). Blossom was teleoperated using a
smartphone as a gyroscope by a teen. The second prototype was Teen-Health-Bot [pseudonym]
Version 4, a soft, but boxy robot with a rendered face on a tablet and a belly tablet displaying text
(Figure 5, right). V4 also uses a robotic voice to communicate. Teens operated each devices in response
to a prompt to express empathy toward a teen sharing a stressful experience. Using the stress story
scripts written previously by teens, one teen read the script, while the operator (using only movement,
or typing a verbal response) responded. In addition to the script reader and the teleoperator, two other
teens acted as witnesses to the interaction. All teens then responded to a brief survey about how they
rated the robot’s response to the teen and how they felt operating the robotic device.

In addition to the script reader and the teleoperator, the teen witnesses in the process are important
in two ways. First, they add the social context that will inevitably be part of the environment in which
the robot will eventually live. Teens will be interacting with the robot while other teens are nearby,
in a public space such as a hallway, or lunchroom. Thus, piloting this more social interaction early on in
the robot design is important. Second, as witnesses, the teens can observe the full interaction, not being
caught up in the script reading activity or the teleoperation, and therefore can focus on the interaction
itself and provide valuable, observational input. In addition to the survey information, after engaging
in the activity, teens also debriefed in a group interview about how they felt about the robot and this
type of interaction. This qualitative, contextual data, post-interaction has provided valuable input
informing our design of EMAR, but also insights into how teens feel about robot interaction.

3.4.2. Teleoperation and Collaboration in Virtual Reality

Exploring robot interactions in the wild can be cumbersome and costly. In addition, exploring
design embodiment and a wide range of interaction behaviors is greatly limited by real world

materials and expense. Therefore, we found that, as a platform, virtual reality (VR) provides a
solution to rapid, collaborative prototyping not only for robot form factors and behaviors, but to pilot
human–robot interactions as well, all while maintaining contextual validity through an immersive
“school” environment. VR also provides a unique opportunity to immerse teens into what feel like
contextually appropriate settings for teen–robot interactions (classroom, lunchroom, and hallways),
thereby avoiding the pitfalls of a lab setting studies. In addition, by designing a virtual reality platform
to elicit collaboration and conversation, our pilot HRI studies in VR allow for easy and natural
conversation, and, thus, data collection.
Our exploration of VR began during discussions of appropriate robot size and behavior related
to teen preference and in terms of durability for a public high school setting. VR allowed us to begin
exploring size and behavior prototypes, prior to costly building in the physical world. However,
as we began to design a collaborative VR game for teens, we quickly recognized the huge potential
for VR to provide: (1) rich research data through conversation; (2) unconstrained co-design sessions;
and (3) unique opportunities for teens to explore HRI.
In user research, often the think-aloud protocol [97] is a technique to understand a the experience
of a user as they go about a task. We wanted to understand choice and decision-making as teens
selected and assembled robots, knowing that talking aloud is not comfortable for teens (from previous
ﬁeld work). Therefore, we created a collaborative game that required talking between teens in order to
succeed. To do this, we developed an asymmetric VR game design [98], meaning one player is outside
of VR, operating a computer with a headset and microphone, allowing them to connect to the other
player who is inside immersive VR. Together, the teens collaborated (each had different abilities) to
agree upon and assemble a robot together. Once assembled, the teens were invited to engage in an
interaction with the newly developed robot. The outside player could teleoperate the robot while
interacting with the in-VR teen, providing rich interaction data. Like all of our interaction studies,
We conducted these VR robot interaction sessions at school by setting up VR equipment in libraries and
classrooms. Teens engaged easily and eagerly with the VR platform and reported that they found both
the internal and external roles fun. Most importantly, we were able to capture valuable data, through
gameplay recordings about how teens collaborate as well as insights into the teens’ perceptions of
robot roles and behaviors. See Figure 6 for examples of the teen’s sketches and gameplay.

3.4.3. Outcomes

From the use of methods designed to engage teens as actors, including teleoperators, in human–
robot interaction, we maintained our participatory research principle of engagement, keeping teens
central to the process. By designing the VR environment in a school setting and by conducting the VR
interaction at a school, allowed us to maintain the contextual validity in both content and environment.
The rich data that emerged during these activities are often qualitative in nature, but extremely valuable
to inform the design of the robot EMAR, not to mention to better understand the needs and beliefs of
our population of teens.

4. Discussion

Utilizing participatory methods in the wild to engage teens in the co-design of a social robot has
been both productive for the project and imperative for creating meaningful long term relationships
with our teen participants. By conducting studies in the wild, we captured interaction data that were
contextually appropriate and valid to further inform the design of the the robot EMAR. In addition,
by being fully transparent in our methods, we worked to maintain trust and engagement with our
vulnerable and often skeptical users—teens. By engaging in these methods over time, we established
trust with our participants and their communities. Based on the three methods cases described in
the previous section, we reﬂected on our approach to develop a set of research principles that guide
our efforts to engage vulnerable populations in the participatory design of social robots. While these
principles speciﬁcally guided our approach, we believe they may be applicable to other design projects
and research domains.

4.1. Participatory Research Principles

The following participatory research principles were developed based on reﬂection of our past
three years of working with teens. These principles are evident in the three methods cases presented
and continue to guide our work with teens.

1.
Contextual Validity: All research and design is conducted in the wild where the eventual robot
will reside.
2.
Participant-Centered: All of our methods allow for teens to be the experts in their own lives,
and the voices to articulate their own needs. The research teams preferences, or personal
experience, never overrides the data we gather from teens.
3.
Collaboration: Engaging teens in collaborative tasks by working in pairs or groups leads to rich
and powerful data, while supporting their desire to be social. Whenever possible, we invite teens
to work in pairs or groups rather than individually.
4.
Engaging and Active: All of our methods are engaging and allow for teens to be active participants.
Teens are the actors as well as participants in the research, and, when possible, they are the only
actors engaging in the process.
5.
Researcher Flexibility: Given that research takes place in the wild, methods must be ﬂexible to
accommodate the many unexpected variables and situations that occur in the school environment.
6.
Trust and Transparency: Each research or design activity is constructed in such a way that
researchers are fully transparent about the agenda, research questions, and goals. Deception is
never used in design or research activities. The use of confederates (actors posing as participants)
or typical Wizard of Oz methods (the illusion of an autonomous robot that is actually being
operated in real time) are never used with teens.

4.2. Designing for Trust

As mentioned in the Introduction, many of the common research methods in human-robot
interaction include deception. However, working with a vulnerable population requires trust and
authenticity in order to maintain community relationships. Therefore, deception could be destructive
in participatory research. Fortunately, the methodology behind participatory research encompasses
the necessity of trust [99,100]. Although there are important ethical discussions regarding the use of
deception in social robotics research [101] even in studies of children [55], it is necessary to move from
discussion to application. For this reason, we believe utilizing a participatory approach, along with
speciﬁc research principles guided by creating trust, is essential to not only ethical engagement, but also
rich, contextual data from participants.

5. Challenges and Limitations

While the methods employed in this project have helped our team develop and articulate
these guiding principles that are providing beneﬁts for the project and our research participants,
these methods and associated principles have challenges and limitation associated with them. First,
as is often true in participatory research, the process of creating relationships with stakeholders and
users can be time consuming. Second, conducting studies in the wild provides huge beneﬁts for
contextual validity, but also allows for an unlimited number of uncontrollable situations. Maintaining
ﬂexibility within design can be helpful, but even then there is still potential for studies to fail in the
wild. Finally, although often much appreciated, communicating and disseminating new, participatory
iterations of commonly used methods to an engineering community can be difﬁcult and time intensive.

6. Conclusions

As interest in human–robot interactions increases, paying attention to how and why researchers
are choosing methods is integral to determining the validity of that data. The choice of methods
informs the rigor of the process, but the application of these methods must include meaningful and
ethical engagement for participants. Thoughtful attention to methods is especially crucial for work
with teens who are a unique and vulnerable population.
Developing and articulating these participatory research principles beneﬁts our research project
and also our participants. The principles have emerged over three years of research and now guide
our decisions and directions in ongoing efforts. Having the principles clearly articulated helps
communicate to new research team members and our stakeholders how and why we conduct our
participatory research in the way that we do. It also acts as a guideline for developing new research
activities or engaging new partners. Further, having a clear set of guidelines helps our team articulate
our approach and its rationale to participants to more fully engage them in the reasons and purpose of
our research.
These guidelines provide our team with conﬁdence that we are engaging teens in a thoughtful,
ethical, and appropriate way. The approaches help gather data that are useful, meaningful and
valid given the contextual validity inherent in these participatory methods. Given the vastness of
potential human–robot interaction studies, we advocate that participatory methods be used, especially
with vulnerable populations. In addition, we recommend that research teams may beneﬁt from the
development of their own set of participatory research principles that maintain consistency within
their research and provide an ethical and transparent rationale for the research.