PROGRAMMATIC REVIEW AND ANALYSIS

Integrating Human-Centered Design to Advance Global
Health: Lessons From 3 Programs

Emily Blynn,a Emily Harris,b Melanie Wendland,c Courtney Chang,d Dyness Kasungami,e Monisha Ashok,b

Metsehate Ayenekuluf

Key Findings

Reflections from 3 global health programs using human-
centered design (HCD) offer 3 categories of lessons for
those considering similar approaches:

n
Planning while considering the needs of both traditional
global health and HCD approaches

n
Engaging key stakeholders to build understanding,
alignment, and buy-in from the outset

n
Applying approaches differently from the way both designers
and global health actors are accustomed to working to
promote long-term program sustainability and learning

Key Implications

n
If implemented appropriately, integrating HCD into
global health programming can produce a virtuous cycle
between co-creation, stakeholder buy-in, and quality of
outputs. The more that programs engage stakeholders in
an inclusive, participatory process, the greater their
continued willingness and motivation. This in turn allows
for more iteration and higher quality, better-tailored outputs
that are more likely to be sustainably used and scaled.

n
To engender this virtuous cycle, programs that
incorporate an HCD approach will need to be scoped
differently than traditional global health programs (e.g.,
more flexible timelines; dedicated budget for
implementation and capacity building, etc.).

n
Because stakeholders may perceive a higher risk of
failure with a new approach, proponents of HCD are
faced with a substantial burden of evidence to persuade
actors to consider its benefits. However, traditional
global health actors should consider alternative
approaches to measuring HCD’s contributions,
including perceived end user value.

ABSTRACT

Background: Human-centered design (HCD) is increasingly being
used as a complementary approach to traditional global health
methods due to its ability to bring new ideas to entrenched
problems, integrate multiple stakeholder perspectives, and bring
in a strong human lens among other advantages. To reap these
benefits, public health and design practitioners in global health
programs can learn from the early experiences of integrating
HCD to advance these efforts.
Objective: This article distills lessons gathered from 3 programs
leveraging HCD to advance global health programming: (1) the
“V” program which used an HCD approach to reframe the
once-a-day HIV prevention pill from a potentially stigmatizing
medicine into empowering self-care; (2) the Adolescents 360 pro-
gram which integrated HCD to create a service for adolescent
girls to access contraception in Ethiopia and to scale this offering
nationwide; and (3) Reimagining TA which used HCD to help
shift perceptions around traditional technical assistance models
to one of co-creation, defining a new approach for non-
financial support for health systems strengthening.
Findings: To inform global health programs that are considering
employing an HCD approach, lessons learned are distilled into
3 categories: (1) planning: considerations for problem definition
and project scoping to allow for flexibility and selection of appro-
priate methods; (2) engaging: reflections on the means to produc-
tively engage different stakeholder groups to build alignment,
understanding, and buy-in; (3) applying: adoption of new ways
of working during implementation to best take advantage of the
benefits of HCD while promoting long-term program sustainabili-
ty and learning.
Conclusion: These lessons represent an important step on the
pathway to demonstrate the contributions of HCD to improving
the effectiveness of health programs at a time when the global
health community needs the most robust set of tools possible to
meet the demands of our current pandemic context and beyond.

INTERVENTIONS
The 3 programs discussed in this article all inte-
grated HCD into traditional global health pro-
gramming, but they vary in important ways that
can illuminate learnings for a broad range of global
health programs (Table).

V
In 2015, the U.S.
Agency for International
Development (USAID) engaged a consortium of
partners led by CONRAD, and including IDEO
and Matchboxology, to identify a new approach
to offering oral pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP)
to adolescent girls and young women (AGYW).
While access to oral PrEP is scaling up across sub-
Saharan Africa, low rates of initiation and retention
continue to limit the progress toward ambitious,
global goals for AGYW.23 USAID hypothesized that
an HCD approach could help program implementers

better understand what AGYW want when it comes
to HIV prevention, shifting from the more tradit-
ional “demand creation” to “desire creation.”
Formative research in South Africa included
user journey mapping and highlighted a negative,
overmedicalized experience of PrEP. Based on this
research, “V” was co-created with AGYW through
prototyping and testing, resulting in a radically
reframed PrEP experience from a potentially stigma-
tizing medicine into empowering self-care. V is in-
troduced through brand ambassadors and initiated
using a starter kit that mimics a makeup bag, includ-
ing a small pill case that silences pill rattling and can
be shown off or disguised as a lip balm case.
In 2019, USAID engaged the Engage Design
consortium—led by McKinsey Design, Match-
boxology, and research partner PATH—to partner
with USAID/Zimbabwe’s leading HIV prevention
service delivery partners to adapt V for program
implementation. Due to COVID-19, implementa-
tion was paused but has recently resumed, with
results expected in late 2021.

Adolescents 360 Ethiopia
Adolescents 360 (A360) is a 4-year initiative
(2016–2020) to increase adolescent girls’ access
to and demand for modern contraception in
Nigeria, Ethiopia, and Tanzania. A360 is imple-
mented by Population Services International (PSI)
and in partnership with IDEO.org, the Center on
the Developing Adolescent at the University of
California, Berkeley, and the Society for Family
Health Nigeria, and cofunded by the Bill & Melinda
Gates Foundation and the Children’s Investment
Fund Foundation. A360 used HCD alongside other
disciplines of social marketing, developmental neu-
roscience, and anthropology to develop innovative
country-specific interventions through an iterative
process of researching, testing, prototyping, and
piloting ideas with girls and other stakeholders. The
first 2 years were dedicated to program design and
optimization, while the second 2 years were focused
on implementation and scale-up.
The HCD approach applied led to the develop-
ment of Smart Start, an intervention that uses fi-
nancial planning as an entry point to engage
young married couples in planning their futures
and reaching financial stability, positioning con-
traception as a tool to achieve their self-defined
goals. Smart Start supports girls aged 15–19 years
and their partners to understand the resources
they will need for the families they desire.
As of September 2020, Smart Start has reached
76,480 girls in Ethiopia, with 35,887 (79% of eligible

girls who are not pregnant and not using contracep-
tion) of those voluntarily adopting a form of modern
contraception. It is currently being implemented in
1,070 sites across the country and the Ministry of
Health (MOH) is embedding it in the national health
extension worker program. PSI has also introduced
and adapted Smart Start for adolescent girls in
Mozambique.

Reimagining Technical Assistance
Reimagining Technical Assistance (Reimagining
TA) was a 2-year project (2018–2020) funded by

the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation and implemen-
ted by the Child Health Task Force Secretariat
through John Snow Research & Training Institute
(JSI R&T) and Sonder Collective. TA has been criti-
cized for failing to align with country priorities or co-
ordinate with governments and other stakeholders,
often focusing on short-term wins, and lacking sys-
tematic approaches to solve public health chal-
lenges.24–26 The project goals were to invite in-
country TA stakeholders to engage in a co-creation
process to map current barriers and opportunities
in how TA is designed and delivered; co-create a

shared vision and concepts for the future of TA; and
test, iterate, and develop new models for TA in Nigeria
and the DemocraticRepublicofCongo (DRC). To
achieve these goals, the project team adopted an inte-
gratedapproachthat combinedHCD,co-creation,and
systems thinking. The HCD aspects of the process in-
volved activities to understand the human experience
of TA, including attitudes, motivations, and behaviors,
as well as social determinants, including social norms
and group identity. In each country, the project used
HCD and co-creation processes that included work-
shops, design sprints, and stakeholder interviews.
The system's thinking included mapping the journey
of TA planning and delivery that recognized interac-
tions among international, several national govern-
ment
departments,
and
subnational
actors
as
opposed to a single project addressing a technical
intervention.
The project co-creation teams identified 9 crit-
ical shifts and 20 design principles of good TA for
global and local stakeholders, which serve as a
platform for alignment, inspiration, and action to-
ward a re-imagined TA.

LESSONS LEARNED ACROSS
PROGRAMS
Reflections on these projects hold lessons for glob-
al health practitioners and designers seeking to ad-
vance global health programming through HCD.
Learnings can be broadly distilled into 3 catego-
ries: (1) planning: considerations for problem defi-
nition and project scoping to satisfy integration of
HCD methods; (2) engaging: reflections on the
means to productively engage different stakeholder

groups to build alignment, trust, and buy-in; and
(3) applying: adoption of new ways of working
during implementation to best exploit the benefits
of HCD while promoting long-term program sus-
tainability and learning (Figure).

1. Planning
Across the 3 programs, early project planning
phases were critical to realize the benefits of HCD
methods. Traditional global health practitioners
needed to adapt their approaches to consider the
flexibility, iterative nature, and sometimes elon-
gated time frames that HCD requires to produce
robust results. Similarly, designers needed to in-
vest time during the planning phase to understand
how design could best add value.

Allow the Problem Definition to Evolve
Because HCD is a creative problem-solving ap-
proach, projects must have a clear, baseline prob-
lem definition that is developed and refined
through research with end users and other stake-
holders. However, experiences of these programs
also suggest that continuing to iterate on the prob-
lem definition throughout the project can advance
better outputs.
For example, in A360 Ethiopia, the program
initially sought to achieve 121,000 new users of
contraception, aged 15–19 years over 4 years.
However, after the insights gathering phase, the
team uncovered 3 different segments in this age
bracket that would require different solutions: un-
married girls in school, young married adoles-
cents, and young adolescent mothers. This fueled
a conversation about redefining the scope of the

project, the user segment, and the appropriate tar-
gets, which ultimately laid the foundation for de-
signing a highly tailored program for one of these
segments.
V’s formative research in South Africa sug-
gested that V would be most impactful if it was po-
sitioned as a consumer brand. Consequently, the
materials were designed with a look and feel that
was intentionally distinct from traditional public
health communication materials. However, when
translating the product for use in Zimbabwe, users
wanted V to be linked to current oral PrEP offerings
through public health programs to avoid confusion.
For future replication, the team recommended that
a rapid, low-resource validation within an existing
program be conducted first. This would allow the
designers leading the HCD process to facilitate the
initial phase of problem definition based on an un-
derstanding of the specific country and program
context.
In Reimagining TA, the timeline, project ap-
proach, and funding had been allocated to the
implementing partners with the assumption of a sin-
gle, broad problem definition. However, though all
actors agreed that the TA delivery was broken and
needed to be reconceived, during the initial in-
country workshops the design team discovered that
the problem with TA was more complex and nu-
anced than previously understood. For example,
while there was consensus that the current time-
frames for TA projects were not appropriate, funders
preferred shorter-term TA projects and near-term
results, while governments wanted several years of
TA to strengthen the underlying capacity of the
health system to deliver long-term and sustainable
results. These multiple and partly diverging problem
definitions between global, national, and local stake-
holders were at odds with the ability to undertake a
fast HCD process. A more collaborative problem def-
inition phase could have helped establish a clear,
shared intent for the work and identify solutions
more suited to the needs of stakeholders at all levels.

Build in Iteration and Allow for Pivoting
The HCD process is rooted in deep inquiry and
open exploration to surface new insights and de-
velop innovative products or processes together
with the users of those solutions. As a result, the
prototype or proposed solution will rarely be the
one to scale. This process of iteration and adapta-
tion can often take more time and can be in ten-
sion with the more linear structure of traditional
global health programs. Recognizing this tension
and building in more time and resources for a

rigorous, iterative HCD process can enable global
health programs to reap the benefits of HCD.
From the beginning, A360 Ethiopia had a gener-
ous timeline and expectation for program adapta-
tion, which allowed the initiative to be successful at
scale. In the solution design phase, there were
3 rounds of rapid prototyping before a 6-month pi-
lot. Through these iterations, the team quickly vali-
dated the value proposition of financial planning for
young couples, experimented with how to best
communicate the relationship between financial
and family planning, and ultimately, refined the de-
livery model for this intervention for married ado-
lescents in rural Ethiopia. In the second year, even
after the Smart Start financial planning curriculum
was launched, a second short design sprint helped
condense the curriculum from 60 pages and 1 hour
to 12 pages and 15 minutes, making it much easier
for health extension workers to integrate these mes-
sages into their work.
Similarly, in Reimagining TA, the team found
that conducting a design process within a complex
system requires time. While the donor originally
allocated funding for an 8-month timeline, the
project ultimately took 24 months for several rea-
sons. First, the project encountered logistical con-
straints. Co-creation workshops required direct
engagement with country-level stakeholders, par-
ticularly government officials, who had limited
availability, and that was exacerbated by person-
nel turnover in key roles post-elections. Second,
in the case of the DRC, the first round of prototyp-
ing surfaced problems at the community level that
resulted from poorly designed TA, including lack
of consideration of the burden of out-of-pocket
health costs on the families, lack of dialogue with
community leaders, and duplication of activities in
the field. The team decided that a second round of
prototyping was needed to identify the root,
systems-level problems. Third, once the timeline be-
gan to get delayed, amendments to the pre-defined
project plan and budget took additional time.
To address these challenges, the project con-
cept should be codesigned by the funder, the
content and process experts, and the collaborat-
ing government entities. With all key stake-
holders at the table, expectations would be
clarified, roles and responsibilities agreed upon,
accountability
mechanisms
established,
and
funding allocated based on a realistic timeline
and level of effort. Ultimately, a timeline that
allows for co-creation of the vision, iteration,
and exploration throughout the process is cru-
cial to consider for successfully integrating HCD
into health programs.

For A360 Ethiopia, navigating the institutional
review board (IRB) process surfaced tensions be-
tween HCD’s discovery-driven and public health’s
pre-articulated research approach. For public
health practitioners, IRB approval is required
when deemed necessary to protect the human
subjects of research. HCD practitioners are accus-
tomed to open and fluid lines of inquiry with users
to discover new and unexpected insights and of-
ten utilize market research approaches that are ex-
empt from IRB requirements. A360 Ethiopia
pursued IRB approval in line with the principles
of
its
Commitment to Ethics in Youth-Powered
Program Design. Initial IRB feedback stated that
A360 did not have an adequate sample size and
had to change the wording of questions and limit
their methods to a specific set of 9 approaches.
The requirement to submit the design research
plan 6 to 9 months in advance of project launch
also limited the design team’s ability to adapt their
methods as needed throughout the process. The
IRB process did help pre-articulate the lines of in-
quiry that would truly advance programming
while eliminating those that are potentially ex-
tractive and not relevant to programming. A360’s
experience demonstrates how adhering to ethical
standards in design can be achieved while main-
taining the uniquely iterative nature of design re-
search. For example, future HCD practitioners can
learn from A360’s approach of including in the fi-
nal IRB application a range of approaches, such as
“inquiry questions may include” “we will speak to
a maximum of X people.” By pursuing discovery-
driven approaches that also promote document-
ing methods and results, HCD practitioners can
advance the diffusion of potentially catalytic
approaches such as design, while ensuring com-
mon ethical standards across the global health
and design communities.27

Understand the Possibilities and Limitations of
Each Approach
Part of the value of embedding HCD in global
health programming is the opportunity to use
it in combination with traditional public health
methods and other complementary metho-
dologies. Each of the program experiences
highlighted the importance of identifying the
specific areas where HCD can add value and
where other approaches can be useful (and
where these have limitations). Further detail
on the value of design as a complementary
methodology is detailed in a separate article in
this supplement.28

The experience of V demonstrates how HCD
can be used to build on existing knowledge and
derive new solutions. V’s formative findings rein-
forced well-documented opportunities (e.g., how
female-controlled HIV prevention products can
capitalize on the concept of control for young
women struggling with a lack of agency) and chal-
lenges (e.g., how discretion is needed to combat
the stigma associated with a product whose users
are perceived as engaging in risky sexual behav-
ior).29 V’s solutions build on well-established so-
cial marketing principles, such as linking health
products with desirable private sector positioning
and messaging, and well-researched interven-
tions, such as pill cases’ ability to improve adher-
ence.30 HCD’s unique contribution was the ability
to build on these known truths and design a new
solution tailored to the needs of the target seg-
ment. If successful, V will demonstrate how align-
ing oral PrEP with a beauty product promotes both
desirability and behavior change (e.g., by taking
advantage of existing wellness routines to pro-
mote adherence), discretion and control (e.g.,
through its ability to be concealed as a nonmedical
consumer product), practicality and delight (e.g.,
by offering a pill case with design elements that
meet young women’s unique needs in a novel
form not available at their local pharmacy).
In Reimagining TA, the team found that with a
project as complex as reimagining a system of ser-
vice delivery at global scale, other approaches such
as systems thinking and behavioral science would
have been useful in addition to HCD. The project’s
HCD approach centered around mapping the hu-
man experience of TA, the user needs of different
actors involved, and journeys through different
TA programs. This helped to understand people,
their interactions, and the complexity of those
interactions. However, a systems-thinking ap-
proach could have helped better identify linkages
and power dynamics in these systems that could
be targeted for change. In addition, reimagining a
system involves changing the behavior of the peo-
ple in that system. The HCD approach in this proj-
ect did not apply a behavioral science approach to
analyze behavior to propose a behavior change
strategy.

2. Engaging
While implementing these projects, both tradi-
tional global health actors and designers found
that they needed to adapt their traditional ways
of working to successfully collaborate on integrat-
ing HCD into global health programming. Teams

found an initial start-up phase useful to build
alignment, understanding, and trust among the
different groups involved. They also found that
establishing ownership with MOHs, implement-
ing partners, and other key stakeholders early in
the process was particularly important for sustain-
ability, as was identifying partners with strong
existing capacity in adaptive management.

Emphasize Alignment and Understanding Among
All Partners
Embedding HCD in a global health program
requires a shift in the way both global health prac-
titioners and designers are accustomed to work-
ing. The 3 projects thus noted that a start-up
alignment phase would be helpful to clearly delin-
eate roles and responsibilities of each partner in
the HCD process and familiarize traditional global
health actors with the baseline components of the
HCD approach.
In Reimagining TA, no such start-up phase
was built in for Sonder and JSI to align on process
and approach. The design team had to orient the
JSI team to the HCD methodology and approach
while simultaneously kicking off activities in-
country, as the JSI team had not worked with
HCD before. Equally, the design team needed
time to understand the country’s context and ef-
fective ways of working with the national govern-
ments. The lack of time to align on how to
integrate a consultant-led design process into the
global health program exposed a lack of mutual
understanding in terms of ways of working. This
created confusion, mutual questioning of the proj-
ect approach, and a lack of clarity around roles and
responsibilities. Had there been an initial codesign
and planning phase for the 2 organizations to
deeply engage with the planned approach and
methodology, reflect on the country context and
its impact on the process, build mutual under-
standing and trust, map out roles and responsibili-
ties carefully, and align the timeline accordingly,
the project would have been delivered in a more
targeted, streamlined, and effective manner.
Conversely, V invested time and resources to
transition formative research conducted in South
Africa to testing, adapting, and integrating the ap-
proach into HIV programming in Zimbabwe. The
prototypes of the V starter kits and distribution
plans developed in South Africa were not auto-
matically transferable to a new context given the
procurement realities of supplying large, U.S.
government-funded programs. Ultimately, imple-
menting V in Zimbabwe required procurement

through an existing U.S. government supply chain
mechanism focused on pharmaceutical product
procurements, which required a competitive con-
tracting process. The start-up planning phase in
Zimbabwe was essential to transition from proto-
typing to program implementation. In addition,
because of the investment of time and effort in
procuring through an existing U.S. government
supply chain mechanism, V is now much more ac-
cessible for other country teams who might want
to procure it.

Establish Ownership With Key Stakeholders Early
in the Process
In traditional global health programming, part-
nerships are already regarded as important, parti-
cularly partnerships with MOHs, to build buy-in
and promote sustainability. However, when add-
ing in a less familiar HCD approach, generating
early buy-in was even more important.
The key to A360 Ethiopia’s sustainability was
its early and flexible partnership with the MOH.
Because A360’s objectives closely aligned with
the
National
Adolescent
and
Youth
Health
Strategy targets for reducing teen pregnancy, the
MOH participated early in A360’s proposal devel-
opment. While the MOH was skeptical of the lon-
ger timeline and programmatic delays that an
intensive co-creation approach would entail, in-
viting young designers to present the insights and
opportunities that emerged from design research
ultimately helped convince the MOH of the ap-
proach. It was a powerful signal, coming directly
from their constituents, about what change was
needed and whose voices needed to be heard to
address teen pregnancy. Design afforded the rare
and insightful opportunity for the MOH to hear di-
rectly from constituents that they may not have
had otherwise.
For Reimagining TA, a lack of strong govern-
ment buy-in affected the quality and speed of the
co-creation process. Given the limited timeline for
securing government buy-in, the government ac-
cepted the initiative without full awareness of and
commitment to the level of engagement needed
for a true co-creation process. As the project was
one among many donor-funded projects compet-
ing for stakeholder time and attention, it lost out
against other priorities that were included earlier
in the country’s operational plans. As previously
noted, including the country governments in co-
creating the project concept could have helped to
achieve greater buy-in.

Identifying Partners With Strong Adaptive
Management Capacity
The HCD process is based on the rapid develop-
ment of prototypes and iteration, which means
that the output of a project is never truly “fin-
ished.” The experiences of these projects suggest
that partners with strong adaptive management
skills (i.e., the ability to make adjustments based
on new information) are those best suited to con-
tinue to test, learn, and improve the solution to
bring it to scale.
For the Reimagining TA project, the Technical
Assistance Hub (TA Hub), an initiative of the Bill &
Melinda Gates Foundation Nigeria country office
and implemented by DAI Nigeria, was able to
adopt, adapt, and use the project outputs. The TA
Hub is an independent nonprofit organization that
coordinates the delivery of comprehensive techni-
cal assistance and institutional strengthening sup-
port to state governments in Nigeria. DAI staff
participated in the Reimagining TA process as co-
creation team members and were later able to ap-
ply the reimagined TA approach. Now, all partners
applying to provide TA to state governments in
Nigeria with funding from the TA Hub are re-
quired to demonstrate how they will apply
the critical shifts and principles of good TA.
Identifying a partner with the capacity to adapt
and iterate on the project outputs was critical to
the project’s implementation.
For A360 Ethiopia, a key factor for success was
PSI Ethiopia building an institutional culture of
adaptive management, which allowed the Smart
Start solution to scale beyond the initial design
phase. After the initial work was completed, the
PSI Ethiopia team created an internal “Learning
and Insights Team,” which continued to practice
design and adaptive management, including rou-
tine data monitoring, conducting focus groups,
and taking action to adjust key program compo-
nents as needed when scaling to a new region or
training a new tier of health workers. This has
allowed them to quickly identify and adjust pro-
gram components when scaling to a new region
or training a new tier of health workers.

3. Applying
When putting HCD into practice in the context of
global health programming, both designers and
traditional global health stakeholders found they
needed to adapt their typical approaches to imple-
ment an integrated program. First, to develop out-
puts tailored to the needs of the end user, teams
found it critical to engage in a true co-creation

process with end users and other stakeholders
throughout the project, with each participant add-
ing equal value; this represented a shift for more
traditional global health actors. Second, though
some HCD projects end with insight generation,
in this work, teams found it necessary to push to-
ward implementation of the product or service to
promote uptake of the final outputs. To ensure the
program can continue once the core work has
concluded, teams found that building HCD capac-
ity among the consortium of partners allowed
them to continue to iterate and adapt the solutions
based on the needs of the target population.
Finally, when designing monitoring and evalua-
tion (M&E) frameworks for these programs, either
traditional global health actors or designers need-
ed to adapt their approach to identify a set of indi-
cators well-suited to the integrated approach.

Engage Users as Technical Experts in a True
Co-creation Approach
Traditional global health programs and HCD pro-
jects vary in the degree to which they include and
embed input from end users and other key stake-
holders. In traditional global health programming,
consulting end users and including other key
stakeholders at key decision points is not a new con-
cept. However, experiences from these projects sug-
gest that it is necessary to engage in a true co-
creation process, involving the end users and stake-
holders at each stage of the work, rather than a more
prescriptive, donor-recipient relationship.
A key component of A360 Ethiopia was
co-creation of solutions with young Ethiopian
designers. During prototyping young people played
a significant role in identifying the most resonant
ideas, resolving conflicting feedback in testing, and
improving ideas to be more contextually appropri-
ate. For example, when discussing the cost of hav-
ing a baby, a young designer proposed expressing it
in the number of goats, rather than the local cur-
rency, which was a more relatable concept for the
pastoralist community. A second benefit to co-
creation was that having young designers as a core
part of solution development gave Smart Start
credibility among the MOH stakeholders who saw
these young people as their constituents. Engaging
youth as team members in this way requires dedi-
cated financial resources, human resources, and
time, which may often be at odds with short-term
efficiency; yet it was central to the success of the
project’s outputs and long-term sustainability.
In the case of the Reimagining TA project, the
degree of co-creation varied by project stage and

country context. The project launch represented a
more prescriptive approach; countries were prese-
lected by the funder, and country stakeholders
were only involved after funding was approved.
Country governments were not involved in devel-
oping the problem definition in the proposal to de-
termine if the related process and approach would
be meaningful and needed in their country. As a
result, throughout the project, it was difficult to
achieve stakeholders’ buy-in and commitment,
despite intentionally adopting a more collabora-
tive co-creation approach in later project phases.
In Nigeria, inconsistent stakeholder engagement
in the workshops resulted in fragmented insights
and low commitment to the process and the solu-
tions. Conversely, in the DRC, the co-creation
team was consistent and engaged throughout the
whole process, which resulted in better adoption
and implementation of the solutions. By the end
of the project, the DRC team was ready and willing
to take independent ownership of the next steps.
Involving stakeholders not as participants but as
co-creators requires global health funders and
other traditional stakeholders to engage in a more
inclusive process from project conceptualization
to implementation.

Don’t Stop at Insights
Some HCD projects can run the risk of seeing the
insights as an end, rather than a means to an end.
When design projects are scoped with insights as
an output, traditional global health actors, coun-
try governments, or other stakeholders must take
the extra step to translate these insights into action
to achieve outcomes. Programs that continued be-
yond insight generation to prototyping and actual
implementation achieved greater success in the
adoption of project recommendations.
In A360 Ethiopia, the insights-gathering phase
yielded findings similar to those found in the ado-
lescent and youth sexual and reproductive health
sector previously, such as “contraception is at odds
with a girl’s identity and what is expected of her”
or “proving fertility and having children is cultur-
ally revered.” The HCD process was more valuable
in translating these insights and learnings into
tangible programming opportunities. For exam-
ple, from these insights, the team built rough pro-
totypes of a baby cost calculator, a newlywed
counseling session, a young wives club, junior
health
extension
workers,
and
many
more.
Following insights generation with rapid solution
prototyping helped to deepen learnings gleaned

from the HCD process and make more actionable
progress toward behavior change.
Conversely in Reimagining TA, the project end-
ed with insights and concept generation, including
20 principles of good TA. The team originally
planned for 4 workshops to move stakeholders
through a design process. However, this proved un-
realistic due to the complexity of the “problem” to
be solved, the inconsistency of stakeholder atten-
dance at the workshops, and the time frame allo-
cated. Given the constraints, the team determined
that the workshops could be better leveraged to de-
velop a set of design principles to guide and govern
TA planning and delivery. Implementation of the
design principles in each country would have re-
quired additional funding and time but would
have been more effective in achieving the intended
impact of the program.
To address these challenges, first, the project
itself should have been co-created with an empha-
sis on the iterative nature of the HCD process. The
full project design, timeline, and funding alloca-
tion should have only been developed after defin-
ing the design challenge or questions. After
understanding the complex nature of the design
challenge, all actors in the process, including the
funder, should have agreed to a flexible timeline
and funding needed to co-create the vision, test
solutions, implement, and evaluate.

Embed Design Skills Among Partners
The HCD process and related outputs are highly
tailored to the needs of a target population that
will shift over time. These projects illustrate how
engaging partners throughout the project, and
particularly during the insight-generation phase,
builds capacity and buy-in to HCD methodology.
Including additional budget and time to support
the active development of these skills will better
enable countries to respond to changing needs of
the target population once the “project” has
ended.
In V, Engage Design, the HCD consortium,
partnered with PSI and Pangaea Zimbabwe AIDS
Trust to scale V in Zimbabwe. This partnership fo-
cused specifically on building HCD capacity and
the expertise needed to implement and adapt V in-
dependently after the Engage Design support
ends. Engage Design sought to empower and in-
spire local ownership through capacity-building
workshops and opportunities for program imple-
menters to work alongside the design team at ev-
ery
stage
of
the
project.
PSI
and
Pangaea
Zimbabwe AIDS Trust staff began as observers,

then with coaching, gradually became cofacilitators
and lead facilitators, working alongside Engage
Design project staff. This collaborative approach
and tapered support plan were also designed to im-
prove the V product during implementation, dem-
onstrating how HCD capacity building also benefits
the quality of global health program outputs.
For Reimagining TA, given timeline and bud-
get constraints, there was no time to build the
HCD skills of in-country co-creation team mem-
bers. Therefore, the solutions identified have not
been implemented systematically.

Develop Design-Sensitive M&E Frameworks
Both design and traditional global health approaches
are valuable when defining suitable M&E frame-
works. These projects experienced success with
both a more traditional global health approach for
measuring longer-term outcomes and with a more
design-led approach for iterative process measures.
However, both cases required one group to adapt
their traditional methods.
In A360 Ethiopia, taking a design-led ap-
proach to monitoring and evaluating the Smart
Start program promoted greater adaptive manage-
ment that was conducive to continually optimiz-
ing the program for scale-up across Ethiopia.
Those familiar with traditional global health
approaches might be tempted to try to rigorously
monitor early prototyping phases and make deci-
sions based on predefined indicators. However, in
A360 Ethiopia, the team found it important to re-
gard prototyping phases as formative research,
while keeping the suite of indicators broad. For
example, instead of only tracking how many girls
were reached and how many girls adopted a con-
traception method in prototyping rounds, it was
equally important to gather feedback on how girls
were hearing about the program, how their part-
ners felt about the program, and how long it was
taking for providers to deliver a counseling ses-
sion. Tracking this more expansive set of indica-
tors led the team to make important refinements
to optimize impact during scale-up (like cutting
program components that were not adding value,
shortening the lengthy curriculum, and creating
new roles for community members recruiting
girls). The ability to flexibly apply a mix of qualita-
tive and quantitative methods to gather data early
on was instrumental in helping the team to con-
stantly learn and iterate on the program model.
For V, an independent impact evaluation
failed to launch due to challenges in identifying
a sufficiently rigorous methodology at a feasible

cost. The evaluation of V in Zimbabwe was there-
fore designed to leverage existing, routine pro-
gram monitoring systems. The learning objectives
for V included first assessing acceptability and rel-
evance with target end users and second, evaluat-
ing the feasibility of integrating V into existing oral
PrEP service delivery. Impact will be assessed us-
ing PEPFAR’s standard performance indicators
for oral PrEP. In addition, a learning agenda was
developed, with questions designed to benefit
both Zimbabwe and global communities (e.g.,
What are the similarities and differences between
the experiences in South Africa and Zimbabwe?
And what can we learn about applying this ap-
proach in other countries interested in V?). This
blended approach of leveraging existing M&E sys-
tems alongside questions that can advance learn-
ings related to HCD can support key decision
makers in determining whether—and how—to
scale programs like V.

DISCUSSION
The 3 program experiences analyzed in this article
offer lessons for planning, engaging, and applying
individually. Additionally, several of these lessons
are interrelated and illuminate insights for the
project approach overall. Reflections from these
projects suggest a virtuous cycle between the
insights in each category. For example, the more
that stakeholders, particularly country govern-
ments and end consumers, are engaged in an in-
clusive, participatory process, the greater their
continued willingness and motivation to engage.
Deeper engagement allows for more iteration and
leads to higher quality, better-tailored outputs
that are more likely to be sustainably used
and scaled. Intentionally building HCD capacity
among stakeholders over the course of the project
strengthens this virtuous cycle by allowing the it-
erative process to continue once the “project” has
ended. A360, V, and Reimagining TA in DRC were
able to foster this cycle from the beginning and the
solutions have continued to scale. Conversely,
Reimagining TA in Nigeria was less able to under-
take a participatory process from the start, which
made
securing
country
buy-in
difficult
and
ultimately hindered implementation of project
recommendations.
The ability to engender this virtuous cycle
depends on another insight previously discussed:
the importance of scoping projects appropriately
to allow for co-creation, iteration, and HCD capac-
ity building. Programs that seek to incorporate an
HCD approach need to be scoped differently than

traditional global health programs. The project
conceptualization and scoping process itself needs
to be more collaborative, and the budget and time-
line need to be more flexible and sometimes be
longer than traditional programs to allow for
greater iteration. However, longer timelines are
not always necessary; a nimbler HCD approach
can be achieved by building in more built-in stage
gates or pivot points for rapid prototyping and iter-
ation at different stages of the process. A more in-
clusive scoping process may lead to a problem
definition and output that is different from donor
expectations and perceived as less directly focused
on a funder’s mandate.
Yet, these projects exemplify that ultimately it
helps to reduce rework and wasted resources and
promote more sustained impact through investing
in stakeholder buy-in and iteration upfront. In
this way, HCD practices represent more inclusive
and participatory approaches that should inspire
us to take further steps toward decolonizing pro-
gram development in global health; however,
more can be done to further define where HCD is
additive to those aspirations and where it is fur-
ther exacerbating historical power imbalances
(i.e., many HCD design agencies or teams are
based in North America and Europe).
Of course, expanding the integration of HCD
into more global health programs will require con-
vincing funders and other decision makers that
these programs are valuable. When considering
a new approach, traditional global health stake-
holders may perceive a higher risk of failure,
especially when weighed against methods that
are better understood and supported by well-
documented evidence. Thus, there is a substantial
burden of evidence required to persuade actors
that this approach is not only beneficial but also
that the risk of not having local ownership limits
long-term benefits if it means projects will require
ongoing grant funding.
The gold standard in global health programs is
demonstrating cost-effectiveness; however, there
is little publicly available information on the cost
of these programs. Further, it is difficult to clearly
break down costs for specific activities and phases,
as budgets are allocated at a high level and multi-
ple workstreams often take place in parallel.
However, this type of estimation was attempted
in a mid-term evaluation of A360, which found it
cost between US$2 million—US$3.5 million to de-
sign the project approach.31 This included the cost
to convene the consortium partners in the incep-
tion phase, as well as some costs from later phases
for continued refinement. Further transparency

and analysis of the true cost—and cost-effective-
ness—of incorporating HCD into global health
programs are needed to persuade others to adopt
this approach.
Alternative approaches to measuring HCD’s
contributions should also be considered. The
results of the projects examined in this article
demonstrate the value that both program imple-
menters
and
program
beneficiaries
received.
However, rigorous process evaluations to assess
HCD’s contribution throughout programming im-
plementation is an area that merits further inves-
tigation and investment, given their acceptance in
global health implementation science program-
ming. At the same time, the concept of value to
the end user is increasingly being heralded to im-
prove health services, and HCD brings a unique
perspective on how best to define those value-
based indicators. For example, end users may not
only value clinical outcomes but also value
improvements in quality and experience of care
as well as the quality of life and well-being.32

Given the expense of rigorous, impact-level eva-
luations of clinical outcomes, defining HCD’s suc-
cess in terms of how it can improve a patient’s
perceptions of value presents a lower-cost alterna-
tive that aligns with HCD’s ethos of user-centric
solutions. Further elaboration on best practices
for M&E of HCD projects in global health is de-
tailed in another article in this supplement.33

CONCLUSION
The global community continues to seek solutions
to achieve the ambitious SDGs for health. The
experiences of V, A360 in Ethiopia, and Re-
imagining TA strongly suggest that integrating
HCD into planning, engaging, and applying in
global health programming could help traditional
global health actors achieve better outcomes.
HCD’s iterative and inclusive approach can pro-
duce more targeted and effective interventions
while building local ownership and promoting
more sustained impact. However, not every chal-
lenge is well suited for HCD, and programs need to
be scoped and implemented thoughtfully to reap
the benefits of an HCD approach and promote sus-
tainability. A participatory, collaborative, and iter-
ative co-creation approach from the project outset
is important, as well as scoping the project in a way
that supports an iterative approach throughout
implementation. Further work is needed to better
quantify the costs and benefits of integrating HCD
methods to provide more evidence-based justifi-
cation for the appropriate use of HCD. In the

meantime, alternative approaches to characteriz-
ing the benefits of integrating an HCD approach
should also be considered. As the global health
field grapples with how to close the growing SDG
gap, especially with the disruptions from COVID-
19, HCD can be a powerful tool to generate prog-
ress toward these goals and more sustained
impact.

Disclaimer: The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily represent those of U.S. Agency for International
Development or the U.S. Government.