Original Paper

Developing and Evaluating JIApp: Acceptability and Usability of
a Smartphone App System to Improve Self-Management in Young
People With Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis

Ran A Cai1, BSc, PhD; Dominik Beste2, MSc; Hema Chaplin1, BSc; Socrates Varakliotis2, PhD; Linda Suffield1,
BSc; Francesca Josephs1, MSc; Debajit Sen1,3, MD; Lucy R Wedderburn1,4, MD, PhD; Yiannakis Ioannou1,3, MD,
PhD; Stephen Hailes2, PhD; Despina Eleftheriou1,4, MD, PhD

1Arthritis Research UK Centre for Adolescent Rheumatology, University College London, London, United Kingdom
2Department of Computer Science, University College London, London, United Kingdom
3University College London Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Adolescent Rheumatology, London, United Kingdom
4UCL Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, Infection, Immunity, Inflammation, and Physiological Medicine, London, United Kingdom

Ran A Cai, BSc, PhD
Arthritis Research UK Centre for Adolescent Rheumatology
University College London
UCL Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health
30 Guilford St
London, WC1N 1EH
United Kingdom
Phone: 44 0203 108 2420
Fax: 44 0203 108 2420

Methods

Participants

Patients were eligible for recruitment to the study when they
fulfilled the following criteria: (1) a diagnosis of JIA, defined
as arthritis of unknown etiology lasting more than 6 weeks and
of onset at less than 16 years [53]; (2) were aged 10 to 24 years;
(3) were able to read and speak English; and (4) were seen at
the Great Ormond Street Hospital (GOSH) or University College
London Hospital (UCLH) rheumatology clinics. Patients were
excluded if they had severe cognitive impairments or major
comorbid medical or psychiatric illnesses that would preclude
their ability to participate in focus group discussions (FGDs).
Parents of patients were eligible if they could read and
understand English. Patient demographics and disease-related
data collected were age at time of study, age at diagnosis,
classification of JIA category, and current medication. The
HCPs working in the multidisciplinary team at the two recruiting
centers were eligible to participate if they had worked in
pediatric/adolescent rheumatology for at least 6 months
according to self-report. Participants were able to take part in

all three phases of the study. Table 1 summarizes which patient
participated multiple times.

Process

The overall project adopted a qualitative, user-centered approach
as per the standard published guidance [54-56]. The study was
conducted in three phases (see Figure 1). Phase I focused on
developing consensus on the features and content of the app.
This involved understanding barriers and enablers to
self-management in YP, and, as suggested by the MRC guidance
[50-52], identifying intervention functions from the COM-B
model that should be incorporated in the app. Phase II was used
to further refine and evaluate the functionalities and improve
the design of the app prototype and the Web application for
HCPs. Phase III focused on usability testing of the final app
interface for YP. Purposive sampling was used to encompass
variations in opinions because of demographic characteristics
(age, gender, and ethnicity), disease duration, and JIA subtype.
Both YP and parents were approached by a member of the
research team in clinics before the rheumatology appointment.
The families who agreed to participate gave informed consent
or age-appropriate assent with parental consent for those aged
under 16 years. Thereafter, YP were offered a group based on
their age for phases I and II. The study was approved by the
Local Ethics Committee (NRES Committee London – Queen
Square, 15/LO/1288).

Phase I: Design and Development

For phase I, we used a nominal group technique to develop
consensus on the app content and features. This included a
number of separate FGDs for HCPs, younger patients (aged
10-15 years) and their parents, and older patients (aged 16-24
years). Following an introductory presentation on the overall
goals of the meeting, YP and parents were asked what features
and information will help them or their child better follow their
treatment plans and cope with arthritis-related symptoms and
consequences. The HCPs were asked what data can be collected
remotely to help with understanding and assessing patient’s
condition and treatment effectiveness. All participants were also
questioned regarding the design and aesthetics of the user
interface. Lists of questions posed to each of the groups are
summarized in Multimedia Appendix 1. Consensus was
considered as having been achieved when 75% of the
participants endorsed a given answer. Answers that did not reach
75% endorsement were discarded or reformulated through
discussion.

Participants’ answers to the questions posed during phase I
FGDs were used to generate a catalog of initial system
requirements. An app prototype was then developed in
collaboration with the Computer Science Department at UCLH.
The agreed set of features were iteratively built into the app
codebase by a developer from the Computer Science
Department. When clarification of the data generated was
required, participants were queried by email and phone to

provide further feedback (see Figure 1). The prototype was
developed using open frameworks for cross-platform
compatibility and runs on both the Google Android (version
4.4.1 and above) and the Apple iOS (version 8 and above)
operating systems.

Phase II: Evaluation and Integration Into Clinical
Practice

The FGDs were again conducted with HCPs and YP with JIA
during phase II to vet and refine the requirements of the phase
I app prototype. Participants were able to test and navigate
through the app’s various features using a smartphone to
improve their understanding of the app and focus on their
recommendations. Screenshots of important pages in the app
were also shown to examine whether YP and HCPs liked or
disliked the design and the question format. They were asked
to provide further suggestions for improvement, and technical
problems with the app were also recorded.

Both HCPs and YP were also asked whether the information
collected would be useful during consultations, and how
clinically relevant information reported by patients should be
imported to, summarized, and displayed in a Web application
for HCPs. Also, what data recorded by patients and information
on app usage should be stored for research were discussed.
Semistructured interview questions that were developed based
on the Usefulness, Satisfaction, and Ease of Use questionnaire
[57] were used to guide the FGDs (see Multimedia Appendix
1). The design of the app was modified and new screenshots

were generated and evaluated until no further changes were
suggested. All FGDs were conducted with each participant
group until point of data redundancy or point of no proposed
new data [58] and lasted between 60 and 90 min. System
analysis and final design were done in joint effort with the
developer from the Computer Science Department.

Phase III: Usability and Acceptability Pilot

Following the development of the final app, the usability and
acceptability of the user interface, as well as the registration
and data extraction process were tested with YP during phase
III. The interviews with YP took place on a one-to-one basis
and YP were shown the app on a smartphone. The researcher
explained that the purpose of the study was to pilot ease of use
and evaluate its features and encouraged YP to input information
in all sections of the app at least once. After navigating the
various features of the app and using it for 10 to 15 min, YP
answered a usability and acceptability questionnaire [57] where
they rated on 5-point scales their general impressions of the
app, its user-friendliness, clarity of information provided, and
whether or not they found the app useful and would recommend
it to other YP (see Multimedia Appendix 2). In addition, YP
answered qualitative questions regarding the specific features
of the app, and how it can help them improve self-management
(see Multimedia Appendix 1). Each interview lasted between
25 and 45 min. Discussions were audio-recorded for all phases
of the project, and field notes were made for phase III. At all
FGDs, RAC and HC were present as interview leader and
observer, respectively.

Data Analysis

All audio recordings were transcribed and qualitative content
analysis [59,60] was applied. Qualitative data from transcripts
and field notes were carefully reviewed to develop a coding
system that reflected perceptions and suggestions for the
smartphone-based JIA app. Data were then assigned with codes
based on their content. Codes with similar content were grouped
into meaningful categories. RAC and HC read and analyzed the
transcripts separately and then compared the results. Differences
from the separate analyses were discussed until consensus was
reached. The coding system and analytic process were further
discussed with DE, an experienced pediatric rheumatologist.
The final analysis organized the categories together into
overarching themes that were developed and refined by
discussions between RAC, HC, and DE. Discussions were also
held between the researchers on how each category mapped
onto the COM-B model. In addition, content analysis was
performed according to the age group of YP (10-15 years and
16-24 years) to identify any age-specific differences in opinion.
All qualitative data were analyzed using NVivo software (NVivo
version 10, QSR International, 2012) [61].

Results

Participant Characteristics

For phase I, a total of 10 patients were recruited and were
separated into two groups: group A included 5 patients (median
age 12 years, range 10-14 years, 2 females) and group B
included 5 patients (median age 18 years, range 17-21 years, 2
females). A separate FGD was conducted with 7 parents of
patients from group A. Two patient FGDs were again conducted
for phase II: group A included 7 patients (median age 12 years,
range 10-14 years; 4 females) and group B included 6 patients
(median age 18 years, range 16-23 years, 5 females). Phase III
interviewed 13 YP. Demographics and disease characteristics
of YP included in the study are shown in Table 1. The
participants had a variety of JIA categories with a median time
since diagnosis of 4 years (range 5 months-17 years) for patients
in phase I, 5 years (range 10 months-14 years) for patients in
phase II, and 8 years (range 1-21 years) for patients in phase
III. The participants were also diverse in ethnicity (62% white,
24% Asian, 10% black, 3% Hispanic).

Two FGDs with HCPs were also conducted for phases I and II.
For phase I, a total of 19 HCPs with a median of 7 years (range
1-20 years) of experience in pediatric/adolescent rheumatology
participated. These HCPs included 7 medical consultants, 4
clinical nurse specialists, 4 rheumatology trainees, 2 research
nurses, 1 physiotherapist, and 1 clinical psychologist. For phase
II, a total of 15 HCPs with a median of 8 years (range 1 to 20
years) of experience participated. The group included 6 medical
consultants, 3 rheumatology trainees, 2 clinical nurse specialists,
2 research nurses, and 2 research fellows.

Phase I: Design and Development

It was apparent that YP with JIA wanted a multifaceted way to
help them manage their condition. Transcript analysis of data
collected during phase I revealed three distinct themes that
guided the development of this app (see Figure 2).

Theme 1: Self-Monitoring

The first theme was self-monitoring, as all participants thought
that tracking certain information will (1) help them understand
what influences their JIA symptoms and (2) provide better data
for HCPs to use during assessments. This theme included six
initial categories for monitoring; however, only those for which
there was >75% agreement on its importance among YP,
parents, and HCPs were included in the app. These were
monitoring (1) symptoms, (2) general well-being, (3) activities,
and (4) sleep. Categories that did not achieve this concordance
were related to tracking (5) weather and (6) nutrition.

All participants identified tracking of joint symptomatology,
including stiffness, swelling, and pain as very important,
particularly as this varies in intensity, location, and duration
over time. They felt that using the app would reduce recall bias
and enable both patients and clinicians to monitor symptoms
in real time:

I want to note the dates of when I have symptoms
before I forget them, so that I can show the doctors,
and help them better understand my illness and what
is really going on. [Patient 3]
One patient stated:

Daily monitoring of pain is better than giving a
monthly average at the clinic. [Patient 2]
Participants indicated that the app should include continuous
visual analog scales (VAS) to indicate the intensity of
JIA-related symptoms by moving a bar across a horizontal line
in preference to categorical selections. One adolescent stated:

Instead of choosing just one number, I want to be able
to choose a range between the numbers, like between
6 to 7. [Patient 3]

As requested by YP, each scale was accompanied with a cartoon
face that changed facial expressions from extremely positive at
the left to extremely negative at the right. Psychometric
properties of the VAS have been widely explored with children
as young as 8 years of age and have confirmed its test-retest
reliability, construct validity, and criterion-related validity
[62,63].

Additionally, YP wanted to use a body map to indicate how
painful and swollen a specific joint is. Body maps can facilitate
children’s reports of location of pain [64,65], and electronic
versions have been used successfully with children as young as
8 years old [40]. The app will include a simple body map (see
Figure 3) with circles at major joint areas in the body, mirroring
what is used in routine clinical assessments [66]. YP can click
on a joint that is painful or stiff and use a VAS to indicate the
intensity of their pain and stiffness, and the joint’s color will
then change accordingly. This is important to include, as YP
often experience different pain intensities from different joints,
and their stiffness intensity also vary by location and time of
day. Both YP and HCPs thought that recording this will help
them better explain their symptoms and assess whether treatment
is required (eg, physiotherapy exercises targeting specific joints).
Lastly, YP requested an open text area where they can input

additional details regarding their symptoms and add comments
about the type of pain, with one of the patients stating the
following reason:

It’s about how you feel and how you describe it
instead of just having a number. [Patient 4]
Being able to monitor general well-being such as mood, fatigue,
and functional health were also identified as important. For
example, YP indicated:

Tracking stressful events and mood and how that
impacts your symptoms is most important. [Patient
4]
Three positive (excited, energetic, happy) and three negative
emotions (anxiety/fear, sad, angry) were chosen together with
YP and HCPs, which were adapted from the Positive and
Negative Affect Schedule for Children [67]. These were assessed
using the VAS and the horizontal line ranged from “not at all”
on the left to “extremely” on the right. A stress scale was also
included, but a verbal rating scale for stress (VRSS) was
preferred by YP instead of a VAS. The VRSS was found to be
more reliable than the VAS and can be easily understood and
completed by children as young as 7 years old [68]. It measures
stress on a scale from zero to five with responses describing an
increase in stress levels. In addition, YP wanted an electronic
version of a JIA-related childhood health-assessment
questionnaire (CHAQ) [69], which is a widely used functional
health status measure in YP with JIA and is administered during
routine clinic consultations. They recognized that completing
it once every 3 to 6 months during clinic consultations may
provide unreliable responses, as it does not reflect variations
over time:

I’d like to track more precisely because the answers
to those questionnaires can change every day, or even
every hour. [Patient 10]
Digital CHAQs have been developed and tested in previous
studies [63] and were found to yield similar outcomes when
compared with the paper form of CHAQ.

Recording activities such as participation in school and physical
exercise and sports was another important area for YP. One YP
said,

Exercise usually makes me feel better afterwards and
doing sports takes the pain away. [Patient 8]
Another stated,

I want to be able to write down what type of exercise
I did, such as swimming. [Patient 1]
YP suggested that the app should provide visual feedback of
their data so that they can see how different factors impacted
their condition, and what techniques were helpful in managing
their symptoms.

Theme 2: Treatment Adherence

Participants were interested in using the app to improve
treatment adherence by setting reminders for when to take
regular medications, request repeat prescriptions, complete
physiotherapy exercises, and attend hospital appointments for
important assessments and tests (eg, regular blood tests). One
of the patients said,

Sometimes when life gets busy I do forget, so having
a reminder would be really useful. [Patient 4]
However, some participants felt that these reminders should be
optional to avoid any disengagement with the app because of
annoyance from compulsory reminders. Furthermore, YP were
interested in recording when medication doses were missed,
reasons for missing doses, side effects, medication change, and
whether they took any additional medicines such as analgesics
or antibiotics and anti-emetics (see Figure 4). Regarding
physiotherapy exercises, YP could select which ones they were
assigned or would like to perform from a list of possible
exercises recommended by physiotherapists at GOSH and could
input the number of sets and repetitions. Additionally, both
patients and HCPs wanted a section where patients could input
their blood test results, with an indication of whether these
results were normal and what the tests measured:

I think it’s interesting to have your blood results on
the app, together with the doctor’s comments such as
there’s nothing to worry about or that something
might be a problem. [Patient 2]

Theme 3: Education and Support

Besides wanting to learn more about their condition, YP wanted
to have a discussion forum in the app with other patients. Also,
YP from all age groups highlighted the need to have easy access
via the app to condition- and treatment-related information,
news about research, and social support:

The app should have information on arthritis…also
news about research, involvement, and being able to
talk to other people. [Patient 2]
Additionally, YP said that learning different ways of managing
their stress and pain from peers, and knowing that they are not
alone, will make them feel more empowered and confident.
Moreover, YP mentioned that their arthritis symptoms tend to
worsen during times of stress and exams and would like
information on how to better manage stressful situations and
pain. Therefore, the app will include general information
regarding JIA, medications, physiotherapy exercises, and
practical coping advice, with links to more detailed and trusted
Web resources (see Figure 4). It will also signpost users to
information regarding support groups that are reputable and
age-appropriate, as well as possible involvement activities
organized by local organizations and charities.

Older patients (18-24 years) requested additional information
on how to become more independent as they become an adult
and what support is available for higher education and work.
The app will provide general information covering these topics,
with links to how other YP with JIA overcame challenges of
growing up. In addition, there is a diary section where YP can

write down any questions or comments that they have and can
easily refer to during consultations.

Phase II: Evaluation and Integration Into Clinical
Service

During phase II, three more themes emerged (see Figure 5),
which related to incentives, design, and integration.

Theme 4: Incentives

It was observed that YP wanted to be rewarded for using the
app, and they preferred a reward-based rather than a punitive
system. One of the patients stated:

You should get points to buy rewards for using the
app but you shouldn’t get points taken away, even if
you don’t use it for a while. [Patient 6]
Therefore, the app will incorporate a point-based reward system
and include encouraging video messages from celebrities and
athletes. However, this was more appealing to the younger group
rather than the older group. Older group enjoyed choosing
reward pictures (eg, of landscapes, animals, and sports) to use
as their wallpaper and motivational quotes that they could
display on the home page.

Theme 5: Design of Patient Interface

In terms of designing the user interface, three aspects were
important for YP and HCPs: (1) data security, (2) visual
appeal/clarity, and (3) convenience. First, as the app will contain
patient’s personal details, it needs to be password-protected:

Arthritis is quite personal so some things you might
not want to share with other people. [Patient 6]
Also, YP wanted the option of diarizing information that would
not necessarily be shared with clinicians:

Some things might be a bit personal, and just for me
to look at in a diary format. [Patient 13]
Second, YP wanted a colorful visual display, easy-to-read fonts,
and pictures and were keen on being able to personalize colors
and backgrounds. One participant stated,

It’s important to have pictures and as little words as
possible. [Patient 3]
Participants also suggested that scales should include faces to
represent different pain or fatigue levels:

Using faces and cartoon will brighten it up a bit
[Patient 4]
Moreover, YP wanted more space on the home page to display
reward videos and pictures on the bottom; therefore, the home
page displays a dial (instead of a drop-down ladder) to count
down the number of days that are left until the next weekly
deadline (see Figure 4).

Lastly, there was a consensus among YP that it should typically
take less than 10 min to input all required information:

Input must be very quick to do and not feel like a
chore. [Patient 12]
Moreover, YP felt that there needed to be an agreed minimum
input to provide clinicians with interpretable data. One
adolescent stated:

Even if you have no pain, you can just indicate “no
pain” so that doctors know that you didn’t just forget
about the app. [Patient 10]
It was agreed by both YP and HCPs that the most important
data to collect were arthritis-related symptoms, CHAQ, and
mood, which should be provided at least once a week. The
frequency of completion of other sections should be decided
by the YP themselves to give them control over the process.

Ease of use was thus improved in several important ways. First,
YP were now able to access the three main monitoring
components of the app (symptoms, CHAQ, and mood) directly
from the home page rather than from the menu bar. Second,
after submitting each input, YP were presented with a pop-up
showing how many days ago was their last input for each of the
other section, which allowed them to quickly select another
section that had not been completed recently. Similarly,
hyperlinks were added within the app itself to facilitate access
to relevant tips and advice. YP confirmed that these changes
made inputting data and finding relevant information faster and
more convenient. Lastly, YP requested a calendar display of
entries, and the ability to input data retrospectively. One patient
said,

Sometimes we have a bad day and we’re tired so we
don’t want to the use the app, but we might want to
go back and re-enter it later. [Patient 1]
All the themes and their associated app functionalities were
mapped onto the COM-B model (see Table 2).

Theme 6: Clinical Practice Integration

The HCPs discussed how JIApp can be integrated seamlessly
into clinical practice and how reports from patients will be
received. Clinically relevant data collected from the app will
be automatically aggregated and presented in table and graphical
summaries (see Figure 4) on a clinician Web interface. The
interface was optimized for usability and data are presented in
an intuitive format such that any changes over time or
associations between various factors (eg, pain and mood) are
visually presented to aid comprehension. Figure 6 illustrates
the system, where raw data recorded by YP are stored and
clinically relevant information can be summarized and displayed
on the clinician interface.

The within-application workflow was also aligned with
clinician’s regular work streams. For example, HCPs can access

the Web interface via a patient’s existing electronic health
records, which can increase the likelihood of integration and
access from all multidisciplinary members of the rheumatology
team. Information can also be downloaded by HCPs and used
to populate clinic letters.

The HCPs also identified possible barriers to integration such
as accessibility to all patients and demands for additional
resources. For example, HCPs proposed that a desktop version
of the app will be beneficial to allow access to YP without a
mobile phone. In addition, HCPs were concerned about the
additional time needed to monitor remote symptom
deteriorations and interpret additional information collected
from the app. It was agreed that HCPs are only expected to
review the data during or right before a clinic consultation.
Therefore, before downloading the app, participants will be
informed that data will not be monitored in real time for this
stage of the project but will be reviewed during clinic
consultations. This is also explicitly explained on the app with
a disclosure statement. The HCPs suggested that the effect of
app use on HCP-patient interactions and cost-effectiveness of
the intervention should be formally assessed in the next stages
of the project during a prospective pilot study.

Phase III: Usability and Acceptability Pilot

All YP endorsed the app and thought that it would be beneficial
for them right from the point of initial diagnosis (mean
acceptability rating=4.29; standard deviation, SD=0.70). Also,
YP were able to input important data within 10 min and found
it intuitive to use and easy to navigate (mean usability
rating=4.25, SD=0.79).

The usefulness of each of the app functionality was reviewed
using qualitative interviews. It was apparent that there were
multiple reasons for using the app such as its potential to provide
YP with opportunities for better self-management, as all YP
discussed the importance of having medication reminders and
easy access to information, advice, and support. Furthermore,

YP commented on how the app made them feel as if all the
information they need is now at their “fingertips,” which makes
managing their arthritis seem less difficult and increases the
likelihood of actually reading the information and engaging in
recommended behaviors and self-monitoring. They also
appreciated how the information displayed was relevant to their
condition and concise. One patient said,

I like the way the sections are organized, and how it
is not too overwhelming, but how I do have the option
of finding out more if I want to. [Patient 22]
In terms of improving motivation to self-manage, YP believed
that through self-monitoring, they were able to understand the
importance of their own behaviors and how factors under their
control can influence disease activity:

I never know when I will flare up…so if this can help
me see if what I do can “actually” affect my arthritis,
then that would be very helpful. [Patient 29]
Moreover, YP emphasized how reading about other people’s
successes and having a record of their own past success with
managing pain and adhering to treatments can increase their
confidence in being able to effectively cope with future
challenges.

Also, YP were especially interested in doctors acknowledging
their input and using data collected from the app to make better
assessments and improve their care. They were enthusiastic
about integrating the app into their care, as it will make it easier
to discuss issues and symptoms that were recorded beforehand:

This app can help me remember what I wanted to say
to my doctors, which I often forget by the time I come
to the hospital…it will make it easier for me to show
them what I mean. [Patient 18]
Improving communication and patient-clinician relationship
can in turn motivate further engagement with health care. Lastly,
YP thought the reward system makes it enjoyable to use and is
simple, yet engaging:

The app itself is already beneficial to the users, but
the images as rewards is actually pretty nice and
simple. I like it. [Patient 4]
Most of the YP also fed back on how using the app can improve
areas related to self-management capability, as reading reliable
recommendations regarding pain management techniques will
teach them better coping strategies:

Sometimes there’s nothing you can do except deal
with it yourself, and this app can help you do that.
[Patient 21]
Patients also highlighted the fact that recording symptoms the
moment they occur using the app enables better understanding
of their condition and treatment beyond what can be provided
by education alone. One of the patients said,

The app is a good way to keep track of my symptoms
and should be given by doctors, especially when
you’re first diagnosed. [Patient 4]
They believed that each individual is different, and inputting
data on a regular basis can help them become aware of their
personal triggers and feel more in control of their arthritis:

I like visual information and to see how my stress
levels interact with my arthritis. [Patient 26]

Discussion

Principal Findings

This study presents the design and development of a smartphone
app 
to 
remotely 
record 
symptoms 
and 
encourage
self-management and engagement with health care for YP of
all ages (10-24 years) with JIA. We worked closely with YP,
parents, and HCPs to identify a catalog of initial requirements
for the app system and the necessary changes needed to improve
the functionalities of the app and its ease of use. Phase III
usability testing demonstrated high rates of overall satisfaction

with the app among YP and further affirmed the theoretical
validity of the choices made in its design.

Through this app, YP are now able to record numerous
additional parameters relating to their physical and psychological
well-being, access relevant educational information and social
support forums, receive treatment-related reminders, and
improve communication with HCPs. More importantly,
clinically relevant data is collected by YP themselves in the
real-world environment rather than by the HCPs in the hospital
environment and is owned by the patient, thus fostering the
concept of independent management of health care as the YP
mature [70-72]. Moreover, having a clear theoretical basis
allows future studies to identify which functions of the app
system are driving improvements in self-management.

From the HCP perspective, this app also has the potential to
standardize the way reports of clinical symptoms and medication
adherence are captured in natural settings and enable
fine-grained monitoring of arthritis in a way that is impossible
to obtain with occasional clinic visits. Having a more accurate
and holistic overview of the symptoms and problems of YP
may improve the dynamics of consultation, as time spent on
gathering information can be directed to discussing issues that
are of concern to the patient. Such a system may also allow
systematic collection of a clinically relevant standardized
dataset, intended to ensure uniform data collection in the clinical
setting [73] that can then inform NHS commissioning processes
such as monitoring the efficacy of biologic therapy and the
impact of such therapies on patient’s functional status. We also
wish to prospectively assess in the next stages of the project the
feasibility of collecting and processing additional mood- and
pain-related data for HCPs, and the impact this has on future
resource use (efficient use of consultation time, early
identifications of problems, and efficient referrals), treatment
effectiveness (whether it facilitates joint decision making with
YP and the patient-doctor relationship), and, ultimately,
health-related outcomes.

From the health care information technology perspective, the
effort was not limited to a standalone app. JIApp is the front-end
data-collection and patient-interaction component of a larger
platform, involving a substantial back-end architecture, which
includes (1) a flexible database mechanism that synchronizes
cached phone data to the data repository, (2) a YP reward
service, (3) user feedback and issue tracking system, and (4)
secure transport of data from devices to the back-end. Most
importantly, the platform also comprises a Web-based clinician’s
interface to facilitate retrieval and presentation of patient data
in a suitable and efficient manner for HCPs.

Moreover, this is not purely a bespoke app for GOSH and UCLH
Rheumatology, and the development efforts did not limit the
system design to this domain. For example, the software
component for the questionnaires could generate any form of
questionnaire with a variety of answer options such as
optional/blank, single, multiple, free-text, slider-based, and so
on. One could reuse such components for rapid development
and deployment of similar data-oriented health care apps. The
front-end JIApp will be made available via popular app stores
(Google Play and Apple).

Limitations

Our user groups were diverse, even though relatively small,
with participating patients having different JIA subtypes at
various stages of their treatment and from different ethnical
backgrounds. The app’s design and evaluation were not affected
by the characteristics of YP, but participation bias may have
influenced the themes that emerged from our FGDs and
interviews. For example, all study participants were computer
literate and had easy access to smartphones; whether further
refinements of the app are necessary for patients who are less
familiar with this technology needs to be established. We
considered this limitation by using open frameworks to develop
the app so that it can be deployed as a desktop version (running
on most modern browsers such as Chrome, Safari, and Firefox)
with minimal effort. It is important for future studies to evaluate
patient’s smartphone usage/ownership and its association with
recruitment, app usage, and app satisfaction to ensure that the
intervention is suitable and easily accessible for all YP.

Conclusions

In summary, a qualitative user-centered approach was used to
develop the first comprehensive smartphone app for YP with
JIA. Next steps will involve long-term feasibility testing of the
app to establish its effect on patient’s self-management skills,
disease outcomes, and general well-being, as well as the
cost-effectiveness of such an intervention. In addition, patient’s
app usage will be monitored to assess long-term sustainability
and understand reasons for disengagement.