Title: 

User-centred design for developing e-Health system for renal patients at home 

(AppNephro) 

Authors:   

Jorge Calvillo-Arbizu1,2, Laura M. Roa-Romero1,2, Miguel A. Estudillo-Valderrama1, 

Mercedes Salgueira-Lazo2,3, Nuria Aresté Fosalba3, Nieves L. del-Castillo-Rodríguez4, 

Fayna González-Cabrera5, Silvia Marrero-Robayna5, Virginia López-de-la-Manzana6, 

Isabel Román-Martínez1,7    

1. Grupo de Ingeniería Biomédica, Universidad de Sevilla, Sevilla, 41092, Spain  

2. Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red en Bioingeniería, Biomateriales y 

Nanomedicina (CIBER-BBN), Spain 

3. Servicio de Nefrología. Hospital Universitario Virgen Macarena. Sevilla, Spain. 

4. Servicio de Nefrologia. Hospital Universitario Nuestra Señora de Candelaria. Santa 

Cruz de Tenerife, Spain. 

5. Servicio de Nefrología. Hospital Universitario Doctor Negrín. Las Palmas de Gran 

Canaria, Spain. 

6. Servicio de Nefrología. Hospital Clínico San Carlos. Madrid, Spain. 

7. Departamento de Telemática, Universidad de Sevilla, Spain. 

2. Materials and methods 

2.1. Study case: e-Health system for renal patients at home 

The system e-Nefro is the result of a multicentre research project between the University of 

Sevilla and five Spanish hospitals. Its objective is easing the monitoring of renal patients at 

home through an e-Health system adaptable to different kind of users and scenarios [18]. 

One of the first activities was the specification of the target audiences (by adopting the code of 

practice of ISO/IEC 30071-1 [19]), including disabled and older users alongside non-disabled 

users. For the analysis of user accessibility needs of the target audiences in appropriate contexts 

of use, semi-structured interviews with nephrologists were performed. In addition, patients and 

caregivers were consulted through specific questionnaires to understand their experiences in the 

hospitals. Several accessibility standards were analysed for extracting design requirements of 

user interfaces for people with limitations. For example, the standard ISO 29138 [20] on needs

of users with disabilities, the Spanish standard UNE 139803 [21] for accessible web content 

(inspired by the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines, WCAG 2.0 [22]) and the standard ISO 

9241 [23][24] for tactile devices.  

A methodological approach based on user centred design [25] and agile development process 

practices was adopted [26]. Involvement of users in all stages of design and development eases 

the product final to be flexible enough to adapt itself to the needs, uses, and preferences of each 

user no matter his/her characteristics (i.e., accessibility). A continuous evaluation based on user 

during design and development stages were also included. 

3. Results 

3.1. User identification and requirements 

Fig. 1 shows target audiences identified. Although patient and clinician are the main end-users 

of any e-Health system, formal/informal caregiver and nurse may also play relevant roles in 

remote healthcare, and their requirements must to be considered. Furthermore, technology 

literacy and access may influence the deployment of solutions and acceptance by patients and 

caregivers. So, individuals should be divided in digital and non-digital sub-populations. 

Semi-structured interviews and questionnaires were performed to health professionals, patients 

and caregivers with the objective of understanding their real needs and translating them to 

requirements [18]. Table 1 shows technological specifications and initial requirements extracted 

from users to design the e-Health system. Besides requirements of each kind of end-user, any 

user may present impairments and disabilities that hinder the effective usability of non-adapted 

technology systems. Thus, accessibility requirements must be considered in parallel for any 

kind of user, and the standards referred above are a good starting point. In addition, standards 

ease the extension and translation of the final product to other scenarios and countries.  

Requirements served for the conception of an initial system design and the development of a 

low-fidelity prototype (by adopting an iterative process of design and incremental development 

based on periodic revisions). User validation of this prototype allowed assessing usability and 

functionality of the system e-Nefro, and several issues raised in this stage.

Fig. 1. Target audience of the system e-Nefro and developed modules devoted to each group 

Two main usability issues of the low-fidelity prototype made hard the completion of tasks (such 

as access to monitoring records or introduce measures of physiological variables) and 

discouraged to any user: an abrupt learning curve and an excessive navigation across different 

screens to exploit system functionality. Both patients and professionals unanimously 

emphasized the need of simplifying the navigation through the system and making it as intuitive 

as possible. Furthermore, most patients and clinicians were interested in being provided with a 

mobile app devoted to the system e-Nefro as alternative access method.  

This identification of requirements led to new development iterations, resulting in a high-level 

prototype of the e-Nefro system consisting in six modules (Fig. 1): (1) web and (2) mobile app 

for digital patients/caregivers (i.e., AppNephro), (3) access module based on interactive voice 

response (IVR) for non-digital patients/caregivers, (4) web and (5) mobile app for clinicians, 

and (6) web for nurses. All modules work together to provide a shared service. Thus, no matter

what module is used to access to the system or to store/retrieve information since data of 

patients and care plans is stored in a shared database.   

Table 1. Initial user requirements and technological specifications 

3.2. The system e-Nefro: e-Health system adapted to users and contexts of use 

A. e-Nefro for digital patients/caregivers 

Digital patients and caregivers can access the system e-Nefro through a web application or an 

Android-based app (AppNephro). Both channels allow a patient (or his/her caregiver) to check 

pending activities on his/her treatment plan (i.e., medication intake, vital signs measurement, 

medical appointments…) and to introduce information about its performance. In addition, 

he/she can inform about risk events or contact his/her health carer. The web access provides a 

friendly interface with some elements that ease navigation (Fig. 2). For example, when the 

patient logs in his/her pending activities are showed at the entrance screen with no need to 

search for them. Furthermore, the side agenda allows consulting activities to perform in 

previous and future days, shows next medical encounters, and warns if any monitoring data has 

not been introduced in previous days.

Fig. 2. Screen for the follow-up of patient’s care plan 

The mobile access is provided by the AppNephro, an Android-based application where 

accessibility and usability are addressed through the inclusion of the following capabilities: (1) 

interface customization regarding user needs; (2) remote change of accessibility settings by an 

administrator, if user needs help; and (3) the possibility of making calls and managing contact 

list in an accessible environment. Fig. 3 shows various screenshots of the AppNephro. This has 

several configuration options to customize the interface to user preferences and limitations. 

Accessibility options chosen are stored in the application and automatically incorporated into 

the interface during the execution of patient’s care plan. 

 

Fig. 3. Screenshots of AppNephro (left to right: setting menu, home screen, and temperature input)

AppNephro validation was carried out iteratively and consisted of two parts: accessibility test 

and usability test. The former focused on evaluating the customization options, and the latter 

sought to assess the ease of use and performance of the care plan, once AppNephro was 

configured according to user preferences. A controlled sample of users was involved in the 

preliminary assessment, covering different ages, vision and hearing limitations, and 

technological skills (Table 2). The realization of these tests was repeated during the design and 

implementation of AppNephro until at least 75% of average rating in both phases, resulting in 

the first prototype of AppNephro shown in Fig. 3. The most relevant findings obtained during 

the validation process are described below. 

Table 2. Characteristics of participants in assessment tests 

Man 
70 
Visual 
Low 

Woman 
66 
Visual and Auditory 
Null 

Man 
61 
Visual 
Medium-Low 

Woman 
55 
Visual, difficulties of understanding 
Low-Null 

Firstly, a practical presentation was performed for each participant in the test of how to adjust 

the application to suit his/her personal preferences, and how to access to general functionalities 

of the phone (e.g. making calls or managing contacts). Then the participant was asked to 

undertake by itself a number of configuration changes such as changing the orientation of the 

screen, adjusting text size or selecting colours.  

After performing these tasks, participants completed an evaluation questionnaire including 

questions pondering both simplicity of use as impressions of users in its management. The result 

of this first test was successful, and the consensus was unanimous in assessing the accessibility 

of the application (Table 3). These results are consistent with the design methodology adopted 

that conforms international standards of e-accessibility, actively involved users in the process of 

design and development, as well as specifying the accessibility requirements the application. 

Table 3. Sample of questionnaire of AppNephro customization assessment

Do you consider it is easy to… 

…modify customizable settings? 

 

Yes (75%) 

 

No (0%) 

 

Only a few (25%) 

… make calls? 
Yes (100%) 
No (0%) 
I don’t know (0%) 

… see, add, edit or delete contacts? 
Yes (100%) 
No (0%) 
I don’t know (0%) 

… initiate the care plan? 
Yes (100%) 
No (0%) 
I don’t know (0%) 

In general, do you consider the smart device is easy 

to use? 

Very easy (75%) 
Easy (25%) 

Would you know use AppNephro without prior help? 
Yes: 25% 
No: 0% 
I don’t know: 75% 

Do you consider AppNephro is accessible for people 

with limitations? 

Yes:100% 
No: 0% 
I don’t know: 0% 

A second validation stage took place on the same sample of users and was based on 

accessibility settings made in the previous step. However, it is worthy to mention that the 

configuration may be performed remotely by the administrator, for greater patient comfort. 

Since the previous survey concluded that the participants showed hesitant to test AppNephro 

without help, this stage began by performing a practical showing. Thus, it was explained how to 

enter the physiological parameters requested by the care plan and symptoms. Then the 

participants were required to perform the following tasks: launching the app, registering a set of 

physiological variables, introducing symptom "fever", and finally making a video call.  

After completion of the tests, participants performed a more extensive questionnaire, addressing 

the most relevant elements of the application relating to the care plan. The results were positive, 

with an acceptance rate above 90%, but all participants were opposed to replace face medical 

consultations by the application. This confirms the suitability of harmonizing m-Health 

solutions as AppNephro with standard medical practices in order to complement healthcare 

delivery.  

B. e-Nefro for non-digital patients/caregivers 

Patients with low technology literacy or access, low economic level, or living in remote 

geographic areas are often excluded as potential recipient of brand new healthcare approaches 

based on technology. Non-digital end-users should be considered as a population with specific

requirements. Furthermore, chronic kidney disease has a high incidence on older and diabetic 

populations, what are often technology reluctant audiences. 

The system e-Nefro provides an access module for patients based on telephone network. 

Patients or caregivers introduce monitoring data through the telephone where the only interface 

is the physical keyboard. A system of Interactive Voice Response (IVR) guides users through 

the process. The IVR system can receive a call and interacting with the patient through voice 

recordings and the recognition of simple responses, such as "yes", " no" or other. It is an 

automated interactive response system, aimed at delivering or capturing information through the 

telephone, allowing access to information services, purchase, reservations and other operations, 

including its use in health services [27][28]. Fig. 4 shows the architecture of the IVR module. A 

calendar submodule allows to recover appointments and reminders for the patient from e-Nefro 

and transform them into voice to call the patient when the programmed date comes.  

 
Fig. 4. Architecture of the e-Nefro IVR module for non-digital patients and caregivers 

C. e-Nefro for health professionals 

Clinicians can access the system e-Nefro through the main web application or an Android-based 

app. The web application is analogous to patients’ but with different functionality. Clinicians

can modify the care plan of patients, monitor their evolution and contact them. In the validation 

stage, health professionals stated out the simplicity of this prototype to create registers into the 

patient’s care plan and to access to planned encounters. The medical encounter screen includes 

accesses to all the information that can be of interest in the encounter such as the patient’s care 

plan, clinical registries, incidences, and personal message exchanged between the patient and 

the professional (Fig. 5).  

 
Fig. 5. Medical encounter screen in the e-Nefro web application 

Information generated during the medical encounter can be included in three different fields: 

one shared with the patient (who can consult it afterwards to clear the conclusions of the 

encounter and indications of his/her clinicians), one for the clinicians’ observations (with access 

limited to medical doctors), and another one for collecting nurses’ observations (that can be 

checked by any health professional).  The mobile app for clinicians was developed to serve as 

complementary access methods for the remote follow-up by professionals (Fig. 6).  

Finally, nurses are provided with a web application with limited functionality. They can make 

appointments, review monitoring data of patients and contact them, meanwhile the modification 

of the patient care plan and generation of reports are out of their scope.

Fig. 1. Screenshots of e-Nefro app for clinicians (left to right: main menu, patient menu, and patient data) 

4. Discussion 

User involvement in design and evaluation stages is common in the health domain, but user 

contributions are often dismissed in the implementation process what results in systems facing 

user refusal since they are not aligned enough to the healthcare delivery or present a limited 

usability. Furthermore, most e-Health systems are used by different kind of users with separate 

needs and/or roles (e.g., nurses and clinicians or patients and caregivers) what leads to the 

imperative of considering their requirements separately.  

As drawback, user involvement in all the development stages of an e-health system increases 

the complexity of the process. Working with a multidisciplinary team inevitably slows down 

system development due to the necessity of reaching a common understanding. A further issue 

is the continuous reconciliation between desires, preferences and needs of different kind of users 

and technology that imposes limits on the cost-efficiency of the product. Involving users 

requires to agree on every decision on system development by establishing balances among user 

needs and desires, technology possibilities and costs. Meanwhile avoiding users in such 

technological decisions results in increasing the refusal rate of the final product, involving them 

requires an additional effort to close them to technology reality. 

Currently, the system e-Nefro has been deployed in five Spanish hospitals to perform a pilot in 

real settings. The objective of this pilot is evaluating how an e-health system for remote

monitoring of renal patients at home can increase the quality of life and commodity of patients 

meanwhile reduce costs for displacements and hospital stays.   

5. Conclusions 

There is an increasing understanding of the relevance of adopting user-centred design and 

development techniques in the health sector. However, users are often assumed to be a 

homogeneous group with the same set of requirements. In this work, the study case of an e-

Health system for renal patients at home has been presented, where users are categorized in four 

different groups (i.e., digital patients/caregivers, non-digital patients/caregivers, clinicians and 

nurse). User requirements of each group have been analysed and different modules have been 

developed to coping with them, resulting in a multi-faceted e-Health system currently in 

piloting. Identification and continuous involvement of users allow their needs to be properly 

understood and addressed by technology, raising user acceptance of the final product.