Human-Centered Design of Team Health IT for Pediatric Trauma 
Care Transitions

Pascale Carayon1,2, Bat-Zion Hose1,2,3, Abigail Wooldridge4, Thomas B. Brazelton III5,6, 
Shannon M. Dean7, Ben L. Eithun5, Michelle M. Kelly5,6, Jonathan E. Kohler8, Joshua 
Ross5,6,9, Deborah A. Rusy5,10, Peter L.T. Hoonakker2

1Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, University of Wisconsin-Madison

2Wisconsin Institute for Healthcare Systems Engineering, University of Wisconsin-Madison

3Department of Anesthesiology and Critical Care at the Perelman School of Medicine, University 
of Pennsylvania

4Department of Industrial and Enterprise Systems Engineering, University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign

5American Family Children’s Hospital, UW Health

6Department of Pediatrics, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health

7Department of Pediatric Medicine, St Jude’s Hospital

8Department of Surgery, UC Davis Children’s Hospital

9Department of Emergency Medicine, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public 
Health

10Department of Anesthesiology, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health

Objective: To describe the HCD process used to develop a usable team health IT (T3 or 
Teamwork Transition Technology) that provides cognitive support to pediatric trauma care teams 
during care transitions from the emergency department to the operating room and the pediatric 
intensive care unit.

Methods: The HCD process included seven steps in three phases of analysis, design activities 
and feedback.

Results: The HCD process involved multiple perspectives and clinical roles that were engaged 
in inter-related activities, leading to design requirements, i.e., goals for the technology, a set of 47 
information elements, and a list of HFE design principles applied to T3. Results of the evaluation 
showed a high usability score for T3.

Conclusions: HFE can be integrated in the HCD process through a range of methods and design 
principles. That design process can produce a usable technology that provides cognitive support to 
a large diverse team involved in pediatric trauma care transitions. Future research should continue 
to focus on HFE-based design of team health IT.

3. Methods

Table 1 provides an overview of the HCD steps and their main outcomes. HFE researchers 
organized the HCD process with the help of a design team that included seven clinicians 
who represented multiple perspectives involved in pediatric trauma care: emergency 
medicine, surgery, anesthesia, intensive care medicine, nursing & trauma management, 
hospitalist, and medical informatics.

3.1. Step 1 – SEIPS Analysis of Pediatric Trauma Care Transitions

Using the SEIPS (Systems Engineering Initiative for Patient Safety) model [24, 25] and 
process modeling [26], we analyzed data on pediatric trauma care transitions between the 
ED, OR and PICU [20] and data from the pediatric trauma registry to characterize the 
complexity of these transitions [16]. The extensive analysis of work system barriers and 
facilitators is reported in a separate publication [20] and shows that the dimension of ‘team 
cognition’ was most frequently cited by the interviewees. The main decision of Step 1 
was the focus on sociotechnical solutions to support team cognition of distributed pediatric 
trauma care teams who manage children during ED-OR-PICU care transitions.

3.2. Step 2 – Identification of Sociotechnical Solutions

Using interview data from Step 1, we identified sociotechnical solutions to support team 
cognition. Based on the SEIPS analysis, the list of sociotechnical solutions, and literature 
on integrated displays for health care teams [11, 27], the design team decided to develop a 
patient status board to support team cognition during ED-OR-PICU transitions.

3.3. Step 3 – Collaborative Design Sessions

The collaborative design process consisted of 4 design sessions with the 7 clinicians of the 
design team (Table 2). A core group of 4 HFE researchers prepared and facilitated the design 
sessions; 2 additional HFE students helped when necessary. When designing a team health 
IT, a challenge is to decide which information elements to display on the technology to 
provide cognitive support to the entire team. Therefore, we organized the design sessions 
to facilitate this decision-making, e.g. using a survey of the design team on information 
elements. The iterative collaborative design produced about 20 different versions of T3. At 
the end of each design session, we administered a survey to get just-in-time feedback from 
the design team about the quality of the design sessions.

3.4. Step 4 – Individual Feedback from Clinicians

During the collaborative design sessions (step 3), we produced multiple version of T3, 
including a mock-up in Adobe InDesign that was evaluated in Step 4. In collaboration with 
the clinicians on the design team, we developed a clinical scenario to show how T3 would 
evolve over the course of the scenario. The scenario was integrated in the collection of data 

on usability of T3 and qualitative comments on the cognitive support offered by T3 and 
its impact on patient safety. Four clinicians from the design team who represented medical 
perspectives from the ED, OR and PICU participated in this step. We used the SUS (System 
Usability Scale) [28] to gather quantitative usability data. The SUS is a reliable tool for 
measuring usability of products and services. It consists of 10 questions with a response 
scale from 1–5 that can be recoded into a usability scale from 0 (low usability) to 100 (high 
usability).

3.5. Step 5 – Input from Nursing Leadership

We gathered input on T3 from hospital nursing leadership in two meetings. The first 
meeting occurred between design sessions 3 and 4; nursing leaders reviewed a version of 
the T3 mock-up and provided feedback. They suggested a few design changes, including 
displaying weight in kilogram and providing additional information on blood products. We 
also discussed the impact of T3 on patient safety as nursing leaders expressed concern 
about the accuracy of the displayed information on T3. This led us to add a step in the 
HCD process and conduct a patient safety analysis (step 6). At the second meeting, nursing 
leaders reviewed the evaluation plan and suggested to add surgical technicians to the sample 
for Step 7.

3.6. Step 6 – Patient Safety Analysis

We conducted a proactive risk assessment (PRA) of T3, which is described in a separate 
publication [18]. We first identified vulnerabilities of T3 that could lead to patient 
safety problems. Then, through a voting process, we focused on three vulnerabilities 
with the highest patient safety consequences and discussed possible solutions. The main 
vulnerabilities were related to (1) reliability of information displayed on T3, (2) unidentified 
patients appearing younger, and (3) visibility of protected health information.

3.7. Step 7 – Evaluation of Mock-up of T3

We conducted a scenario-based evaluation of the T3 mock-up with 36 participants. Details 
on the methodology are reported in Hoonakker et al. [19]. We used the SUS [28] to evaluate 
T3 usability, which had a Cronbach alpha score of 0.90.

3.8. Overall HCD Process for T3

The entire HCD process was spread over 30 months (Figure 2). As described in Table 1, it 
included diverse inter-related activities in seven distinct steps. The first two steps of analysis 
produced data that were used in subsequent steps of design activities and feedback. Steps 
3–7 helped to define the T3 design requirements and produce the final mock-up of T3.

4. Results

4.1 Feedback on Design Sessions

The feedback survey after each of the design sessions showed that, on a scale from 1 (poor) 
to 5 (excellent), the four co-design sessions were rated between 4 and 5. On a scale from 
1 (not useful) to 5 (very useful), the sessions were rated between 4 and 5. Qualitative 

comments highlighted the importance of “multidisciplinary input from several different 
services involved in trauma” and the consideration of different perspectives. Challenges 
included time constraints as meetings were scheduled for only 1 hour and not all clinicians 
could fully participate in all design sessions.

4.2. Design Goals for T3

An outcome of Steps 1 and 2 of the HCD process was the agreement on developing a 
technology for care team members involved in ED-OR-PICU transitions. The design team 
identified that the main goal of T3 was to support team cognition and shared mental models 
in these transitions for pediatric trauma patients [20]. During the collaborative design of Step 
3, the design team iteratively developed the following specific design goals of T3:

1.
to provide timely, up-to-date summary of information about patient status to 
distributed care team members during patient transition from ED to OR and 
PICU.

2.
to support communication, coordination and anticipation between sending (ED) 
and receiving (OR, PICU) units, such as when the OR or PICU is ready to 
receive the patient, if the patient is still in the ED, and what medications need to 
be prepared.

3.
to help identify care team members involved in the ED to OR and PICU 
transitions.

4.3. Information Elements on T3

A challenge of the HCD process was deciding which information elements to include on 
T3, especially given the various users and roles with different information needs. Decisions 
about which information elements to include on T3 were made by the design team during 
the four collaborative design sessions (step 3). This was an iterative process with multiple 
activities, such as voting on information elements during the first design session and 
discussing results of the survey on information elements during the third design session 
(see Table 2). The final version of T3 (see Figure 3), which was evaluated in Step 7, includes 
47 information elements in 10 categories (see Appendix for the complete list of information 
elements):

1.
patient information

2.
information about what happened prior to admission

3.
information on the patient family or caregiver

4.
time elapsed since the injury and in the ED

5.
current status of the patient

6.
information on the mannequin

7.
information on the timeline: e.g. start and stop times of CPR, vital signs

8.
members of the care team

9.
status of the transition to OR

10.
status of the transition to PICU.

4.4. HFE Design Principles for T3

A key output of the HCD process was a list of HFE principles that were applied to T3. The 
HFE design principles emerged iteratively with input from clinicians involved in pediatric 
trauma care transitions (steps 1, 2, 4 and 6), collaborative design (step 3), and hospital 
leadership meetings (step 5). Because the goal of T3 was to support team cognition during 
care transitions, a major design principle was situation awareness. The structure of T3 was, 
therefore, organized around three panels of (1) what happened to the child and background 
information (left panel), (2) current status (middle panel), and (3) next steps of transition 
to the OR, PICU or floor (right panel), as well as a timeline in the bottom part. Because 
HFE researchers organized the HCD process, they used their expertise and knowledge of the 
literature to also provide input to the design process and the list of HFE design principles. 
For instance, we integrated several usability heuristics [29, 30] in the design of T3 such as 
consistency and minimization of workload. Safety is another important usability heuristic, 
which was also emphasized by nursing leaders (step 5) and included in the list of design 
principles. The design principles for T3 addressed all three domains of cognitive, physical 
and organizational HFE (see Table 4).

4.5. Usability Evaluation

Usability of T3 was first evaluated in individual feedback sessions with 4 clinicians (step 
4). The SUS scores varied from 60 to 98 with a mean of 85 and a standard deviation of 
14. When asked to describe three things they liked about T3, clinicians mentioned that 
T3 displayed a lot of well-organized information that showed trends and provided timely 
updates on the patient status in a single display. Two of the four clinicians mentioned that 
some text boxes had a lot of information, e.g. detailed information on individual physicians. 
This feedback was used to revise the T3 mock-up.

Table 5 provides information on participants in the second usability evaluation conducted 
in Step 7. Most were positive about T3 (Figure 4). The overall mean SUS score for T3 was 
74.4, which is above the cut-off score for “good” (71.4) but below excellent (85.5) [31].

5. Discussion

This study shows how an HCD process can produce a usable health IT (T3 or Teamwork 
Transition Technology) for multiple team members involved in pediatric trauma care 
transitions. We provided a detailed description of the HCD process, which is rarely done 
especially for the design of team health IT. The HCD process unfolded over 30 months with 
activities aimed at analyzing pediatric trauma care transitions, co-designing the technology 
with clinicians, and gathering and integrating feedback from multiple stakeholders. The 
seven steps of the HCD process led to the creation of a technology mock-up with high 
usability.

5.1 Participation of Multiple Perspectives via Multiple Methods

Designing team health IT can be particularly challenging because team members have 
different information needs. In this study, we paid particular attention to the systematic 
integration of multiple perspectives in the design process. This was accomplished with both 
direct and indirect user participation in all phases of the HCD process (i.e., analysis, design 
and feedback), using multiple methods.

User participation in an HCD process for technology design can take different forms, such 
as direct participation in decision-making for technology design and indirect participation 
via data collection [32]. While users of T3 were involved directly in the technology design 
process as seven clinicians participated in the design team and made decisions about the 
design of T3, others were involved indirectly in multiple stages of the HCD process. For 
instance, in Step 1, we interviewed 18 clinicians involved in the ED-OR-PICU pediatric 
trauma care transitions; interview data were used to define the goals of T3. Users were 
also involved in the patient safety analysis of Step 6 and the evaluation of the T3 mock-
up in Step 7. Involving all groups of users along with other stakeholders (e.g. nursing 
leadership, trauma management) is critical for developing a usable technology [33], but 
can be challenging. For instance, in Step 3 of collaborative design, not all clinicians 
were able to participate in all design sessions; this is a major challenge for participatory 
methods in health care as clinicians are busy with clinical responsibilities. This calls for the 
development of efficient design methods [34]. Because not all groups of users were directly 
involved in the design of T3, it is possible that important input may have been missed. While 
we found a high usability score for T3 in Step 7, a few survey respondents provided negative 
feedback. For instance, 23% of survey respondents either disagree (6%) or neither agree or 
disagree (17%) with the statement on overall satisfaction with T3. In informal debriefings 
after the usability evaluation, some participants indicated that T3 may not be useful in the 
trauma bay, in particular if the trauma chief says things out loud and help everyone maintain 
a shared mental model. Other negative feedback related to the issue of information accuracy, 
which was also identified in the patient safety analysis of Step 6. These issues are important 
to address in the next phase of design and implementation of T3.

The participatory HCD process integrated multiple perspectives through multiple methods 
and mechanisms: interviews (steps 1 and 2), design sessions (step 3), individual feedback 
(steps 4, 5 and 7) and a structured PRA or proactive risk analysis (step 6). This variety of 
participatory approaches ensured that multiple perspectives provided input in all stages of 
the HCD process. In particular, the co-design sessions (step 3) allowed for collaboration 
among different clinical roles; therefore, facilitating the emergence and integration of 
multiple perspectives through discussion, confrontation and convergence [35].

5.2 Integrating HFE in Team Health IT Design

Our study showed how HFE can be integrated into the process of team health IT design, i.e., 
through the use of HFE methods and the application of HFE design principles. Our HCD 
process included the following HFE methods: SEIPS analysis (step 1), co-design sessions 
(step 3), feedback and usability evaluation of T3 mock-ups (steps 4 and 7), and proactive 
risk analysis (step 6). Experts recommend the use of multiple and mixed HFE methods, in 

particular in health IT design [36, 37]. Both quantitative and qualitative data are needed 
to develop a usable technology [38]. In our study, we collected both quantitative survey 
data (i.e. SUS or System Usability Scale [28]) and qualitative interview data in Steps 4 
(individual feedback from 4 clinicians) and 7 (scenario-based evaluation of T3 mock-up with 
36 clinicians).

The HFE discipline has developed a large compendium of “principles” [39], in particular 
for designing usable technologies. In the cognitive HFE domain, design principles include 
usability heuristics [29, 40]. In the physical HFE domain, design of technologies tackles 
visual access and physical dimensions. In the organizational HFE domain, technologies 
need to fit with organizational and team processes. In this study, we produced HFE 
design principles for T3 (see Table 4), which cover the domains of cognitive (i.e. situation 
awareness, visual support, information integration and interpretation, minimization of 
workload), physical (i.e. physical and visual access) and organizational (i.e. consistency and 
safety) HFE. These design principles emerged with input from clinicians and nursing leaders 
and integrated expertise of the HFE researchers. Because HFE researchers were actively 
involved in the HCD process, they provided an important perspective as well as knowledge 
of HFE design. The list of design principles in Table 4 may be applicable to other team 
health IT, e.g. integrated displays and status boards.

5.3 Adaptability of HCD Process

We adapted the HCD process from the ISO [21], which has similarities with the process 
Schiro et al. [12] applied to design a pediatric ED patient prioritization tool. We conducted 
a SEIPS analysis of care transitions, similar to the work system analysis of Schiro and 
colleagues. Another similarity was the evaluation stage; we conducted an evaluation of 
the T3 mock-up and Schiro et al. conducted user testing of their mock-up and prototype. 
Our HCD process was based on the co-design model [35], which included a series of four 
collaborative design sessions in which clinicians were directly involved in designing the 
team health IT. Schiro et al. presented their mock-up to a multidisciplinary focus group for 
feedback and design suggestions, which is more closely aligned with a user-centered design 
process and indirect participation [22].

Feedback in HCD is critical. Similar to Schiro et al. [12], our HCD process included 
multiple feedback loops, in particular between Steps 3 to 7 in the phases of design activities 
and feedback (Figure 1). For instance, 4 clinicians provided feedback on an early mock-up 
of T3 (step 4), which was discussed in a design session (step 3) and led to revisions to the 
design. Iterative feedback is important as many different opinions and perspectives need to 
be assessed and integrated during the design process.

The HCD process itself is adaptable and may change over time. We adapted the HCD 
process as we gathered input, in particular from nursing leadership (step 5). We conducted 
the proactive risk analysis (step 6) after nursing leaders expressed concern about the safety 
of T3, which could provide wrong or delayed information. Safety was one of the HFE 
design principles of T3 (see Table 4). This analysis will be particularly important in the 
implementation of T3: issues of where the data come from will need to be addressed. In 
a separate analysis, we found that about 90% of the information elements on T3 could be 

found in the EHR; the proactive risk analysis brought up the important issue of reliability of 
and timely access to information in the EHR.

5.4 Limitations

Our study provides detailed information on an HCD process; however, we did not compare 
our process and its outcome to a non-HCD process or to another form of HCD. Such 
comparative studies could be useful, but may be difficult to practically conduct. Our study 
adds to the literature on the benefits of HCD and integration of HFE methods and design 
principles. Finally, because we developed and evaluated a technology mock-up, we do not 
have information on the actual use of the technology. Evaluation after implementation is 
critical to fully assess the fit of the technology in the entire work system and workflow.

6. Conclusion

We showed how an HCD process integrated multiple HFE methods, applied design 
principles in the cognitive, physical and organizational HFE domains, and produced a 
usable team health IT. Integrating multiple perspectives in the design process is particularly 
important as T3, or Teamwork Transition Technology, aims to support the work of a large, 
distributed team involved in pediatric trauma care transitions. Future research should focus 
on the design of team health IT as patient care is increasingly performed by fluid teams that 
are often distributed spatially, organizationally and temporally.