Original Paper

Development of the Shift Smartphone App to Support the
Emotional Well-Being of Junior Physicians: Design of a Prototype
and Results of Usability and Acceptability Testing

Isabelle Counson1,2, MPH, GradDipPsychAdv; Alexandra Bartholomew1, BCom (BSc), MPH; Joanna Crawford1,2,
PhD; Katherine Petrie1,2, BSc (Hons); Geetanjali Basarkod3, PhD, BSc (Hons); Victoria Moynihan1, BVA; Josie
Pires1, BSc; Rachel Cohen1, PhD, BSc (Hons), MPsych; Nicholas Glozier4, MBBS, FRANZCP, PhD; Samuel Harvey1,2,
MBBS, MRCGP, MRCPsych, FRANZCP, PhD; Samineh Sanatkar1,2, PhD

1Black Dog Institute, Randwick, Australia
2School of Psychiatry, Faculty of Medicine, UNSW Sydney, Kensington, Australia
3Institute for Positive Psychology and Education, Australian Catholic University, North Sydney, Australia
4Brain and Mind Centre, Faculty of Medicine and Health, University of Sydney, Australia

Samineh Sanatkar, PhD
Black Dog Institute
Hospital Road
Randwick, 2031
Australia
Phone: 1 02 9382 4368

Methods

Overview

There were 4 project phases as follows: phase 1, needs
assessment through qualitative end user interviews; phase 2,
Shift app prototype development; phase 3, pilot-testing of the
Shift app prototype; and phase 4, generation of an updated
version of the Shift app. In preparation for phase 1, consultations
with a range of stakeholders were conducted (including junior
physician managers, providers of support services for junior
physicians, and professional organizations related to junior
physicians in New South Wales) to examine the existing mental
health support services for junior physicians, and facilitators of
and barriers to engagement with these services. This was to
ensure that the app development complemented existing support
and provided up-to-date information on available services.
Furthermore, our broader research team had previously
developed HeadGear, an mHealth app that has been found to
be effective in male-dominated working populations [21,32,33].
The intervention component in HeadGear was delivered in a
30-day challenge
format, which successively unlocked
psychoeducational material, as well as behavioral activation,
goal-setting, and mindfulness techniques. Hence, one option

JMIR Form Res 2021 | vol. 5 | iss. 12 | e26370 | p. 2

available to our team was to utilize the 30-day challenge format
of the evidence-based HeadGear app and to modify the clinical
content to meet the needs of junior physicians. To this end, the
interviews with junior physicians in phase 1 included a question
about their attitudes toward a 30-day challenge in an app to
support the well-being of junior physicians.

Phase 1: Needs Assessment Through Qualitative
Interviews

The objective of the qualitative component of this project was
to inform the design and development of clinical content and
to ensure that the app is tailored to the specific needs,
characteristics, and challenges faced by this unique user group.
Specifically, the interviews aimed to (1) identify the main
stressors and challenges for junior physicians, both at and
outside of work; (2) explore their attitudes toward a mental
health app; (3) identify facilitators of and barriers to their use
of, interest, and engagement in a mental health app; (4) assess
current use of general apps; and, finally, (5) to identify their
suggestions, preferences, and dislikes or unwanted features that
they felt would support junior physicians’ mental health and
well-being. The qualitative component was granted full ethical
approval by the South Eastern Sydney Local Health District
Human Research Ethics Committee (protocol #: 18/140,
HREC/18/POWH/321). A qualitative analysis of the interviews
focusing on the experiences of junior physicians is reported in
detail elsewhere [34]. This paper presents specific app-related
items and findings from interviews.

Participants were recruited from 2 metropolitan hospital sites
in the Sydney area between July and September 2018.
Advertising took place via email invitations distributed by
medical supervisors, through email and social media
announcements to professional organizations related to junior
physicians, and through on-site hospital visits by members of
the research team (JC, KP, and GB); 41 junior physicians
expressed interest in the study, of whom 12 provided written
informed consent and were recruited for one-on-one face-to-face
interviews (conducted by JC). Participants included 9 women
and 3 men aged between 24 and 35 years. The sample was
evenly spread across the early stages of training and comprised
interns (n=3), residents (n=5), and registrars (n=4). The majority

had studied medicine in Australia and were generally 3-5 years
into their clinical training.

Data on app-related items were analyzed using a thematic
analysis approach [35] informed by grounded theory and Massey
emergent approach [36]. In an iterative process undertaken by
one researcher (KP), all transcripts were reviewed closely to
generate an initial first-level coding framework. Through
subsequent refinements through discussion with co-authors,
broader second-level themes related to the app issues were
identified, and subthemes and common suggestions were listed
under each of the 4 main issues of interest, summarized below
in the Results section.

Phase 2: Prototype Development

On the basis of the recommendations made by junior physicians
in the qualitative interviews and consultations with stakeholders
in line with evidence from recent literature [14,17,18], new
clinical content for the Shift app was written by 1 psychologist,
2 clinical psychologists (JC and RC), 2 psychiatrists (SH and
NG), and 1 researcher (GB).

Phase 3: Pilot-Testing

Pilot-testing was conducted in October and November 2019 to
examine the usability and acceptability of the prototype version
of the Shift app. Trends in depression and anxiety symptom
severity, as well as changes in help-seeking intentions before
and after using the Shift app prototype over a 4-week period
were also examined. This study was approved by the South
Eastern Sydney Local Health District Human Research Ethics
Committee (protocol # 2019/ETH00318).

Two New South Wales hospital sites, one regional and one
metropolitan, issued recruitment calls via email messages on
behalf of the research team to junior physicians at the intern,
resident, or registrar levels. The eligibility criteria were current
employment as junior medical officers in New South Wales
and ownership of an internet-enabled smartphone with an Apple
or Android operating system. A total of 52 candidates accessed
the study website, of which 50% (26/52) consented to
participate. A final sample of 22 participants (13/22, 59%
women; mean age 29, SD 4.1 years) entered the pilot study and
completed a baseline assessment. A diagram of the participant
flow is shown in Figure 1.

JMIR Form Res 2021 | vol. 5 | iss. 12 | e26370 | p. 3

Figure 1. Flow chart describing how participants progressed through the pilot study phases.

A baseline questionnaire assessed basic demographic
information (age, gender, level of training, and regional or
metropolitan placement) and symptoms of depression (Patient
Health Questionnaire 9-item) and anxiety (General Anxiety
Disorder scale 7-item) over the past 2 weeks. Participants
indicated their depression and anxiety symptoms on a 4-point
Likert-type response scale ranging from 0 (not at all) to 3
(nearly every day). In addition, participants indicated their
previous and recent help-seeking intentions for mental health
problems (eg, “If you were to develop a mental health issue,
how likely would you be to seek help from a GP or mental
health professional [eg, psychologist/psychiatrist]?”) on an
11-point Likert-type response scale ranging from 0 (not at all
likely) to 10 (very likely). After completion of the baseline
questionnaire, participants were given instructions on how to
download the Shift app onto their mobile phones. The app
automatically recorded usage metrics, such as the number of
log-ins and challenges or sessions completed.

After 1 month, participants were invited via email to complete
a poststudy questionnaire reassessing their current depression
and anxiety symptom levels and help-seeking intentions. At the
poststudy assessment point, participants were further asked to
respond to a battery of purpose-built questions relating to the
usability and acceptability of the Shift app prototype (eg, “Was
the app interesting/engaging?”) on a 5-point Likert-type scale
ranging from 1 (not at all) to 5 (completely) and to the overall
satisfaction rating of the app on a 5-point Likert-type scale

ranging from 1 (low) to 5 (high). A modified version of the
System Usability Scale was also administered to obtain an
objective indication of the overall ease of use of the app.

Phase 4: Shift App Redevelopment

It was anticipated that a final phase of design would be required
after the initial pilot-testing of the Shift app. A series of 3
user-consultation workshops (N=51) at 2 metropolitan hospitals,
driven by a lead user experience designer (VC), helped develop
any final changes and responses to insights gained from the
pilot-testing. The feedback of junior physicians participating in
the workshops was collected using an interactive prototype
containing screen mock-ups and questions aimed at testing
potential changes and solutions.

Results

Phase 1: Needs Assessment Through Qualitative
Interviews

Attitudes Toward a Mental Health App for Junior
Physicians

All participants reported that they owned a smartphone and used
apps multiple times each day. Half of the sample had already
tried at least one mindfulness app, and 2 had previously used a
web-based mental health app. Although the use of work-related
apps was common, the use of such apps was centered on
communication and medical information–seeking and reference

JMIR Form Res 2021 | vol. 5 | iss. 12 | e26370 | p. 4

material. A total of 83% (10/12) participants reported to be very
or somewhat interested in the idea of an app to support the
mental health of junior physicians and provided positive
endorsement for the idea in principle and for its potential to
benefit the population. Most of the participants endorsed use
of the app for both prevention of and early intervention in mental
illness and suggested the inclusion of directions to support and
treatment services for those with more severe mental illness.
Although no participants were directly opposed to the idea of
an mHealth app to support junior physicians’ mental health, 2
participants questioned whether fellow junior physicians would
use an mHealth app or to what extent they would benefit from
it, particularly if physicians were not currently experiencing
symptoms of mental illness (“no one takes their medicine when
they are feeling good”).

App Naming, Content, and Feature Suggestions

Shift was named based on participants’ views that the name of
the app should be unobtrusive and not obviously related to
mental health. This term refers to both shift work, which is one
of the most common stressors in this population, and to shifting
cognitions and behaviors to promote better mental health and
well-being, in line with cognitive behavioral and mindfulness
principles.

Participants made numerous suggestions for clinical app
contents, including mindfulness, sleep strategies, mood
monitoring, behavioral activation, and cognitive therapy
targeting specific situations commonly faced by junior
physicians. The provision of strategies to deal with problematic
work situations was often seen as having a stress-buffering and
destigmatizing effect. A list of recommendations for the broad
content areas provided by participants is presented in Table 1.

Table 1. Qualitative interview participants’ overview of main content recommendations for Shift and whether recommendations were adopted in
successive versions of the app (N=12).

Version 2
Version 1
Recommended content components

✓a
✓
Cognitive behavioral therapy

✓
✓
Sleep hygiene

✓
✓
Mindfulness and stress management

✓
✓
Goal-setting

✓
✓
Pleasant activity scheduling

✓a
✓
Practical lifestyle strategies

✓a
✓
Problematic work situations

Hand over tips for changing terms or hospitals

✓a
Stories from junior physicians

aIndicates an addition or improvement compared with the previous version.

All participants provided positive feedback about the idea of a
30-day challenge, with some reporting that they were more
likely to use this feature as it was time-limited and seemed
achievable with a set end point and small regular goal-oriented
challenges. Several participants suggested graphical feedback

on symptom trackers that compared multiple outcomes over
time to appeal to the scientifically minded. A list of desired
mHealth app features, as expressed by the participant sample,
is presented in Table 2.

JMIR Form Res 2021 | vol. 5 | iss. 12 | e26370 | p. 5

Table 2. Qualitative interview participants’ desired features for Shift and whether recommendations were adopted (N=12).

Version 2
Version 1
Desired features

✓a
✓
Logical, clear app structure with clear user flow

✓a
✓
Simple layout, easy to navigate quickly

✓
✓
Default private option—no linkage to social media

✓a
✓
Quick start option, easy access log in

✓a
✓
Skip function; ability to return to modules later

✓
✓
Provision of both text and audio formats

✓a
✓
Symptom tracker function with graphics showing charts

✓a
✓
At log in, quick tick box of symptom self-assessment

✓a
✓
Centralized access to many things from one place

✓
✓
Notifications and reminders should be optional

aIndicates improvement compared with the previous version.

Facilitators of and Barriers to App Use

The main app use barrier reported by the participants was that
the app would feel like another chore when participants were
already time-poor and working long hours. Although most
participants 
expressed 
concerns 
about 
confidentiality,
deidentification, and minimal information-sharing, 92% (11/12)
of participants reported that they would still provide their name
and email address to register to a mental health app.

The main facilitators of app engagement that the participants
reported were the app being quick and easy to use and having
added-value features that would distinguish the app over others
(that’s targeted to medics, that other apps aren’t going to
address). Most participants reported that they would be happy
to use the app quite frequently, such as every morning or every
few days, but only if the sessions were very brief.

Phase 2: Prototype Development

The Shift app was developed for use in Android and Apple
operating systems. The main features of the app are the
following: (1) therapeutic and psychoeducational modules, (2)
provision of contact details to mental health organizations and
workplace resources, (3) mood and habit tracking, and (4) brief
symptom assessments. Shift delivers content through a variety
of text, audio, video, and graphical displays.

On the basis of previous research on the therapeutic benefits of
cognitive behavioral, mindfulness, and value-based action
components for medical professionals [14,15] and guided by
preferences expressed in phase 1 qualitative interviews, the Shift
app was developed employing cognitive behavioral principles
of thought evaluation (ie, identification, evaluation, and
modification of unhelpful thoughts) and engagement in valued

action (ie, values-consistent patterns of action) adopted from
acceptance and commitment therapy. Relaxation techniques
(eg, progressive muscle relaxation) based on mindfulness and
stress management practices were also incorporated to lessen
the impact of stressful life events or daily stressors. Cognitive
behavioral, value-based, and mindfulness modules were
generated and presented in a 30-day challenge format. Each
challenge was designed to take approximately 3-4 minutes to
complete.

In addition, a suite of psychoeducational modules (sessions)
was developed, including informational content on common
mental health disorders, avenues through which to seek help
for mental health concerns, and suggestions on how to
incorporate relevant strategies, such as how to adjust to shift
work. Psychoeducational content included mental health,
help-seeking, and workplace information, such as depression,
anxiety, mandatory reporting, at home and workplace avenues
for seeking help, workplace bullying, adjusting to rural and
regional placements, exams and interviews, and sleep health.

A tracking tool and symptom screening options were designed
to allow users to capture daily snapshots of how they were faring
and, in the case of the tracking function, build a visual tool to
observe variations in mood and behavioral patterns over time.

The clinical content and design drafts of the app prototype were
modified based on user experience feedback. User experience
experts and psychologists worked with 2 junior physicians to
refine the user pathways, functionality, color palette, and design
and to modify the clinical content (eg, examples of scenarios
used in cognitive therapy). Tables 3 and 4 outline the contents
of the resulting Shift app prototype, which were organized into
challenges and sessions.

JMIR Form Res 2021 | vol. 5 | iss. 12 | e26370 | p. 6

Table 3. Organization of challenge topics in the Shift app prototype version.

Type
Topic name
Therapeutic type and challenge day or days

Mindfulness

Video
Introduction to mindfulness
2

Audios
Seeing the horizon
3

Audios
Grounding anchor
9

Audios
Calming breath
16

Audios
Loving-kindness
20

Audios
Cargo thoughts
24

Audios
Breathing wind
26

Audios
Lapping ocean
28

Value-based

Video
Introduction to values and values as a physician
4

Text
Strive for five
5

Text
Scheduling meaningful actions
6, 12, 17, 21, 27

Cognitive behavioral

Video
Introduction to unhelpful thoughts
7

Text
Unhelpful thoughts
8

Text
Cognitive biases
11

Video
Introduction to thought challenging
14

Text
Thought challenging
15

Text
Worry decision tree
22

Video
Cognitive therapy review
23

Positive psychology

Text
Gratitude
10

Text
Getting active
13

Text
Social support
18

Text
Help a friend
19

Text
100 enjoyable activities
25

Text
Planning for the future
29

General

Text
Checkup
1

Video
Putting it all together
30

JMIR Form Res 2021 | vol. 5 | iss. 12 | e26370 | p. 7

Table 4. Organization of session topics in the Shift app prototype version.

Type
Topic

Sleep and fatigue

Text
Sleep health

Text
Adjusting to shift work

Common mental health problems

Text
Depression

Text
Anxiety

Text
Burnout

Text
Posttraumatic stress

Text
Alcohol and other drugs

Getting help

Text
Get help now

Text
Dealing with intense emotions

Text
How to seek help: workplace avenues

Text
How to seek help: nonworkplace avenues

Text
Mandatory reporting

Common issues for JMOsa

Text
Exams and interviews

Text
Work-life balance

Text
Adjusting to rural and regional placements

Text
Bullying in the workplace

Text
Dealing with the death of a patient

Text
Calling for a consult

Text
Feeling inadequate

aJMO: junior medical officer.

Phase 3: Pilot-Testing

App Acceptability and Usability

As shown in Table 5, the median responses to questions relating
to overall app rating, content understandability, appropriateness,
and usefulness were all on or above the midrange of the response
scales. The overall system usability rating was 84.72 (SD 8.33),
which was above the average score of 70 across technological

tools more generally [37] and comparable with an average score
of 77 reported for common smartphone apps and tablets [38].
Tables 6 and 7 present a breakdown of participants’ usefulness
ratings of Shift challenge and session components. Participants
rated the mindfulness challenges favorably and rated the general
and value-based components least favorably. Among the session
topics, the sleep and fatigue information components received
the highest usefulness ratings, while the other sessions were
rated lower or were not attempted.

Table 5. Pilot trial participants’ responses to the usability and acceptability of the Shift app prototype (N=9)a.

Values, minimum-
maximum
Values, median
(range)
Item

3-5
5 (2)
How well did you understand the content of the app?

2-5
5 (3)
Was the app content appropriate for you?

3-5
4 (2)
Was the app interesting/engaging?

1-3
3 (2)
Do you feel that the app has helped you improve your mental health?

3-5
4 (2)
Would you recommend this app to other junior physicians?

2-5
3 (3)
What is your overall rating of the app?

aResponse scales ranged from 1 to 5.

JMIR Form Res 2021 | vol. 5 | iss. 12 | e26370 | p. 8

Table 6. Pilot trial participants’ usefulness ratings of the Shift app prototype 30-day challenge contents (N=8)a.

Values, minimum-maximum
Values, median (range)
Challenge type and topic nameb

0-5
4 (5)
Mindfulness

0-5
0 (5)
Value-based

0-5
3 (5)
Cognitive behavioral

Positive psychology

0-5
3 (5)
Gratitude

0-5
1.5 (5)
Getting active

0-5
2.5 (5)
Social support

0-4
0 (4)
Help a friend

0-5
3 (5)
Enjoyable activities

0-5
1.5 (5)
Planning for the future

0-4
0 (4)
General

aResponse scales ranged from 0 to 5, where 0 indicates unattempted components, 1 indicates low perceived usefulness, and 5 indicates high perceived
usefulness.
bOnly positive psychology challenge topics were assessed individually because of the distinctiveness of each topic in this category.

Table 7. Pilot trial participants’ usefulness ratings of the Shift app prototype session contents (N=8)a.

Values, minimum-maximum
Values, median (range)
Session type and topic name

Sleep and fatigue

0-5
3 (5)
Sleep health

0-5
3 (5)
Adjusting to shift work

Common mental health problems

0-4
1.5 (4)
Depression

0-5
2.5 (5)
Anxiety

0-5
1.5 (5)
Burnout

0-4
0 (4)
Posttraumatic stress

0-4
0 (4)
Alcohol and other drugs

Getting help

0-4
0 (4)
Intense emotions

0-5
1 (5)
Workplace avenues

0-5
1.5 (5)
Nonworkplace avenues

0-5
0 (5)
Mandatory reporting

Common issues for JMOsb

0-3
0 (3)
Exams and interviews

0-5
1.5 (5)
Work-life balance

0-4
0 (4)
Remote placements

0-5
0 (5)
Workplace bullying

0-5
0 (5)
Death of a patient

aResponse scales ranged from 0 to 5, where 0 indicates unattempted components, 1 indicates low perceived usefulness, and 5 indicates high perceived
usefulness.
bJMO: junior medical officer.

JMIR Form Res 2021 | vol. 5 | iss. 12 | e26370 | p. 9

App Use

Of the 22 participants, 95% (21) downloaded Shift and used the
app at least once. The mean number of log-ins was 5.24 (SD
5.93) and participants spent an average of 28 minutes (SD 52.7)
on the app, although the large SD indicated that there was
considerable variability in use times. The median use time was
11 minutes (range 199.35). Participants completed an average
of 5 challenges (SD 7.75) and spent 3.24 minutes working
through these challenges (SD 4.53). Sessions were used less
frequently (mean 1.81, SD 2.56), and less time was spent on
sessions (mean 1.38, SD 1.46 minutes).

Symptoms Change

Wilcoxon signed-rank tests indicated that depression (Z=−1.38;
P=.168) and anxiety (Z=−1.05; P=.293) scores slightly
decreased, albeit not significantly, and that help-seeking
intentions were largely unchanged (Z=−.38; P=.705) over the
1-month period of app use.

Phase 4: Shift App Redevelopment

On the basis of the results of the pilot, a major redesign of the
prototype was conducted to create a more user-friendly and
user-driven learning experience. The pilot study results indicated
that the first version of the app did not engage junior physicians
sufficiently well, which may have been an important factor
contributing to small effect sizes in symptom change and
help-seeking scores. A series of 3 user-consultation workshops
(N=51) at 2 metropolitan hospitals helped finalize the proposed
changes to the prototype. These were (1) layout and design
improvements, (2) increased personalization and ease of access,
(3) updates of clinical contents, (4) the inclusion of
self-reflection activities, and (5) the adoption of more
meaningful and relatable wording [6].

A streamlined login process with the inclusion of a biometric
security system (ie, fingerprint or face ID authentication) was
incorporated to facilitate use after app download. Personalization

enhancements were achieved through significant changes in the
presentation of the app. Importantly, the 30-day challenge
structure was removed, and challenges and sessions were
organized under a general overview of the topics. In this view,
users were directed to contents through headings named Mental
Health, Getting Help, Lifestyle, and Work. The challenge
concept was maintained by incorporating an option for users to
set their own weekly targets (ie, number of activities to complete
each week) during the app on boarding process. With this new
functionality, users could choose achievable goals relating to
their app use while still encouraging regular use of the app.

The previously limited line-graph tracking function was
completely redesigned to become more interactive and visual,
as well as allowing a new option of work/life balance. To
accommodate these changes, thorough layout and presentation
updates were made, as well as enhancing the interactivity with
a complimentary day-by-day view to show which activities
were completed on which dates. Consistent with the user
experience workshop feedback, new modules on exercise and
diet were incorporated into the app. Two additional modules
were developed in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Informational sessions were extended with the inclusion of
example stories from junior physicians and adjunct brief
empirical evaluations (symptom screeners, for example, the
Patient Health Questionnaire–2-item, General Anxiety Disorder
scale–2-item). Example stories, based on recommendations put
forward by junior physicians in qualitative interviews (Table
1), illustrated mental health challenges and invited users to
elaborate on symptoms. The mHealth app contents were finally
proofread by 2 clinical psychologists, 3 researchers (IC, AB,
and SS), and 1 digital learning designer (JP) to ensure the
provision of up-to-date clinical and psychoeducational contents
in a way that facilitates learning [39,40]. The structure and
design graphical guides of the novel Shift version are provided
in Figure 2.

JMIR Form Res 2021 | vol. 5 | iss. 12 | e26370 | p. 10

Figure 2. Visual examples of the most recent Shift version Home, Topics, Tracking, and Settings screens.

Discussion

Principal Findings

This paper describes the development of an mHealth app, Shift,
designed to support the mental health and help-seeking of junior
physicians. In line with gold standard recommendations on the
importance of user-centered design principles [26], the 4-phased
app development process (ie, semistructured interviews,
prototype development, pilot-testing, and app redevelopment)
focused on a participatory approach to promote effective
engagement and facilitate cognitive, affective, and behavior
changes of junior physicians. Junior physicians were involved
at every stage of this process through qualitative interviews,
user experience workshops, and participation in pilot-testing.
The aim of this approach was to create, deliver, and refine
content in a way that was acceptable, effective, and engaging
to end users.

Pilot-testing revealed several issues with the delivery of in-app
content components to junior physicians. Although a successive,
day-by-day delivery of therapeutic content has been successfully
employed in a previous working population sample [21] and
was generally viewed favorably by junior physicians in
qualitative assessments, preliminary use data indicated that this
format failed to engage junior physicians in practice. Inspection
of app use data revealed that discontinuation of the 30-day
challenge tended to appear around day 5, which was a generally
lower rated, value-based activity. With the 30-day challenge
format, users were unable to skip challenge topics or change
the order of challenges, possibly facilitating the discontinuation
of app use. As a time-poor, well-educated group, junior
physicians may be more insistent on being able to choose their
own modules from other working populations. In addition,
informational sessions were underutilized in comparison to
challenge content, possibly due to their less-prominent

positioning within the app. Feedback on challenge and session
components indicated considerable variability in the favorability
ratings of the contents. This observation highlights 2 key aspects.
First, even when app components are generated based on
qualitative data from focus groups, their use in the real world
needs to be tested. Second, simply modifying the modes of
content delivery (ie, 30-day challenge structure) from one
evidence-based app to suit another working population is not
always successful. To meet the needs of a population of junior
physicians, a new app structure needs to be developed.
Therefore, in phase 4, the app was adjusted with the help of
junior physicians across successive user experience workshops
to enhance the overall experience and encourage engagement.
The main changes included streamlining login and onboarding
procedures and categorizing contents by topics, which allowed
for the personal selection of modules and for an updated design
and learning experience.

Strengths and Limitations

The 4-phase process emphasizes the need for customization for
end users. In line with previous research, this project illustrates
the role of usability testing in the development of a digital
intervention tool [24,41]. Using participatory mixed methods,
such as qualitative and quantitative assessments, to involve end
users at all stages of the product development process was
fundamental in our attempt to create a digital solution that
allowed for the pursuit of multiple outcomes, such as cognitive
behavioral, psychoeducational, or providing contact details to
relevant specialized services [26]. Furthermore, our development
process suggests that user experience and learning designers
are critical in translating methods proven useful in face-to-face
settings in the digital arena. The establishment of a
multidisciplinary team including academics, clinicians, and
digital experts helped incorporate the suggestions and feedback

JMIR Form Res 2021 | vol. 5 | iss. 12 | e26370 | p. 11

put forward by junior physicians into an mHealth app
intervention environment.

This study had several important limitations. First, the Shift
mHealth app has not been evaluated for its effectiveness to date.
Future studies are required to establish whether it is indeed a
useful tool to reduce or prevent the onset of common mental
health symptoms in junior physicians. Similarly, it needs to be
established whether help-seeking intentions or actions improve
after using Shift. Second, although the increased personalization
of the novel Shift version is expected to increase engagement,
the freedom to choose modules may unintentionally facilitate
avoidance behaviors or choice overload and thus potentially
minimize exposure to beneficial content. Thus, use behaviors
and outcomes should be thoroughly inspected to predict which
use patterns constitute effective engagement if such a pathway
indeed exists. Finally, Shift focuses on individual-level change
factors. However, to address distress among junior physicians
in a comprehensive manner, structural change programs
including organization-level solutions are likely to be required

alongside the delivery of interventions directed at an individual,
such as the app [14].

Conclusions

The integration of new technology in the creation of workplace
and personal well-being programs constitutes an easily
accessible and cost-effective approach to addressing mental
health concerns. Digital mental health programs provide a
potential solution to engaging hard-to-reach, time-poor, and
potentially help-seeking averse junior physicians in a way that
does not exasperate confidentiality concerns around discussing
mental health problems face-to-face. To our knowledge, Shift
is the first initiative of its kind in that it aims to deliver mental
health and support resources to junior physicians through
unobtrusive mHealth app technology. This study describes an
innovative, multiphase, and multidisciplinary user-driven design
process that was undertaken to ensure a match between the app
and the needs and barriers faced by junior physicians. Further
research is planned to examine whether Shift proves useful for
a substantial number of junior physicians.