User-centered Design in Time and 
Resource-limited Settings: Enhancing the 
Usability of 'Hearing for Life' (HeLe) Device

Roy O. Dahildahil, MSc,1 Iris Thiele Isip-Tan, MD, MSc,2 Portia Grace F. Marcelo, MD, MPH2 and Lorelie C. Grepo, MSc3

1Medical Informatics Unit, College of Medicine, University of the Philippines Manila
2College of Medicine, University of the Philippines Manila
3University of the Philippines Diliman

Methods

This research is a descriptive study using mixed methods. 
It involved three phases: 1) User Profiling, which involved 
administering questionnaires, 2) Inspiration Phase, which 
involved workflow analysis, participant observation, focus 
group discussion, and expert interview; and 3) Ideation Phase, 
which involved design and testing of prototypes. 
The self-administered questionnaire was adopted 
from Venkatesh and was pre-tested to nurses and a doctor 
from a different RHU before data collection to ensure 
understandability and clarity of the data gathering tool. This 
questionnaire was used to obtain demographic data such as 
age, sex, educational attainment, medical experiences, list of 
ICTs owned at home or work, level of ICT use by describing 
how often do they use certain ICTs, and their attitudes 
towards ICT use where they are asked if they agree or not 
agree on ICTs relative advantage, compatibility, complexity 
among others.14 It was self-administered considering the 
time and availability of the HCWs. Cronbach's Alpha was 
processed using Cronbach Alpha (v1.0.5) in Free Statistics 
Software (v1.2.1).15 Site visits were conducted to document 
RHU workflow and interaction of the users to available 
technologies. The user profile provided insight whether 
certain demographics prefer particular requirements. 
In the inspiration phase, card-sorting activity, adapted 
from IDEO.org, was used as a priming activity to make the 
health workers more comfortable in the discussion.9 List of 
words were written on the cards and the users were asked 
to arrange them in order of priority based on how they 
understood each word. The words used in the activity were: 
Training, Instructions, User-friendly, Simplicity, Accuracy, 
Understandability, Feedback, Readability, Speed, Security, 
Error-detection, Privacy, Consistency, Durability, Brightness, 
and Color. There were no correct or wrong answers in 
arranging the cards, what mattered was how the participants 
explained how the cards were sorted.
Guided discussions were then conducted to elicit 
requirements. Requirements were ranked using the MoSCoW 
(Must, Should, Could, and Won’t Have) prioritization matrix.9 
‘Must Haves' are the important and vital requirements that 

41

the HeLe device must have; ‘Should Haves’ are important 
requirements but not vital; ‘Could haves’ are wanted or 
desirable but not important; and 'Won’t have this time’ are 
requirements that are not important and not vital. Technical 
specifications from an audiologist in the regional hospital 
in Iloilo also helped ensure the requirements and execution 
of the HeLe device are aligned with their clinical practice 
guidelines. 
Insights gathered from the user profile and inspiration 
phase guided the design prototypes for the ideation phase. 
In the ideation phase, three low-fidelity prototypes, in the 
form of paper drawings and cut-outs, were shown to the 
HCWs. They walked through each of the pages and were 
asked to comment or suggest in terms of design, content, 
or function, which of the designs were preferred and not 
preferred. They were also asked the level of priority of each 
requirement. Frequently requested must-have and should-
have features were noted and translated to design solutions. 
After incorporating the feedback, it was rendered to a mobile 
version mock-up (medium fidelity prototype) and deployed 
in a mobile tablet with dimensions almost similar to the 
HeLe device's. Adobe XD version 17.0.12.11, a free Adobe 
software, was used to develop the mock-ups. This software 
was used as it is free and readily available. 
A task list was prepared to ensure the users will cover 
all steps. Successful tasks, failed tasks, common errors, and 
feedback by the users were documented and analyzed. 
After completing the task lists, System Usability Scale were 
administered to gauge the system's usability level.
Six rural health units (RHU) involved in the HeLe 
research program were purposively selected for the study. 
Three HeLe target sites in Iloilo (Igbaras, Tigbauan, and 
Tubungan); and three non-HeLe target (Miagao, San 
Joaquin, Guimbal) were selected. The non-HeLe target sites 
were purposively selected as they are in close proximity tof 
the three target sites and belong to the same district. Thirty 
participants, i.e., five (5) RHU health workers led by their 
Municipal Health Officer (MHO) per RHU, were recruited in 
the study. The other four HCWs were selected by the MHOs 
based on availability and role in the RHUs. This satisfies the 
sample size recommendations for the different phases of 
the research in conducting user research methods striking a 
balance between rigor and practicality.16 Sample size should 
be 12-20 participants for user research methods, 15 to 30 
participants for card sorting activity, 4 to 12 participants for 
focus group discussion. Furthermore, it satisfies Faulkner et 
al.'s recommendation suggesting that 15 people theoretically 
provide the best possibility of detecting user interface 
design problems with an average of 97% while limiting the 
number of resources required.16 In addition, an audiologist 
from the government Regional Hospital was interviewed 
to get technical input on the functional requirements of an 
innovative NHS device. These were reviewed and matched 
with the user requirements identified by the representative 
users.

This study protocol was reviewed and approved by 
the Research Ethics Board (REB) of the University of the 
Philippines Manila. 

Results

Application of UCD in the HeLe UI design

Phase I. User and Rural Health Unit Profile
Generally, the selected RHUs have access to electricity, 
internet connectivity, and mobile data but with weak 
connections in sites relatively farther from the city. The 
RHUs have at least one desktop and laptop computer; all 
are EMR-enabled. Four of six RHUs have lying-in clinics 
but only two that are actively providing birthing services and 
screening for genetic metabolic anomalies among newborns. 
The other two sites were under renovation and did not attend 
to parturient mothers at the time of this study. Notably, none 
of the six sites screens newborns for hearing problems using 
a hearing screening device. The medical doctors described 
their newborn hearing screening method as the "Baah test", 
where they would produce the "Baah" sound to the newborn 
to elicit a reflexive response and determine if there is a 
hearing problem. 
There were 30 respondents composed of six (6) medical 
doctors, eight (8) nurses, and 16 midwives (Table 1). The 
average age of participants was 43.8 (±10.1) years old, with 
a range of 25 years old to 63 years old. More than half of the 
participants are in the older population and above 46 years 
old. Years of medical service range from less than a year to 33 
years; the majority have worked for more than 20 years. (Three 
of these 30 health workers dropped out of the two-month 
long UCD process when they resigned from the RHU within 
the duration of this study. Hence, the change of 'respondents' 
data reported for subsequent questions.) 

ICT Ownership and Use
Most of the participants have access to desktop and 
laptop computers at work in almost the same proportion (22 
or 73.3% and 23 or 76.7%, respectively) (Table 2). All doctors 
have access to laptops both at work and at home. Among 
all respondents, desktop and laptop computers were reported 
to be used almost every time (x̅ =3.57 and 3.90, respectively). 
Noteworthy is that even with the passage of the law requiring 
hearing screening among all newborns, the health workers in 
these Rural Health Units reported never using any newborn 
hearing screening device nor having access to it at work. 
HCWs strongly agree that using ICT has a relative 
advantage (Table 3) and has the highest score among 
purported benefits of ICT listed in the survey (with a mean 
score of 4.30; the highest mean score is 5.0). Similarly, 
participants agree, especially the doctors (score of 4.67), that 
ICT enhances their job effectiveness and improves the quality 
of medical work (Table 3, RA2). Furthermore, they also agree 

42

that ICT is entirely compatible with their current situation 
(Table 3, CT8). 
Complexity had the lowest score among all components, 
wherein using ICT does not require much mental effort 
garnering the lowest score (mean score of 2.90). Trial-ability 
and observability scored 3.71 and 3.78, respectively. These 
translate to respondents having equivocal views about these 
characteristics of ICT innovations.

Inspiration Phase

User Requirements
There were 27 user requirements elicited from the focus 
group discussions in the six sites (Table 4). These were ranked 
based on the MoSCoW prioritization matrix and categorized 
according to design, function, or content. The most requested 
requirements for a telemedicine device that the users cited 
include accuracy, durability, instructions, feedback, and should 
be easy to understand. Accuracy was defined by the users as 
the ability of the device to give correct results especially since 
they are dealing with lives of the newborn, and erroneous 
results could lead to detrimental effects in the long run. 
Durability referred to the ability of the device to withstand 
continued use. One participant said, “it’s nice and all, but 
what would I do with it if it gets damaged easily”, pertaining 
to durability. Feedback was understood as the ability of the 
users to send comments or suggestions to the institution who 
developed the device. Finally, easy to understand meant the 
users should be able to easily know how to operate the device.
Training, instructions, and user-friendliness were also 
listed at the top of the list during the card sorting activity. 
They explained that it is vital for them to know how to 
use the device through proper training and instructions. 
Furthermore, one participant mentioned that one of the 
possible reasons technology is not successful in their RHU 
is because their previous experience with other medical 
devices was not user-friendly. Five respondents (n=5) across 
six sites reported that they would use the device if it were 
user-friendly especially since most of them in the RHU are 

Table 2.	ICT Ownership and Level of Use of the Study Participants

Desktop
0
22
3
5
25
3.57
Almost Every time
Laptop
4
8
15
2
28
3.90
Almost Every time
Laptop (Touch)
3
4
5
18
12
2.74
Occasional
Basic Mobile
12
1
5
12
18
3.24
Occasional 
Mobile Phone (Touch)
14
0
15
1
29
4.79
Every time
Tablet (Touch)
8
4
4
14
16
2.84
Occasional
Digital Camera
5
3
3
19
11
2.58
Rarely
Internet
1
6
17
6
24
4.10
Almost Every time
PDA
2
3
1
24
6
2.14
Rarely
NHS Test
0
0
0
30
0
1.58
Never

Legend: 1.00 – Never; 2 – Rarely; 3 – Occasional; 4 – Almost Every time; 5 – Every time; Cronbach Alpha = 0.83; H – Home, W – Work, N – None
H – Home Only; W – Work Only; B – Both Home and Work; N – None; T- Either Home/ Work

Table 1.	User Profile of the Study Participants from the Six 
Municipalities in Iloilo (n=30)

Profession
Midwife
16
(53.3)
Nurse
8
(26.7)
Doctor
6
(20.0)
Total
30
(100.0)

Educational Attainment 

College
24
(80)
Post-graduate
6
(20)
Total
30
(100.0) 

Age (years)
25 and below
1
(3.3)
26-35
8
(26.7)
36-45
5
(16.7)
46-55
14
(46.7)
Above 55
2
(6.7)
Total
30
(100.0)
Mean
43.8 
(± 10.1)

Monthly Income (Php)
No data
3
(10.0)
<10,000
1
(3.3)
10,001 - 15,000
11
(36.7)
15,001 - 20,000
6
(20.0)
20,001 - 25,000
3
(10.0)
>25,000
6
(20.0)
Total
30
(100.0)
Mean
25,661.96 (± 21,207.23)

Medical Experience (years)
5 and below
4
(13.3)
6 to 10
7
(23.3)
11 to 15
7
(23.3)
16 to 20
4
(13.3)
Above 20
8
(26.7)
Total
30
(100.0)
Mean
14.9
(± 8.18)

43

not technologically adept. They do not have someone to ask 
how to use any medical device. 
The card sorting activity also helped the users explain 
features that are important to them. One participant 
mentioned that, "Accuracy is important, especially from our 
experience before. The device did not give accurate results, and 
since then, we questioned the credibility of the device and ended 
up not using it". One suggested a way to ensure this is to have 
regular device calibration. 
Durability was a significant consideration because of 
their experience with the previous technology that broke 
quickly. It was also suggested to have service centers near the 
region to promptly repair devices when damaged. Meanwhile, 
instructions are required by the health workers since not 
everyone was trained to use the HeLe device. Apart from 
instructions, quick access to a manual in the device and a hard 
copy should be made available. The feedback requirement was 
elaborated as the: 1) confirmation that the device received 
their action (i.e., vibrate, sound); and 2) prompt or warning 
sign when they are doing the wrong thing or pushing the 

wrong button. They also want to add prompts when the device 
remains idle for a particular time, which might signify that 
the health worker is struggling with what to do next. Another 
must-have requirement mentioned is that it should be easy to 
understand, such as in smartphones which entails minimal to 
no training to use. The device can also be easily understood by 
making the content and steps very straightforward. 
Noteworthy, they require the device to have print 
functionality in all sites. They justified that printed results are 
still significant even if the Department of Health (DOH) 
pushes for paperless systems. They still need to attach 
printouts of test results in medical records, or printed copies 
are required when referring the patient to the hospital or any 
referral facility. 
Feedback from the low fidelity prototyping affirmed the 
critical requirements discussed by the user from focus group 
discussions. In four of the six RHUs, the group preferred 
the third prototype that focused on simplicity since it is 
straightforward to understand. There were only a few steps to 
perform the intended action, and it was easy to understand. 

Table 3.	The Attitude of Participants towards ICT (Adopted from UTAUT Questionnaire – 5 Point Likert Scale)

Relative Advantage
4.54
4.18
4.35
4.30
RA1. Using ICT enables me to accomplish a medical task more quickly
4.50
4.25
4.38
4.33
RA2. Using ICT improves the quality of medical work I do
4.67
4.25
4.25
4.33
RA3. Using ICT makes me do my medical work easily
4.60
4.25
4.38
4.34
RA4. Using ICT makes me improve my job performance
4.50
4.13
4.38
4.27
RA5. Using ICT enhances my effectiveness in my job
4.67
4.25
4.50
4.40
RA6. Using ICT gives me greater control over my work
4.33
3.94
4.25
4.10

Compatibility 
4.67
3.96
4.38
4.22
CT7. Using ICT increases my work productivity
4.67
4.13
4.50
4.33
CT8. Using ICT is entirely compatible with my current situation
4.67
3.80
4.25
4.10

Complexity
3.83
3.37
3.71
3.56
CX9. I think the ICT I used fits well with the way I like to work
4.83
3.87
4.38
4.21
CX10. Using ICT fits nicely into my work style
4.50
3.53
4.13
3.90
CX11. I believe that using ICT is not complicated3
3.33
3.06
3.50
3.23
CX12. Using ICT does not require a lot of mental effort3
2.67
3.00
2.86
2.90

Trial-ability
3.75
3.69
3.75
3.71
T13. Using ICT is not often frustrating1
3.67
3.31
3.63
3.47
T14. I believe that it is easy to make ICT do what I want it to do
3.83
3.88
4.00
3.90
T15. Learning to operate ICT is easier for me
3.83
3.63
3.63
3.67
T16. I have had a great deal of opportunities to try ICT applications
3.67
3.93
3.75
3.82

Observability
3.73
3.81
3.75
3.78
O17. I know where I can go to try out ICT satisfactorily
4.00
3.44
3.63
3.60
O18. I always try out ICT applications before using it
4.00
4.07
3.63
3.93
O19. I use ICT on a trial basis enough to see what it could do
3.80
3.87
3.63
3.79
O20. I do not have to take very much effort to try out ICT
3.17
3.25
3.63
3.33
O21. I have seen what other hospital staff do with ICTs
3.83
4.00
4.00
3.97
O22. In the hospital, I see ICT being used for many tasks
3.83
4.06
4.25
4.07
O23. ICT is very visible in the hospital where I work
3.50
3.87
3.63
3.72
O24. It is easy to observe people using ICT in the hospital
3.67
3.94
3.63
3.80

1 Cronbach alpha = 0.8488
2 Legend: 1.00-1.80 – Strongly Disagree; 1.81-2.60 – Disagree; 2.61-3.40 – Neither; 3.41-4.20 – Agree; 4.21-5.00 – Strongly Agree. 
3 Questions were negatively phrased, and the results were processed inversely

44

One participant emphasized regarding having instructions 
in place stating that, "Design three is easy to understand, but it 
would be better if there are instructions or warning, especially if 
you are doing it wrong." In three sites, users emphasized the 
importance of instruction present in prototype 2, but with a 
certain simplicity level similar to prototype 3. 

Technical Inputs from Clinical Audiologist
In a separate session, a clinical audiologist in the 
Regional Hospital in Iloilo was interviewed to get technical 
specifications in the HeLe device. The clinical audiologist 
is a health care professional that can competently perform 
audiologic evaluation and audiologic habilitation. In terms 
of design, the clinical audiologist highly recommended a 
user-friendly and easy-to-understand UI considering the age 
group of health workers in the RHU. It was also observed 
that RHU staff are no longer open to learning complicated 

things or are often afraid to handle a device. Moreover, text 
size and buttons should be large enough to be readable, and 
instructions to perform the required task should be minimal 
and not text-heavy. Based on these inputs, the prototype 
was designed with readable font styles, larger buttons, and 
instructions composed of fewer steps.
Regarding content, the clinical audiologist suggested 
using the standard terms for the results, i.e., "Pass" and 
"Refer." These are the standard terms in their practice 
described in the Newborn Hearing Screening Manual 
as most hearing devices are just screening tools and need 
referral for further confirmation. Moreover, the patient data 
to be collected should be based on the requirements specified 
in the Newborn Hearing Screening Manual and reports to 
claim payment for rendering the Newborn Care Package 
of the PhilHealth. A copy of the forms were obtained and 
adapted in the print-out interface. Also, following the manual 

Table 4.	List of User Requirements and design solutions taken (n=27)

1.	 Accuracy
M, S
F
Added "Maintenance Check" or "Diagnostic Check" function; Visual prompts to 
remind of monthly/ regular maintenance or diagnostics and month last checked; 
Suggest to NTHC regular calibration or testing of the device

2.	 Durability
M, W
F
Endorsed to NTHC

3.	 Instructions
M, S
D, C
Instructions and a manual were added in the design

4.	 Feedback to confirm correct action
M, S, W 
D, C, F
Visual prompts / Feedback; Show progress of test

5.	 Error-detection
M, S
D, C, F
Visual prompt / Feedback; Instructions how to correct the action
Inactive buttons

6.	 Simple and easy to understand
M, S
D, C
Use of simple and straightforward terms

7.	 Security of data
M
F
Added sync function to EMR; Suggest to NTHC easier method to back up EMR data

8.	 Training
M, S
C, F
Suggest to NTHC; Manual readily available in device; Accessible video instructions

9.	 Complete functionality
M
F, C
Incorporated Technical Expert inputs (e.g., content, workflow); 
Incorporated standard DOH/ PhilHealth forms

10.	Interpret results for the users
M
F, C
Incorporated in the design: "Pass" or "Refer"

11.	Portability
M, W
F
Endorsed to NTHC

12.	Print-function
M
F
Added print function button; Suggest to NTHC

13.	Privacy and Confidentiality
M
D, F
Sign in and sign out; Suggest to auto sign out during idle time

14.	User-friendly
S
D, C, F
Simple and straightforward

15.	Stand-alone 
S
F
Endorse to NTHC; Placeholder for sync data

16.	Speed
S
F
Endorse to NTHC

17.	Visual Aesthetics (i.e., colorful)
W
D
Documented for future iterations

18.	 Brightness
W
D
Added function to adjust brightness and other device settings

19.	Cost-effective
W
F
Documented for future iterations; Suggest to NTHC

20.	Readable font
M, W
D
Use of larger fonts for important information

21.	Access to maintenance
M
N/A
Suggest to NTHC

22.	Able to connect to internet
M, W
F
Device is already wifi ready

23.	No recurring data
M
C
Auto complete for data already gathered

24.	Not electric dependent
M, S, W
F
Suggest to NTHC

25.	Responsive to touch
M
F
Suggest to NTHC

26.	Interoperable
W
F
Documented for future iterations; Suggest to NTHC

27.	Messenger function
W
F
Documented for future iterations; Suggest to NTHC

Legend: M – Must Have; S – Should have; W – Could-have or wont-have; F – Function; D – Design, C – Content, N/A – Not applicable

45

and audiologist’s recommendation, the design reinforced the 
users to test thrice for “refer” results. 
For specific functions, the clinical audiologist emphasized 
accuracy. The device should be "unquestionably accurate." 
It will defeat the purpose of everything if the device is 
not accurate. In addition, the workflow on the Manual of 
Procedures for Newborn Hearing Screening Program should 
integrate into the UI design to guide the HCWs to follow 
specific required steps. Printing of the referral form, patient 

registry forms, and results form with the device ID should 
also be added as these are needed for PhilHealth to reimburse 
the RHU for the NHS test. 

Ideation Phase 

Low Fidelity Prototype 
Three design paper sketches were prepared and presented 
to the study participants to maximize the site visits (Figure 3). 

B.	Prototype 2 – Instructions Requirement

Figure 3.	 Sample low-fidelity prototype.

C. Prototype 3 – Simple Requirement

A.	Protype 1 – Training Requirement

46

All prototypes shared a common workflow and pages to 
perform the newborn hearing screening procedures, as follows: 
1.	
Sign in page – This serves as the home page and user 
authentication page.
2.	
List of patients – This page is where the user can see 
all patients in queue and select which patient to test 
for NHS. Each prototype contained varying layout 
of the list and content being displayed.
3.	
Newborn hearing screening – This page is where 
the user can perform the actual test. 
4.	
Referral or Printing of the results – This page is 
where users can review the results for referral or 
printing. A test case for newborns with hearing 
problem was used for all prototypes. 

Each design prototype has a distinct feature highlighting 
the different requirements from ideation phase. The first 
prototype focused more on the training requirement (Figure 
3A). Prior to signing in, the interface contains reference 
materials and video resources how to use the device. In-
app video instructions on how to place the device to the 
newborn and help button were made very visible across the 
interface. This attempted to address the need for the user to 
be trained on how to use the device before actually using 
it. The second prototype attempted to address the in-app 
instruction requirement (Figure 3B). This was achieved by 
providing visual prompts and feedbacks in every page in the 
application. A pop-up instructions were shown for each step 
to guide the user what to do. The third prototype highlighted 
simplicity (Figure 3C). There were no instructions or visual 
prompts. Other information and buttons were removed. And 
the screen has a consistent and default sections all throughout 
the steps.
The participants were asked to choose among the 
prototypes and to pinpoint specific features they wanted to 
be improved. Feedback on the prototypes was integrated to 
the Medium Fidelity Prototype. 

Medium Fidelity Prototype
The medium fidelity prototype (Figure 4) was developed 
using Adobe XD version 17.0.12.11, a free Adobe software 
to show detailed graphics, placeholders, and actions of the 
corresponding buttons and functions. This prototype was 
presented on a tablet device with almost similar dimension 
to the actual HeLe device used.
Subsequently, a Concurrent Think-Aloud (CTA) activity 
was used where the participants narrate or verbalize their 
thoughts while interacting with the HeLe UI in the tablet. 
The activity allowed the researcher to understand what 
the users were thinking about and how the users behaved 
with the proposed design, and in the process continuously 
identify additional problems, and requirements in terms of 
design, content, and function that had not been detected 
in the inspiration phase or in the low-fidelity prototype 
testing. List of tasks to accomplish were provided to ensure 

all functions are covered. The tasks emphasized four major 
activities: 1) Sign in, 2) Select Patient, 3) Perform Test (left 
ear and right ear), 4) Submit results. Specific details on how 
and where to perform the tasks were not included. Common 
user errors and problems with the design such as the font 
styles, button sizes, etc. were documented. The average time 
elapsed was also computed and described. Activities with 
relatively low effectiveness (accomplished) and efficiency 
(time elapsed) scores were investigated. All responses from 
the evaluation of low-fidelity and medium-fidelity prototypes 
were extracted, and patterns were identified, meaningfully 
interpreted, and translated to design, content, or functional 
requirements. 

System Usability Testing 
Self-administered System Usability Scale (SUS) 
questionnaire were distributed to the participants immediately 
after the CTA to assess the medium-fidelity prototype. The 
SUS is a simple, ten-item Likert scale measuring subjective 
assessments of parameters of usability. SUS score is calculated 
by summing the score contributions from each item (ranges 
from 0 to 4). The score contribution for items in odd numbers 
is the scale position minus 1. For items in even numbers on 
the other hand, is 5 minus the scale position. Then multiply 
the sum by 2.5 to get the overall value. SUS scores range 
from 0 to 100. This study followed Bangor et al., category 
and set 60 (marginally unacceptable) as a cut-off score.17 
The score of the Medium Fidelity Prototype obtained from 
27 respondents was 81.94 (±14.60). This is interpreted as 
acceptable, meaning most will likely not have usability 
problems and merit no further iterations.17 The lowest score 
obtained was 57.5 given by two midwives while the highest 
score was 100 from three doctors, one nurse, and one midwife. 
The average time elapsed to finish all the NHS tasks 
was 173.19 (±54.43) seconds, or 2 minutes and 53 seconds 
(Table 5). 
The activity on the patient list page was relatively fast. 
Twenty-six (26) out of 27 performed the task correctly without 
external help from the researcher. The users greatly appreciated 
the search button. They specifically requested this function 
when the Low Fidelity Prototype was being discussed. In the 
medium fidelity prototype design phase, the search buttons 
were just placeholders and not yet functional.
The users took most of their time on the NHS perform 
test page, 80.44 seconds (±26.49) as this page involves several 
steps in order to complete. Most users had difficulty signing 
into the device; 10 succeeded only after several trials and 
errors. HCWs spent an average of 80.44 (±26.49) seconds 
to finish the activity. However, two health workers took more 
time than others because they got confused about starting 
the test and which step to do first. Nevertheless, 21 health 
workers completed the task without help from the researcher. 
Six users appreciated the instructions and carefully 
read them as a guide. Two other health workers thought the 
instructions were buttons to tap.

47

Figure 4.	 Medium fidelity prototypes of the HeLe user interface.

A. Sign-in Page

C. NHS Begin Test Page

E. Summary Results Page

B. Patient List Page

D. NHS – Results Page

F. Print Results Page

48

Discussion

Lessons from RHU and User Profile
The user profile of the RHU (53.3% Females, 46.7% 
belonging to 46-55 years old) reflected the typical age and 
gender distribution in most RHUs in the Philippines. The 
individual characteristics are important to note as this could 
be potential moderators of adoption.14 For older adults, 
according to Berkowsky et al., their self-assessed abilities on 
computer or internet skills could be a predictor for adoption.18 
The majority of the older health workers expressed their 
disinterest, thinking it is complicated and younger health 
workers are there to operate the medical devices.18 This might 
not necessarily reflect sentiments of all older population 
as the sample size is limited. However, the participant 
observation suggests that younger health workers primarily 
handle tasks involving computers or other technology-based 
activities. This supports SAQ suggesting that most HCW 
perceived technology as always complex. Using ICT does 
not require mental health effort (2.90) scored the lowest. 
Participants, especially those from older population, claim 
they are already too 'non-techie' and old to understand or 
learn to understand new technology. Ironically, these same 

HCWs also reported having access and using other forms 
of ICTs (i.e., smartphones, computers) in their daily lives.
Examined further, HCWs complained that as much 
as they wanted to use technologies, they perceived EMR 
as additional work. They have to do both the electronic and 
manual encoding in documenting patient information and 
preparing and submitting aggregated reports, respectively. 
Berkowsky et al. support this, suggesting that older adults' 
confidence in learning the technology and the perceived value 
and impact on the quality of life were the strongest predictors 
of a willingness to adopt a technology.18

Understanding the fears and concerns of HCWs through 
user profiling is as critical as developing the ICT itself. HCWs 
have different fears and perceptions about technology that 
could be addressed with adequate education and support. 

Inspiration phase
The Card Sorting Activity helped initiate the conversation 
with the users. The list of words allowed the users to verbalize 
what they wanted in the device and how much they value 
each requirement. The activity somehow provided them the 
concepts to describe the design, content, and functions they 
want in the user interface. It enabled discussions to flesh out 
their attitudes, desires, and fears interacting with technology. 
Further, the activity is easily understood by both the research 
participants and researchers, easy to prepare, and affordable, 
thus accessible to those in low-resource settings.19

Focus group discussion had been an efficient way to 
extract information and understand the design creativity, 
desired and actual user experience, and usability of the Low 
and Medium Fidelity Prototypes. It was also ideal in order not 
to disrupt their work in the RHU. The choice was found to be 
beneficial to the data collection. Getting similar sentiments 
from colleagues helped them articulate their feedback on 
the technology. 
But as recommended by the Interaction Design 
Foundation, the user interviews or focus group discussions 
were treated as contextual. Sometimes it is not what the 
people say they will do, and people may have memory issues 
and thus could not recall details as clearly.19 The interviews 
can serve as a starting point to examine the users' problems, 
fears, goals, user experiences, the usability of the product, 
etc. They were rarely used to solely achieve a finished output. 
Users, after all, are not designers, but they can at least 
probably suggest design ideas. 
Usability in this paper is defined as how well users can 
use the technology to achieve a defined goal effectively, 
efficiently, and satisfactorily. This is important even more 
in medical devices where the life and/or quality of life of a 
patient is on the line. 
MoSCoW prioritization matrix was helpful as it 
made clear to the HCWs that some conditions may not be 
incorporated in the design, considering there are limitations 
in terms of time and budget. The matrix allowed discussing 
among themselves what they felt were critical and needed by 

Table 5.	Summary of Task Accomplished and Time Elapsed

1. Sign in Page
- Tap username input field
- Tap keyboard
- Tap password input field
- Tap keyboard
- Tap sign in

50%
100%
10
17

28.52 (±13.19)
34.9 (±15.47)*
24.76 (±10.37)*
p-value: .026‡

2. Select Patient
- Tap patient “Cardo Dalisay”
50%
100%
1
26

9.93 (±15.22)
79
7.27 (±6.55)
p-value: .026‡

3. Perform test
- Tap "Left" button to start test
- Tap Okay to confirm test
- Tap again "Left button"
- Tap "right" button
- Tap "test” again (2 of 3)
- Tap "test” again (3 of 3)
- Tap submit

50%
100%
6
21

80.44 (±26.49)
95.33 (±27.74)
76.19 (±25.19)
p-value: .60‡

4. Print / Submit Results
- Scroll to check results
- Tap Print
- Review result' s print preview
- Tap print
- Tap done
- Tap log out

50%
100%
8
19

54.30 (±24.30)
57.50 (±26.33)
52.95 (±24.02)
p-value: .089‡

Total Elapsed
 173.19 (±54.43)

†	0% – Fails to complete the task correctly, gives up, or succeeds only 
with an assist from the moderator; 50% – succeeds, but in a round- 
about way, making errors, needing to back track or using on-line help; 
100% – succeeds quickly, following the route the designers intended.

‡	alpha at .05

49

their RHU. Inputs from a clinical audiologist were beneficial, 
especially in the process and content, as most of the HCW 
in the SAQs results have no access to NHS devices. This 
could also be done after designing the prototypes by letting 
the experts walk through the prototype and looking for issues 
with the design, accessibility, and usability of the product.19

User Requirements
The series of participatory methods and structured 
procedures surfaced a total of twenty-seven user requirements. 
Apart from prioritization, these requirements were classified 
according to design, content, and functional condition. 

Design
Nine of the 27 user requirements raised during the 
FGDs are design-related (Table 4) and it reflected the 
fundamental concepts of Norman, specifically affordance, 
constraints, signifier, and feedback.3 A good device user 
interface could reduce or eliminate use-related hazards that 
could compromise medical care, increase correct use and 
user actions, minimize user frustration and irritation, and 
facilitate technology acceptance and utilization.4 
According to Norman, affordance refers to the 
relationship between a physical object and a person, the 
relationship between the properties of an object, and how 
the thing could be used.3 It was observed during the CTA 
when users easily associated the icon's help, settings, and exits 
to their potential use. Affordance was also articulated in the 
results when a participant suggested using the tabular format 
for the patient queue to "resemble their existing EMR" since 
they are more accustomed to that type of presentation. 
Constraints, which refer to cues limiting possible 
actions, were found helpful in ensuring they do the tasks. 
In the Low Fidelity Prototype, the health workers preferred 
the prototype that disabled buttons to proceed to submission 
unless all steps had been conducted thoroughly. 
Signifiers were incorporated in the design in the visual 
prompts, color codes, shapes, and font styles. Its purpose is 
to guide the users on what to do in the particular page or 
perform their intended tasks. Instructions were also a form 
of a signifier, although a more deliberate one.20 This was 
requested by the users in case they forgot what to do on a 
specific page. For example in the case of the two HCWs 
who were confused on how to start the test, a signifier in 
a form of an instruction would be helpful to prompt them 
what they should do next. It assured them that they were 
using the device correctly and improved their willingness to 
use it. As emphasized by Berkowsky et al., a users' lack of 
confidence in using the device could be a barrier in technology 
adoption.18 Having these layers of safety nets for the users 
convinced, even the older HCWs, that they can use the 
device. However, it should be noted that these instructions 
should not be obscuring nor cause further confusion on how 
to interact with the device. Use of different colors or opacity 
for the instructions could reduce this confusion. 

Signifiers were also used to incorporate the suggestion of 
the clinical expert in conducting NHS. Signifiers in the form 
of three colored dots were displayed on the testing page to 
inform the users to re-test three times the patients who were 
reported to have a hearing problem. While signifiers were 
beneficial, it was also important to test them to ensure they 
are intuitive and useful to the users. Similar to the different 
layouts, shapes, and visual presentation of the information 
tested during the paper prototype testing, signifiers if resource 
permits should also be meticulously tested to enhance 
usability of the device. 
Finally, another recurring requirement for the HCWs 
is to have feedback (i.e., sounds, visual cues, vibrations) to 
notify the users that they are doing the tasks correctly. During 
the Think Aloud activity, one participant religiously read 
everything that flashed on the screen. He also appreciated 
that the device displayed 'checking nodes' and 'testing' upon 
pressing the test button. Participant was relieved that the 
device received the action and indicated the need to wait 
while the test was ongoing. Feedback was significant so that 
the users would know that the device acknowledges the users' 
action (e.g., they triggered the start of the test) and need to 
wait for the test to be completed.
User interface design also involves making the interface 
visually appealing, influencing proper use, reducing error, 
and improving the user's willingness to use the device. 

Content
Nine of the 27 user requirements were content-related. 
The content should have all the essential data based on 
national or international standards, instructions, and even 
content related to decision support. 
Preparing and submitting reports to different government 
offices during the inspiration phase is a recurring concern for 
HCW. It entailed additional work for the HCWs, especially 
since various offices require differently formatted yet similar 
reports. HCWs wanted to be assured that the data gathered 
in the device were complete data sets needed to submit 
information to the DOH. Input from the clinical expert 
regarding the essential data by the national government 
helped in completing this requirement. 
All this content had to be organized and displayed in 
a not confusing or overwhelming manner. The Interaction 
Design Foundation (IDF) emphasized find-ability to be 
an essential concept to ensure a good user experience. 
This refers to the idea that "the product and the content 
within them should be easy to locate or find".19 Different 
font styles, text boxes, and other visual elements aided the 
users in locating only the needed content for the specific 
task. This aligned with Wong’s study that recommends 
the reduction of "visual clutter" to not compete with users' 
limited attention. Further, Wong emphasized the need to 
limit only to necessary components for the current tasks to 
provide clear, visible, and unambiguous means of navigating 
or understanding the content.21

50

But clarity does not mean empty UI. Alexander and 
Staggers contradict that it is more optimal to have dense 
screens that include all pertinent information to minimize 
unnecessary movements between screens to search for 
information.22 FGDs, prototype testing, and participant 
observations helped strike a balance between complete and 
precise by understanding how the health workers make their 
decisions and the information necessary displayed on every 
screen or in a particular task. 
Having all the contents needed is not enough; how it 
will be presented and when it should be displayed should also 
be considered. 

Function
Twenty (20) of the 27 requirements were function-
related. There were common themes in the operations 
requested by the health workers across all sites. Mostly these 
were accuracy, durability, built-in instructions, ready-to-use, 
security, confidentiality, and the print function.
This study elucidated the importance given by HCWs 
for the credibility of the device they are using. During the 
FGDs, they emphasize that the accuracy of the information 
must be, by no exception, accurate. They also noted the need 
for the device to be built to last. The machine needed to 
remain stable even after several uses, especially in isolated 
communities, to access service centers, and communicate with 
the project proponent. This is especially cited since RHUs 
serve geographically isolated communities, to access service 
centers, and communicate with the research proponents for 
device repair is cumbersome. Credibility influences good user 
experience, according to IDF. This involves the ability of the 
user to trust in the product provided, not only that it does the 
job it is supposed to do, but also that it will last for a reasonable 
amount of time and the information provided with it is accurate 
and fit-for-purpose" 19 This study found similar findings and 
reported them as the top requirement.
Functions related to training and ease of learning the 
device were also a primary must-have requirement by the 
HCWs. Since most health workers expressed that they are not 
adept with technology, they want the HeLe device to be easily 
understood and not require too much mental effort to use it, 
on top of the demands of everyday work. This relates to what 
Berkowsky said in the earlier discussion that confidence to use 
predicts the willingness to use technology.18 HCWs explained 
that having these instructions are significant considering the 
fast turn-over rate of HCWs, especially among the younger 
ones. However, on-site or regional training events are costly 
and require the HCW to leave the RHU for a certain period, 
which in turn slows down health care services. Moreover, 
when HCWs trained on the technology leave the RHU, the 
knowledge leaves with them. Typically, instructions are not 
being cascaded to the remaining HCWs. In-app instructions 
and quick access to a guide on using the device or software 
are standard features in most commercial devices or digital 
phone applications. This feature might be helpful to HCWs.

Another requirement elicited is having a print function 
in the device, requested by almost all sites. Health workers 
explained that although the government's thrust is to use an 
EMR, they still need to have printed results to refer patients 
until the promised service delivery network is well established. 
It is a vital health service to screen newborns for hearing 
problems. Understanding this is important to ensure that the 
technology to be introduced is aligned with their workflow. 
With this requirement, we could infer that compatibility 
and facilitating conditions, described by Venkatesh in 
UTAUT, should be considered in designing the technology. 
The UTAUT underscores the importance of compatibility 
of the device with service delivery to facilitate technology 
adoption.14 Facilitating conditions means that the intro-
duction of the innovation should consider availability of 
resources (i.e., equipment, infrastructure, etc.) of the target 
user and if they are capable of implementing it. These are 
often missed when developers do not profile their target 
recipients. One participant articulated it further being a 
recipient of many projects in the past stating "these projects 
and policies imposed by national government have failed 
because they never consider the conditions in the grassroots. 
For example, electricity, which is necessary for their EMR, 
was erratic in the locale".
Fleshing out all these requirements at the beginning of the 
design and development allows more room to accommodate 
the requirements with lesser resource implications.

Lessons during the ideation phase
Paper prototypes were useful, economical, and easy to 
revise on the spot. IDEO and Smaradottir also describe this 
as an efficient way to describe suggestions for functionality 
and user interface.19,23 Moreover, providing several compa-
rative designs during the Low Fidelity Prototype FGD 
helped elicit what the users want and do not want in a user 
interface. It also helped narrow down design choices on 
specific interfaces that appeared to be problematic for the 
users. This also lowered the costs and number of interviews as 
they were already presented with options they could choose 
from. The FGD lowered the costs in requirements gathering 
and efficiently gathered collective views on the UI. During 
the presentation of the prototypes and interview after that, 
the users checked whether their needs were met. They highly 
appreciated that they were consulted as to what should be in 
the device and be part of creating the software. They also took 
pride when the specified requirements were incorporated 
into the prototypes. It made them more interested in 
being involved and giving inputs knowing their feedback 
could be included in the output. 

System Usability 
System usability and user evaluation are essential 
steps before deploying technology on a wider scale. In this 
step, developers could infer how the users would behave 
with the proposed design in the actual situation i.e., issues, 

51

recurring errors, and additional requirements could already be 
documented for future interface improvements.20 The repeated 
erroneous actions should hint the designers to develop design 
solutions to avoid these mistakes and ensure that the users 
perform the task correctly.3

Results of the SUS for the medium-fidelity prototype 
developed from this study point out that user find the 
interface usable and acceptable. With an SUS score of 81.94, 
it is beyond the threshold of 60 points and achieved a higher 
SUS score than reported by Custodio (68 points) in 20182. 
This study’s output is successful in improving the usability 
of the user interface design of HeLe device.

Conclusion 

Developing a promising health technology requires a 
thorough analysis of the users' context, needs, and preferences 
for health ICT to be seamlessly and sustainably incorporated 
in care delivery. In the development cycle, the User-Centered 
Design approach actively involves end-users in each step, 
allowing them to bring suggestions and opinions on design 
and functionality. User acceptance has been one of the 
significant barriers to the deployment of health projects, 
mainly because relevant user preferences and usability issues 
have not been considered.
This study supports several prior research of Rothgangel 
et al. and Bath in demonstrating the worth of UCD in 
developing health ICT.12, 24 However, there is limited research 
in the Philippines that describes the end users' systematic 
involvement in the design of new technology, especially in 
health care. This study documents best practices and lessons 
learned in applying UCD methodology in design and 
development. 
Different participatory methods and structured 
procedures (i.e., card sorting, MoSCoW matrix, CTA) were 
applied to help elicit and prioritize user requirements and 
feedback from the users. 
The UCD methodology is undoubtedly time-consuming, 
but in the long run, can be cost-effective. It reduces major 
revisions or potential overhaul of the technology in the late 
stage. In essence, paper prototyping has been an efficient 
way to present and gather suggestions on designing the 
user interface. This could also be quickly revised on-ground, 
compared to an already developed device, to accommodate 
the demands and changes by the users. Digital mock-ups also 
require little to no coding and computer skills, and can be 
designed and redesigned faster than the actual product. The 
process was a crucial step that has resulted in a high degree 
of user acceptance of the Medium Fidelity Prototype among 
the target primary care health workers. Government research 
investments intended to democratize access to essential 
newborn hearing screening must successfully define what is 
user-friendly. 
The most common considerations in user interface 
design are the presence of signifiers, constraints, feedback, and 

the organization of the information that should confirm what 
they are accustomed to. Users prefer that they understand 
what to do on a specific page at a glance (i.e. fonts, signifiers, 
instructions), be prevented from making errors (constraints 
and feedback), and can be alerted and allow to correct their 
mistakes (error-tolerance and education). 
In general, the users believed that the design was easy 
to use and understand. They described the design as very 
user-friendly, simple, and straightforward to the desired 
action. The tabular format of the patient list, with emphasis 
on the pertinent information, was also preferred by the users 
as it enabled getting the patient details quickly. They again 
emphasized during the interview sessions that instructions 
helped them throughout the process, together with the visual 
prompts where the device can detect if they are doing the task 
wrong. The visual prompts also provided instructions on how 
to correct the wrong action which was very helpful according 
to them. Moreover, it was preferred that the instructions can 
be enabled or disabled depending on who is using the device. 
They believe that it was an important feature for the majority 
of the health workers who are not technologically adept, but 
would be a nuisance for those who are already accustomed 
with the technology.
Finally, they believe that the current design already 
allowed them to perform the intended function of testing 
the device. They also appreciated that the device follows the 
specific guidelines in testing newborn hearing screening. 
Most of the users are contented with the prototype of the 
UI and that there were no other crucial requirements that 
needs to be added.
This study documents practices and lessons learned in 
applying UCD methodology in design and development that 
have been demonstrated to improve usability of the UI design. 
The experience, tools, and lessons in the UCD methodology 
applied in HeLe prototypes can guide future research and 
eventually better understand ways to develop user-friendly 
telemedicine devices for the Philippines and also for other 
resource-limited environments. The reported findings and 
lessons learned might interest researchers, software, and 
hardware designers immediately. Health workers who will 
be at the user-end of innovations, program managers, chief 
executives, and policy makers can also consider these findings 
within their own spheres of influence, contributing to the 
future's desired innovative ICT-based health care system.

Recommendations
Due to resource constraints, the study's sample size is 
small and insufficient to illustrate the presence or absence of 
causal relationships on explored variables. It was limited to the 
application of UCD to HeLe interface. The Implementation 
Phase of the UCD methodology was not done. The usability 
testing is also limited to user feedback and does not provide 
sufficient insight to predict utilization or acceptance of the 
actual HeLe device. Nevertheless, this Medium Fidelity 
Prototype and other lessons from this UCD methodology 

52

are endorsed to the HeLe research team for use in the next 
stages of the investigational device development. 
With enough budget and human resources, the research 
could be continued up to a high-fidelity or final prototype 
for testing. Future research could also assess the utilization 
and adoption of the device developed using this design 
methodology. A controlled trial could also be conducted to 
allow for a more direct comparison of the interface before and 
after the implementation of UCD methodologies.