When user-centered design meets
implementation science: integrating
provider perspectives in the development
of an intimate partner violence intervention
for women treated in the United States’
largest integrated healthcare system

Sara B. Danitz1*
, Shannon Wiltsey Stirman2,3, Alessandra R. Grillo1, Melissa E. Dichter4,5, Mary Driscoll6,7,
Megan R. Gerber8,9, Kristin Gregor8,9, Alison B. Hamilton10,11 and Katherine M. Iverson1,12

Method
Design
In this qualitative study, we conducted and analyzed
semi-structured telephone interviews with VHA key in-
formants working within two large VHA medical centers
located in the New England region of the US (VA Bos-
ton Healthcare System and the VA Connecticut Health-
care System) during September–December 2017. The
Institutional Review Boards (IRB) at both the VA Boston
Healthcare System and the VA Connecticut Healthcare
System provided ethics approval for this study.

Participants
Eligible participants were individuals who were at least
part-time VHA employees who worked in a relevant
clinical capacity with female VHA patients. The study
team identified potential participants based on their job
titles and role/discipline listed through the hospitals’ e-
mail system, and then sent recruitment e-mails to spe-
cific types of providers. This included those involved in
coordinating relevant care for women, namely primary
care physicians, social workers, psychologists, licensed
marriage and family therapists, psychiatrists, and staff,
including IPV Assistance Program Coordinators. (IPV
Assistance Program Coordinators are mandated within
VHA to assist with policies and procedures for address-
ing IPV within the local medical center and outpatient
clinics, including coordinating referrals for women who
disclose IPV and are interested in receiving interven-
tions). As such, the study team used purposive sampling
techniques to identify key informants whom work in
clinics and roles relevant to the delivery of IPV interven-
tions [39]. Project investigators contacted potential par-
ticipants through e-mail to inform them of the study
opportunity and invite them to participate. Those who
expressed interest were scheduled for a 60-minute inter-
view
at
their
convenience.
Prior
to
the
interview,

participants received the draft RISE manual to review if
time permitted.
All participants provided verbal consent for the inter-
view and for the audio-recording of the interview. Partic-
ipants answered a few brief questions about their
demographics and their VHA role(s) prior to beginning
the interview.

Approach
Study investigators with expertise in IPV, treatment devel-
opment, and implementation science developed the inter-
view guide, which contained questions about general
impressions of the RISE intervention, any modifications
needed to enhance feasibility, fit, effectiveness; and facilita-
tors to and barriers of using RISE in routine care. Inter-
view questions were semi-structured in nature, with a
focus on eliciting provider perspectives on RISE, including
potential contextual barriers and facilitators to RISE im-
plementation [40, 41]. All interviews were conducted by
the study project manager (SD) or principal investigator
(KI), both of whom are Ph.D. level female psychologists
with training in qualitative interviewing. The interviewer
explained the purpose of the interviews, the rationale for
the development of RISE, its underlying focus on em-
powerment, and its overall structure. After asking any ini-
tial questions, the participants had up to 20 minutes to
review the RISE manual in order to get a better feel for
the philosophy, structure, and content of the intervention.
Interview questions assessed an array of factors relevant to
the implementation of RISE within VHA. The semi-
structured interviews were of varying lengths, with an
average of approximately 43 minutes. Interviewers com-
pleted brief memos immediately after each interview. The
team conducted interviews until variations in perspectives
lessened and data became duplicative (i.e., saturation)
[42]. All interviews were transcribed.

Data analysis
The current study uses an established rapid content ana-
lysis approach to efficiently derive key findings from
transcripts to tailor and refine the RISE manual [43]. As
transcripts became available, they were reviewed and
coded by members of the research team (one PhD-level
researcher and two bachelor’s level research assistants,
with supervision from the study PI) using top-level, de-
ductive coding to capture the content of key topics from
the interview guide. Using a hybrid deductive-inductive
approach, the team added inductive codes as they identi-
fied emergent findings. We transferred summaries into
matrices and used matrix analysis methods to identify
key themes related to the RISE intervention and its im-
plementation characteristics [44]. The matrices facili-
tated the discovery of relationships and patterns across
participants, expediting synthesis and summary [44].

Initial implementation characteristics coding categor-
ies were derived from Proctor and colleagues’ taxonomy
of implementation outcomes [45]. Further, researchers
used Wiltsey Stirman and colleagues’ framework for
modifications
and
adaptations
of
interventions
to
categorize end-user feedback into “content” versus “con-
text” modifications [38]. According to this framework,
content modifications include changes made to interven-
tion materials or delivery, whereas context modifications
include changes to the personnel who deliver the inter-
vention or the format or setting of the intervention [38].
All members of the coding team coded the first 5 tran-
scripts independently and then met for consensus to dis-
cuss
any
coding
discrepancies
and
ensure
coding
agreement. Once agreement was reached, the next 18
transcripts were divided among the 3 coders, and 33% of
the data (n = 6 transcripts) was double-coded and per-
cent agreement was calculated in NVivo [46]. Percent
agreement was 94.7% (ranging from 93.9–96.1%). Fol-
lowing the completion of coding, two members of the
research team reviewed coding categories to independ-
ently identify sub-groups of key points from each of the
coding categories using matrices that included key topics
and
exemplary
quotes
and
interviewer
notes
from
memos in order to capture all sources of data from the
interviews.

Results
A total of 23 key informants participated in this study
(62% participation rate, with nearly equivalent represen-
tation across the two study sites). The mean age of par-
ticipants was 42.6 years (SD = 11.6; range: 25–63) and
the sample predominately identified as female (91.3%;
n = 21). Participants had worked in VHA for a range of
2–25 years (mean = 8.6, SD = 6.9). Table 1 provides a
breakdown of the sample by provider profession.

Acceptability and appropriateness
Overall, findings indicated that RISE was highly accept-
able to providers. They endorsed RISE as well-organized
and user friendly, noting that, “It’s very usable, I can
really picture doing each of these activities with a veteran

Table 1 Breakdown of Providers by Profession (N = 23)

Profession
Frequency
Percent %

Psychologist
9
39.1

Social worker
5
21.7

Physician
4
17.4

Registered Nurse
2
8.7

Licensed Marriage and Family Therapist
1
4.3

Peer Specialist
1
4.3

Psychiatrist
1
4.3

sitting in front of me. There’s something tangible for the
veterans to take, to read, to visualize … [RISE] brings it
to the veteran’s level where they are and normalizes it.
It’s non- stigmatizing … it empowers the patient to be ac-
tive.” In particular, a number of providers endorsed ap-
preciation for the modular style of the intervention,
noting that the content feels manageable, and the format
provides welcomed flexibility. Participants also indicated
that they found the components of RISE, including its
content and non-judgmental, empowering stance, to be
highly relevant and appropriate to the unique needs of
women dealing with IPV. One provider noted, “I like
that the script and the language of MI and the empower-
ment language mirrors that goal of helping a woman re-
gain control over her own choices. I’ve found that it’s
[autonomy/choice] taken away in the context of IPV and
so I think that’s a critical element in addressing it.”

Relative advantage and facilitating factors
Providers noted the relative advantages of RISE com-
pared to other related interventions (or lack thereof)
or how they usually address IPV. A consistent finding
was that providers perceived that the RISE interven-
tion manual would help to facilitate provider comfort
and confidence in addressing IPV, especially for those
who have less familiarity with addressing IPV. Pro-
viders noted that the comprehensive nature of RISE is
reassuring and its structured nature helps to ease pro-
vider anxiety, “It’s helpful to have a structured ap-
proach for this. I know that many providers that I’ve
worked with whether here or elsewhere feel a little bit
more nervous about ongoing IPV because unlike many
of the things that we deal with, the trauma isn’t in
the past, it’s ongoing, so there’s an element of in-
creased current risk that makes it a bit more stressful,
and having clear tools for that I think can be very
comforting for a provider.” Another provider echoed
that IPV, in particular, seems to be scary for pro-
viders, noting that even for those who are comfort-
able doing suicide assessments, they are reluctant to
inquire about IPV for fear that they will hear some-
thing and “not know what to do with it.” As such,
providers noted that RISE offers a structured ap-
proach
that
“would
make
me
feel
much
more
confident to address [IPV] with a client.”
When asked about how RISE compares with the way
providers currently address IPV, providers noted that
RISE is much more detailed and comprehensive, stating
that “it’s massively leaps and bounds ahead. In other set-
tings I’ve had no guidance, so I was winging it.” Overall
these findings underscore the advantage of a structured
yet flexible intervention like RISE in potentially facilitat-
ing provider self-efficacy and comfort in addressing IPV.

Providers also noted that the example scripts lend
themselves to a conversational style with patients, which
can help to make both the provider and patient alike feel
at ease. This is particularly true for providers who may
not address IPV as often; one provide expressed that “If
you’re someone who doesn’t work with [IPV] on a regular
basis, but certainly might come across it, if I knew that I
was going to have a meeting with someone for something
unrelated to IPV, but I looked in their records and saw
there was a history of it, I would pull out this manual
and look at it and say ‘okay, here’s a way that I can ap-
proach this woman about this topic’ that will be con-
structive and helpful as opposed to who knows if I’m
being helpful or not … .it’s reassuring, like here’s some
steps, here’s some guides, there’s even an example of what
you can say. I like that a lot, especially if you’re in un-
charted territory.” Another provider echoed that the
manual is user friendly and accessible, “I definitely think
people would be open to using it. Among the good things
about it is that it’s very brief … and the actual language
within the manual and the sheets and everything are con-
versational and easy to read.” Several additional advantages
of RISE were noted, including that it is patient-centered
(as opposed to a provider-driven protocol), transdiagnostic,
proactive rather than reactive, feasible, and its flexibility ac-
commodates women’s variable preferences and needs.
Participants also gave feedback regarding what types of
providers and clinical contexts would be best suited to
facilitate the delivery of RISE. Providers felt that RISE is
a particularly good match for clinicians with training in
mental health and psychosocial health issues. Such pro-
viders include psychologists (e.g., clinical, health psy-
chologists),
social
workers,
marriage
and
family
therapists, as well as case managers and peer specialists.
In addition, participants described IPV Assistance Pro-
gram Coordinators as key referral sources for imple-
menting
RISE
in
VHA.
In
general,
while
MD
practitioners (i.e., PCPs, psychiatrists) in the study en-
dorsed that they were well suited to detect IPV or make
referrals to RISE, they felt that mental health providers
were better suited to deliver an intervention such as
RISE, noting, “it seems like there’s other people that are
better suited to do it … it’s a better fit for somebody like
a psychologist, peer specialist who does a lot of these
more practical things.” Providers recommended settings
for RISE implementation including integrated women’s
health primary care clinics, where social workers and
mental
health
professionals
are
typically
embedded
within the clinic to address psychosocial health issues.
Primary care mental health integration was noted as a
particularly promising context. In addition, outpatient
mental health (e.g., general mental health clinics, post
traumatic stress disorder clinics), and case management
were also mentioned.

Barriers
Participants identified several potential barriers to imple-
menting RISE. One participant noted that it may be dif-
ficult for providers to take a nonjudgmental, MI-
informed stance with their patients who are experiencing
IPV, noting, “I think it’s really, really hard – providers
really want to help, and they want to keep their patients
safe, and as a provider, I’ve seen other providers have a
really hard time with letting clients who are in abusive
relationships stay in those relationships. So I think taking
this really nonjudgmental frame and letting it be very
patient-focused, patient-centered, and patient-directed, if
it doesn’t go in the same direction that the provider
thinks it should go in, I think that can create a really
tough dynamic.” Relatedly, providers noted the difficul-
ties holding emotionally laden experiences. One provider
expressed, “I think there are people who are very uncom-
fortable sitting with trauma and violence and while I
don’t think that’s specific to this protocol, there’s some
folks who have very intense reactions to hearing about
others experiencing trauma and abuse, so I could see
them having difficulty from that standpoint.”
Providers also identified barriers such as the limited
time, resources, and space available in primary care and
other busy clinical settings. In particular, the burden of
other
clinical
responsibilities
within
primary
care,
coupled with large patient panels, make it difficult for
some types of providers (e.g., primary care physicians,
nurses) to have the time or wherewithal to provide com-
ponents of an intervention such as RISE, “I think people
are really open to interventions, but honestly it just really
comes down to time. If that wasn’t a factor and if people
had more freedom to be able to provide interventions
and try to help without being held hostage to a clinical
reminder or to a performance indicator, I think people
would be very open to doing something like this.” Relat-
edly, the length of the manual and the time required to
deliver it to patients were considered additional barriers
of addressing IPV. Some participants expressed that an
IPV intervention was not perceived as a priority by the
clinic, the healthcare system, and/or the leadership.
However, participants also perceived that the availability
of a clearly defined and feasible intervention could help
break down this barrier.

Content modifications
Key informants suggested several content modifications.
The most common request of providers emphasized the
importance of providing a clearer protocol for assessing
physical safety throughout the RISE intervention, even if
the patient does not select the safety module to focus
on. One provider suggested taking an approach similar
to that in Dialectical Behavior Therapy (DBT) [47, 48]
where safety is prioritized, “The DBT approach of really

being transparent up front in the initial introduction that
I as a provider feel compelled to highlight if there’s some-
thing that I’m really worried about imminent safety, I’m
going to really ask if we can discuss that piece.” Several
other informants also suggested a brief safety check-in
during the beginning of each RISE session so that any
concerns are prioritized in the session, whether it be
through the Safety Planning module or weaved into
other modules (e.g., Connecting with Resources). In
addition, informants felt it was important that RISE pro-
viders understand that safety planning will look different
depending on the woman’s unique situation, especially
when the woman is considering leaving the relationship
or is still in the relationship as opposed to having already
left and feels safe. One provider suggested adding a pro-
vider tip to the manual to specify this, “Add a tip before
the safety planning saying that a safety plan likely looks
different at these three sort of pivotal times in a relation-
ship: if someone is deciding [whether or not to leave], if
they’re planning to leave, and once they’ve left. Those are
three very different phases, so a safety plan would look
different if it’s tailored to one of those phases.”
Other content modifications included suggestions for
additional provider tips in the RISE manual about topics
such as vicarious traumatization and the importance of
RISE providers seeking consultation and self-care. Pro-
viders emphasized reasons this would be helpful, par-
ticularly for those with less experience with IPV and
trauma, noting that “It’s hard to hear this [IPV, trauma]
sometimes … so I think it’s important to acknowledge –
that hearing about trauma and relationship violence can
be difficult, especially for folks who haven’t worked in
trauma or in IPV before.” Consultation offers a potential
vehicle for seeking support; “to be able to consult with
others when you feel like there’s tension with the client or
other difficulties arising, could be really normalizing and
validating for providers as well.” Informants suggested
varying formats for consultation, including having a con-
sultation phone line available to call into as needed, or
having a structured consultation time set up following
the initial dose of training. Additionally, providers re-
quested a ‘cheat sheet’ or overview/summary page for
each module for ease of provider use, as well as a patient
manual that includes all of the handouts for the inter-
vention. Informants also requested that SMART (i.e.,
Specific, Measurable, Attainable, Realistic, Time-based)
goal terminology be embedded throughout the interven-
tion, and that local resources be included in the manual
in addition to the national resources.

Context modifications
Researchers identified several context modifications. In-
formants requested that the RISE intervention be offered
in different contexts in addition to individual counseling.

A group setting format was frequently suggested, noting
that “being in a group with other women who have gone
through or are going through what you’re going through
can be invaluable, having that safe space makes it feel
very normalizing for women.” Others suggested settings
for RISE include residential treatment programs as
women may be able to engage fully in these safe and
supportive contexts in which they are away from their
abuser. In addition, a few providers recommended the
potential for RISE to be delivered by telemedicine, which
may break down some barriers to receiving care for
some women, especially those who live far from VA.
Further, a modification that was frequently endorsed
across providers related to training. Providers discussed
the importance of a RISE-specific training, which could
include role-plays to help providers acclimate to RISE’s
structure and to observe and practice more difficult sce-
narios. Providers endorsed that an in-person workshop
or training would be helpful, and could potentially be
followed by ongoing consultation. Other informants sug-
gested that brief trainings during clinical team meetings
or via an online webinar training would be helpful for
providers who are interested in learning the RISE
intervention.

Discussion
Like other health care systems in the US and across the
globe, VHA is integrating mechanisms for identifying
women who experience IPV and is in need of evidence-
informed, acceptable, and feasible interventions to offer
women veterans who desire IPV-related treatment. The
current study solicited provider feedback to refine the
RISE intervention and plan for implementation in VHA.
Results revealed that providers perceived the interven-
tion as highly acceptable, noting strengths and relative
advantages including RISE’s nonjudgmental and empow-
ering
stance,
patient-centered
agenda,
user-friendly
structure, and its facilitation of both provider and pa-
tient comfort. Barriers to implementation were also
identified, including provider discomfort with IPV and
trauma, as well as limited time and resources to provide
this intervention in a busy clinical setting, especially
when IPV is not viewed as a priority health issue by a
healthcare system. These findings have guided refine-
ments to the RISE intervention both in terms of content
and implementation characteristics. Study findings have
implications for the utilization of UCD for other emer-
ging interventions for IPV and for adapting or modifying
existing IPV interventions.
A robust theme that researchers identified was the dis-
comfort providers experience in inquiring about IPV.
While inquiry about suicide and homicide risk is rou-
tinely done in both primary care and mental health set-
tings, informants described reluctance to ask about IPV,

in part due to the paucity of interventions for addressing
IPV. This finding is supported by the literature that
points to many barriers to routine IPV screening in pri-
mary care and mental health settings [49, 50]. As such,
RISE has the potential to fill a critical gap in the field
and to provide a framework for responding to IPV dis-
closure that goes beyond routine IPV screening. Accord-
ing to our findings, RISE may help to facilitate provider
comfort with not only asking about, but also addressing
IPV in a more comprehensive manner through deliver-
ing RISE or referring a female patient to RISE. This is
important because provider self-efficacy is an important
provider-level facilitator in addressing complex health is-
sues, including IPV [30, 51]. Furthermore, key infor-
mants provided insights into the type of training that
would be needed to help them develop a sense of self-
efficacy in using RISE to address IPV.
In addition, as knowledge regarding IPV becomes
more sophisticated and there continues to be calls to ad-
dress IPV within healthcare systems [1], there is a need
for a nuanced provider response to the disclosure of
IPV. While well-meaning providers have likely urged
those in unhealthy relationships to ‘just leave,’ such a
simplified approach risks missing the important nuances
of the complexities involved, including shared children,
and the ambivalence often experienced by women who
both care about a partner and are simultaneously being
hurt by their partner. As such, interventions for women
who have already left the violent relationship (e.g., the
Intervention for Health Enhancement After Leaving
[iHEAL; 21]), while highly important, are insufficient on
their own. Interventions for IPV need to reflect these
nuances, and provide a patient-centered framework that
can meet women where they are – independent of
whether or not women are ready, willing, or able to
leave the unhealthy relationship at any given moment in
time. As Hegarty and colleagues highlight, it is not suffi-
cient to only assess for the safety of women and children
when addressing IPV, but rather [interventions] “must
also respect and promote the dignity of women, validate
and understand the diversity of women’s experiences,
withhold judgment about what a woman should do and
when, and place ongoing support at the centre of the
interaction between the woman practitioner,” [52]. Simi-
lar to the WEAVE intervention [36, 52], RISE provides a
framework in order to do such, utilizing MI principles to
work through ambivalence and empowering and encour-
aging women to make the decisions that are best for
themselves and (when applicable) their families. Findings
support that providers are appreciative of these qualities
of the RISE intervention, providing language and a the-
oretical framework that meets these needs and thereby
is perceived to build confidence and comfort in ways to
holistically treat women dealing with IPV. In addition,

findings of this study bolster support for utilizing MI
principles to address IPV by suggesting their acceptabil-
ity and appropriateness from the provider perspective
[35, 36].
In line with a UCD framework, end-users and stake-
holders identified themes of content and context modifi-
cations that serve to inform refinement to the RISE
intervention. Themes that researchers identified (e.g.,
about safety, trainings, goal setting, patient materials)
align well with other evidence-based psychotherapies,
both with the VHA setting and beyond [e.g., 47, 48, 53,
54]. For example, the request for a handout only manual
for patients in addition to the provider manual, as well
as ongoing consultation following an in-person work-
shop or training, is similar to formats used to increase
the feasibility of delivering Cognitive Processing Therapy
(CPT) [53, 54] a widely used intervention for posttrau-
matic stress disorder that has been rolled out within
VHA. Further, the request by participants for safety
check-ins during each RISE session, independent of
whether the patient identifies safety as the topic that she
wants to focus on during the session, aligns with the
DBT approach [47, 48] in which safety is inquired about
and prioritized. Additionally, the suggestion to utilize
SMART goal terminology in the manual will likely help
to set women up for success in setting goals each ses-
sion, such that women are identifying specific, attainable,
and realistic goals that she can plan for and address be-
tween sessions, as opposed to lofty, unrealistic goals,
which may lead to feelings of inadequacy. These modifi-
cations identified during provider interviews have in-
formed refinements and improved the RISE intervention
and its implementation characteristics.
While this study focused on providers working with
veterans in the US’s largest integrated healthcare system,
findings may be broadly applicable to other countries
that provide healthcare to former service members and
veterans, such as the Veterans Affairs Canada, the De-
partment of Veterans Affairs in Australia, and the Ser-
vice Personnel and Veterans Agency in the United
Kingdom [55]. For example, issues raised by providers in
this study regarding vicarious traumatization, the im-
portance of providers treating trauma and IPV seeking
consultation and self-care, are not specific to providers
in the US, and are broadly applicable to providers work-
ing with veterans and/or trauma globally. Consultation
offers a possible venue for providers to seek support
from peers that may help to offset some of the impact of
vicarious traumatization.
Further, findings may be applicable for women’s health
providers who are addressing IPV and trauma broadly.
For example, the finding that having a structured ap-
proach to responding to IPV, which includes example
scripts
that
could
facilitate
provider
comfort
in

addressing IPV, may likely be transferrable for pro-
viders working with IPV across other settings and
contexts. Additionally, the barrier identified that pro-
viders may have a difficult time utilizing a nonjudg-
mental stance and MI principles when responding to
women who plan to remain in violent relationships is
likely applicable broadly. Utilizing MI principles, and
drawing from the Transtheoretical Model of Behavior
Change [56] to understand the stages of change that
a patient is currently in, as Hegarty and colleagues do
in their WEAVE intervention in Australia [52], is a
helpful tool in ensuring that therapy does not become
a ‘tug of war’ between provider and patient, and that
providers can meet patients where they are at in
terms of readiness for change. This study supports
utilization of Wiltsey Stirman and colleagues’ frame-
work when conducting UCD research throughout the
treatment development and evaluation for identifying
content, context, and training modifications to inter-
ventions [38]. The framework was useful for organiz-
ing and characterizing the variety of suggestions for
refinement, and may be useful in guiding or support-
ing intervention development or pre-implementation
efforts to adapt other interventions to increase their
relevance
and
feasibility
in
routine
care
delivery.
Thus, this research may prove useful to other efforts
that could benefit from established frameworks and
methodologies
for
enhancing
interventions
and
incorporating research on implementation characteristics
that will likely increase the adoption, acceptability, and
feasibility of the interventions by the intended end-users.
Several limitations exist in the present study. Providers
interviewed in this study work at VA Healthcare Systems
in the New England region of the US, and therefore
findings may be specific to these regions and healthcare
systems. As noted above, however, several findings are
particularly applicable to other settings and to women’s
health providers more generally. Nearly 40% of the sam-
ple were psychologists, and as such other professions
may be under represented in the current study, possibly
due to that physicians busy schedules may reduce en-
gagement in voluntary research studies. Further, the
current study did not formerly assess for provider’s level
of training in or experience with IPV, which may have
influenced results. Additionally, it is possible that other
undue influences (e.g., social desirability) may have im-
pacted provider response to study team members about
the RISE intervention. Further, RISE was developed spe-
cifically to target the needs of women veterans who have
experienced IPV, and while its principles likely could
apply to some other settings in the US and across the
globe, our findings may not be broadly applicable to
implementing RISE in countries where healthcare re-
sources are limited.

Future research should examine the RISE intervention
in practice using hybrid study designs [57], in order to
both examine the effectiveness of the intervention on
psychosocial outcomes (i.e., clinical outcomes) as well as
to provide evidence for the acceptability and feasibility
(i.e., implementation outcomes) anticipated by providers
in the current study. Trainings and workshops for the
RISE intervention should be further developed and ex-
amined based on the feedback provided in this study.
Calls for role-plays, web-based training, and ongoing
consultation are aspects of implementation that may be
particularly applicable to other IPV interventions and
other health care systems across the globe.
An additional area for research involves determining
the preferred settings for RISE implementation and dis-
semination.
While
providers
in
the
current
study
expressed hesitancy about implementing RISE in pri-
mary care settings due to time and resource constraints,
more research is needed to determine whether RISE can
be effectively implemented in integrated primary care
settings that include co-located mental, behavioral, or
social health providers, such as social workers and psy-
chologists, as part of the primary care medical home (re-
ferred to as Patient Aligned Care Teams in VHA) and
primary care mental health integration. Primary care
may be a setting that women are more willing to access
given that it is not associated with the same stigma as
mental health clinics, and many women veterans are
already followed in primary care routinely. Further,
RISE’s brief sessions (30–45 minutes) and short-term na-
ture (one and up to six sessions) may make it an ideal
intervention to implement in the fast-paced primary care
setting. Further, providers noted IPV Coordinators as
particularly well-suited for delivering RISE with women
veterans, given that all VHA medical centers are re-
quired to have an identified IPV Assistance Program Co-
ordinator to assist with policies and procedures for
addressing IPV, as well as to accommodate ‘warm hand-
offs’ and referrals for women who disclose IPV and are
interested in receiving interventions. In addition, if ef-
fective in an individual format, more research is needed
to examine RISE in different formats, such as in a group
setting, which would allow for social support and
normalization among other women who have experi-
enced IPV, but may not allow for as much individual au-
tonomy in selecting the module most relevant to a
patient’s specific needs.

Conclusions
IPV against women is a critical population health issue.
There remains a need to develop and evaluate interven-
tions to address IPV, especially among vulnerable popu-
lation such as women who have served in the military.
This study described an example of applying UCD and

implementation science principles to inform refinement
to the first IPV intervention of its kind for women vet-
erans in the US, for which there is a great need. We are
hopeful that by eliciting provider feedback early on in
intervention development and by incorporating current
findings into intervention refinement prior to formal ef-
fectiveness evaluation, we will accelerate the timeline for
implementing RISE into routine care, should it prove ef-
fective. We are hopeful that these methods and findings
can be applied broadly to other settings globally in
which providers are working with women to address
IPV and trauma.