Original Paper

A Digital Platform to Support Self-management of Multiple Chronic
Conditions (ProACT): Findings in Relation to Engagement During
a One-Year Proof-of-Concept Trial

Julie Doyle1, BSc, PhD; Emma Murphy2,3, BA, MSc, PhD; Shane Gavin1, BSc; Alessandra Pascale4, BSc, MSc, PhD;
Stéphane Deparis4, BSc, MSc, PhD; Pierpaolo Tommasi4, BSc, MSc; Suzanne Smith1, BSocSci, MSc; Caoimhe
Hannigan2,5, BA, MSc, PhD; Myriam Sillevis Smitt6, BSc, MSc; Cora van Leeuwen6, MA, MSc; Julia Lastra7, BSc,
MSc; Mary Galvin2, BA, HDip, PhD; Patricia McAleer1, BSc, MSc; Lorraine Tompkins2, BSc, MSc; An Jacobs6,
MSc, PhD; Marta M Marques2,8, PhD; Jaime Medina Maestro7, BSc, MSc; Gordon Boyle1, BSc, MA; John Dinsmore2,
BSc, PhD

1NetwellCASALA, Dundalk Institute of Technology, Dundalk, Ireland
2Trinity Centre for Practice and Healthcare Innovation, School of Nursing and Midwifery, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland
3TU Dublin, Dublin, Ireland
4IBM Research Europe, Dublin, Ireland
5Department of Psychology, National University of Ireland, Dublin, Dublin, Ireland
6Imec-VUB-SMIT, Brussels, Belgium
7Tree Technology, Madrid, Spain
8ADAPT SFI Research Centre, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland

Julie Doyle, BSc, PhD
NetwellCASALA
Dundalk Institute of Technology
Dublin Road
Dundalk, A91 K584
Ireland
Phone: 353 429370497

Methods

Inclusion Criteria and Recruitment

Trials occurred in Ireland and Belgium. The inclusion criteria
for people with multimorbidity were that they were aged >65
years and had a diagnosis of two or more of the following
diseases: diabetes, COPD, CHD, and CHF. It should be noted
that 1 participant in Belgium was aged 60 years. This participant
had initially recorded an incorrect date of birth on the screening
documentation, and this was not discovered until after the
participant had already begun the trial. This person was excluded
from the core analysis presented in this paper. However, a
separate analysis of their data was conducted, and the outcomes
reflected those participants aged 65 years and above. Participants
were recruited from a number of sources, including social groups
for older adults, condition support groups, social media, radio
and local newspaper advertising, formal care organizations,
health care professionals, pharmacists, and living lab agencies.
People with multimorbidity could also nominate up to 5 people
to be part of their care network (including informal and formal
carers and health care professionals). A total of 73 care network
participants consented to participate. However, this paper
focuses solely on the person with multimorbidity participants.

Study Design

The study was a PoC trial, which used an action research design,
to allow for continuous feedback from participants and
refinement of the ProACT platform throughout the trial. There
were 3 action research cycles (ARCs) and 4 time points (T1-T4)
of data collection, involving collection of questionnaire data,
semistructured interviews, and usability testing (Figure 13).
Refinements were made to the ProACT platform based on the
feedback from participants at the end of each ARC. The same
study design and methodologies were used across Ireland and
Belgium to ensure consistency and comparability. The specific
objectives were as follows:

•
Evaluate the usability and acceptability of the ProACT
CareApp and devices
•
Evaluate user adoption and satisfaction with the technology
and services
•
Evaluate experiences of using ProACT

In this paper, we focus on the findings from studies that relate
to engagement with the platform and usability.

Figure 13. Study timeline across action research cycles. ARC: action research cycle.

Procedures

Each participant was provided with an iPad, a smart watch to
monitor sleep and activity, a digital weight scale, and a digital
blood pressure cuff. Those with diabetes were provided with a
blood glucose monitor (glucometer), whereas those with COPD
were provided with a pulse oximeter to measure oxygen
saturation levels. During the initial visit to the participant’s
home, the devices were set up by the researcher, and training
was provided on using the devices. A second visit,
approximately 1 week later, introduced the ProACT CareApp
to the participants, and further training was provided. Each of
the participants received a detailed paper-based training manual,
while training videos on how to use the devices and CareApp
were also available in the Tips section of the CareApp. The
participants were asked to use the ProACT platform as they
wished to evaluate how ProACT would fit into their lives
naturally. During the trial, data from the participants were
monitored by a clinical triage service in each country, appointed
through a tendering process. The triage staff determined a
protocol for alerts and escalation procedures in the case of an
alert. The alerts were set within the SIMS triage platform
described above. These were initially set at a global level (eg,
the same blood glucose thresholds were set for all diabetic
participants) and as the trial progressed, these could be
individualized based on a person’s normal range or input from
their health care professional. The triage staff responded to alerts
between 9 AM and 5 PM, Monday-Friday (hours were limited
because of project budget) and made monthly check-in phone
calls. Participants were made aware of the hours of triage, both
through their project information sheet and a weekly pop-up
message in the CareApp. Participants also had a helpdesk
number they could call if they experienced any technical issues
or wanted to request further training. A researcher was available
to answer calls between 9 AM and 5 PM, Monday-Friday.
Outside these hours, the participants could leave a message.

Data Collection and Analysis

The full study protocol, including details on all data collected
during the trial and full analysis procedures, can be found in
Dinsmore et al [51]. For the purposes of this study, data
collection comprised interview data and questionnaire data on
usability and user burden at each time point, which coincided
with the end of each ARC. These data were collected at the
participants’ homes. Interview protocols at time point T1
covered motivations and expectations, whereas interviews at
later time points covered a range of topics with respect to
participants’ experiences in terms of using the technology,
benefits and challenges, their self-management practices, and
care network support. Interviews were audio recorded and
transcribed verbatim. A semantic thematic analysis [52] of these
transcripts was then conducted using NVivo for Mac (version
11) in Ireland and MAXQDA in Belgium. A selection of
transcripts was coded by 2 researchers to ensure a thorough
iterative identification of a wide range of semantic themes.
Initial broad coding was performed to identify the themes of
interest, as covered within the interview protocols. Within these
broader themes, an iterative thematic analysis was conducted
to uncover the subthemes. Themes with respect to engagement
are presented in this paper, whereas other themes (such as those

relating to the self-management journey, experiences with the
technology, behavioral change, and collaboration with the care
network) are being submitted for publication elsewhere. Data
on engagement with the system were logged through the
ProACT platform, and metrics analyzed included the number
of symptom readings per day and engagement with different
sections of the CareApp.

Although additional data were collected during the trial, such
as interview data with care network participants and triage staff,
as well as the symptom and well-being data collected through
the ProACT platform, the analysis of such data is outside the
scope of this paper and will be published elsewhere.

Ethical Considerations

Ethical approval was received from 3 ethical committees in
Ireland and 4 in Belgium. All procedures were in line with the
General Data Protection Regulation for research projects, with
the platform and trial methods and procedures undergoing data
protection impact assessments in both countries. Written
informed consent was obtained on an individual basis from
participants in accordance with legal and ethical guidelines in
each trial region, following a careful explanation of the study
and provision of patient information and informed consent forms
in plain language. All participants were informed of their right
to withdraw from the study at any point without having to
provide a reason for this.

Results

Overview

In total, 120 people with multimorbidity consented to participate,
60 in Ireland and 60 in Belgium. In Ireland, the average age of
the participants was 74.23 (SD 6.4) years, and 60% (36/60)
were male. In Belgium, the average age of the participants was
73.61 (SD 6.49) years, and the participants were predominantly
male (43/60, 72%). Additional demographic data are presented
in Table S1 of Multimedia Appendix 1. In this section, we
present findings with respect to engagement with the ProACT
platform, usability, and user burden and outline findings from
the interviews with person with multimorbidity participants
across the different time points that relate to engagement with
ProACT. In particular, we focus on motivations to engage along
with facilitators and barriers to engagement. At the end of the
participant quotes, we identified the participant with the legend
(ID, gender, age, inclusion conditions, time point, and country).

Engagement With ProACT

Over the course of the 12-month trial, the majority of
participants remained engaged with ProACT. By the end of the
trial, 3 participants had died in Ireland and 8 had withdrawn,
resulting in 49 participants in Ireland completing the trial. In
Belgium, 16 people withdrew, resulting in 44 participants
completing the trial. Exit interviews were conducted with a
subset of those who withdrew early and who consented to this.
The reasons for withdrawal are discussed below in the Barriers
to Engagement section.

Engagement with the sensor devices (used to record key
symptom data) and ProACT CareApp were measured through

J Med Internet Res 2021 | vol. 23 | iss. 12 | e22672 | p. 13

the platform. The heat maps in Figures 14 and 15 illustrate high
levels of engagement with the ProACT devices for measuring
key symptoms and well-being parameters, by the majority of
participants in Belgium and Ireland, respectively. The horizontal
bars of each graph depict one participant, with the start of the
bar indicating their recruitment to the trial and the end of the
bar indicating their exit from the trial. White bars indicate
dropouts or those who died. During the trial, there was an
average of 40 (SD 7.6) users in Ireland and 43 (SD 16.6) users
in Belgium, taking measurements on a daily basis. The
maximum number of participants recorded taking measurements
on any day during the trial was 48 in Ireland and 60 in Belgium.
Participants had an average of 2 daily readings in Ireland and
three daily readings in Belgium.

Figure 16 shows how the ProACT CareApp was used across
all trial participants: each row is a session and each cell is
colored depending on the time spent on each section of the
CareApp (the sections can be seen in the bottom menu in Figures
3-5). White cells are sessions with no visits to the correspondent
section. With this in mind, My Profile and Tips were less visited
sections. The rest of the sections are quite dense in the graph,
which means that they have been frequently visited. More green
cells are visible in View Readings, which means that participants
spent more time checking their vitals than entering data or
looking at their Dashboard (Figure 3). Furthermore, Tips,
despite being a less visited section, has a significant number of
green cells, which is expected as participants would likely spend
more time here, viewing relevant educational videos or reading
health tips.

Figure 14. User engagement in Belgium—daily symptom readings.

Figure 15. User engagement in Ireland—daily symptom readings.

J Med Internet Res 2021 | vol. 23 | iss. 12 | e22672 | p. 14

Figure 16. Heatmap of CareApp section visits across the trial period.

Figure 17 shows the percentage of time, on average, that trial
participants spent in different sections of the CareApp. No
significant difference was recorded for those aged less than 74
years compared with those aged over 74 years across the
different sections of the CareApp. When a user opens the
CareApp, they land on the Dashboard, which accounts for the
highest percentage of section visits. The View Readings (where
participants could see an overview of all their health and
well-being data) and Add Info sections (where participants could
answer the daily questions or add a manual symptom reading)
were the most frequently visited sections by both age groups.
Participants navigated to the Tips section less often. This may
be because the Tips were used mostly at the beginning of the
trial, as participants were learning about their conditions and

self-management. Future work will examine this issue further.
Similarly, the reflection feature (Figure 4), which asks
participants if a particular daily reading is high or low for them,
was not used as much as other sections of the CareApp, and our
data show that its use declined over time.

Finally, the Goal Recommender was implemented within the
platform for the final 8 weeks of the trial, primarily to test
whether it worked as expected. Approximately half of the
participants (53/96, 55%) set at least 1 activity goal during this
period. Almost 75% (39/53) of participants set their goals in
steps rather than meters or minutes. Furthermore, participants
felt comfortable with the metric chosen—just 3 changed it over
the course of the 8 weeks (from distance to steps).

Figure 17. Percentage of time participants engaged with different sections of the CareApp across the trial period, categorized by age group.

J Med Internet Res 2021 | vol. 23 | iss. 12 | e22672 | p. 15

Usability and User Burden of ProACT

The participants completed the system usability scale (SUS) at
T2, T3, and T4. The SUS is a 10-item questionnaire and is a
quick and reliable tool for measuring the usability of both
hardware and software products [53]. SUS scores range from
0 to 100. A value above 68 indicates that the system is usable.
Table 1 indicates that SUS scores during the trial over time

points T2, T3, and T4 remained relatively the same in Ireland
and Belgium and above the threshold of 68, which indicates
that participants considered ProACT to be usable. User burden
was also measured at T2, T3, and T4 using the user burden
questionnaire that measures the burden across six constructs,
including difficulty of use, physical, time and social, mental
and emotional, privacy, and financial [54]. No significant
increases in burden were experienced over time.

Table 1. Usability and user burden scores across time points in Ireland and Belgium.

Time points, mean (SD)

T4
T3
T2

Usability

75.6 (14.7)
72.4 (14.5)
74.6 (14.6)
Ireland

75.5 (20.8)
74.9 (16.8)
78.1 (17.0)
Belgium

User burden

5.5 (4.6)
5.0 (4.4)
4.7 (4.0)
Ireland

5.8 (6.6)
5.2 (5.1)
3.2 (3.1)
Belgium

Participant interviews provided insights into possible usability
and burden issues associated with using the platform. The SUS
did not distinguish between the ProACT CareApp and
symptom-monitoring devices. However, participant feedback
suggests that the majority of usability issues lay with using the
devices, in particular the blood pressure monitor and the
glucometer, which was a source of frustration for some
participants:

I 
just 
stopped 
taking 
the 
blood 
pressure
measurements. Because all the equipment wasn’t
working properly. In that it wasn’t connecting to the
iPad. There was one morning I timed it and it was
only after spending half an hour connecting the thing
on 
the 
screen.
[P009, 
male, 
71 
years,
COPD+CHD+Diabetes, T3, Ireland]
Questions about accuracy were also noted: “Look last Friday
it did not register sleep, why not?” [P106, male, 70 years,
diabetes+CHD+CHF, T2, Belgium]. P103 (female, 79 years,
diabetes+CHD+CHF, T2, Belgium) who had mobility issues
stated that her limited steps do not always register.

Despite several reported device issues, participants felt that the
platform was usable:

The app itself I think is very good. And I think it’s
helpful to get people to focus on a small number of
things. That are key to their, you know their health.
To also have a system that was easy to use, it is easy
to use. [P015, male, 82 years, diabetes+CHD, T3,
Ireland]
Everything links in quickly enough...And I don’t have
a problem, there’s no delay or whatever in it. It’s
straightforward. I think the equipment is excellent.
[P012, male, 67 years, diabetes+CHD, T3, Ireland]

Motivations to Engage

Overview

Two primary subthemes emerged with respect to motivation to
engage at T1, which remained present at T2, T3, and T4 as
reasons for continued engagement with ProACT:

•
Improving self-management
•
Improvement of health and well-being

Improving Self-management

At the start of the trial, improving self-management was noted
by the majority of participants as the reason they wanted to
engage with ProACT:

I haven’t focused sharply enough [on health] and this
is where I think this programme maybe will give me
a bit of a kick in the backside, where it’s very in your
face and very visual and you know, just to see like
say the blood pressure or the blood sugar readings.
[P033, male, 65 years, diabetes+CHD, T1, Ireland]
The participants felt that improved self-management would be
achieved by gaining insights into their health from actively
self-managing and seeing results, learning about conditions,
learning what to avoid, and learning what to do if symptoms
are changing.

At the start of the trial, a number of participants discussed how
they hoped using ProACT would lead to increased confidence
both in terms of managing their health and engaging with
activity:

You know, seeing the results, it might give more
confidence...I’d like to be able to have a round of golf
and also I’d love to get back and play an odd set of
tennis. [P052, 78 years, male, diabetes+CHD, T1,
Ireland]
P052, like many participants before beginning the trial, was
fearful of undertaking physical activity in case it exacerbated

J Med Internet Res 2021 | vol. 23 | iss. 12 | e22672 | p. 16

their conditions. Interview data from later time points in the
trial show the participants became more empowered and
confident in their self-management, as they used the ProACT
CareApp to reflect on and compare data from a range of devices,
in 1 place, across multiple symptom and well-being readings:

[The technology] gives you confidence, to be honest
with you. And I quite like being able to take my own
blood pressure and stats, so as I’m still in control.
[P031, male, 70 years, CHF+CHD, T2, Ireland]
P115 spoke of her fear before the trial, as an exacerbation could
happen at any time:

I was living on a timebomb. Now, I do not live on any
different timebomb than anyone else. [P115, female,
73 years, CHF+CHD, T3, Belgium]
You are not as frightened because you know your
readings and everything like that. [P036, male, 72
years, COPD+CHD, T4, Ireland]
This was partly linked to higher levels of awareness:

Well, I suppose by being a bit more aware and a bit
more in control, it’s a positive thing and I suppose
you have a bit more confidence as a consequence.
[P033, male, 65 years, diabetes+CHD, T2, Ireland]
Participants also reported making sense of how their actions
affected their health, giving insight into what behaviors they
could moderate or change to improve their various health
readings:

Well it’s telling me what’s going on I suppose, I’ve a
better idea myself and can relate the two together. If
I haven’t had activity, I can see how that is affecting
blood sugars. I can see the relationship between the
two, it’s becoming clearer. [P012, male, 67 years,
diabetes+CHD, T3, Ireland]
Related to this, participants reported taking action based on
their insights across their conditions and well-being, including
changing their behaviors to improve their health readings.
Participants also reported taking action with respect to their use
of health care and interactions with health care professionals:

It is one of the reasons, through the use, that I went
to my GP. That I said look, I am a bit worried. And
then we looked for a solution and different medication
and such. And that has changed due to [ProACT].
[P71, male, 69 years, COPD+CHD, T2, Belgium]
Notably, some participants reported going to the doctor less as
they had more confidence from knowing their readings:

When I get an attack, the COPD or whatever flares,
I can recognise [now] whether I need an antibiotic
or not...Whereas before [using the technology], as
soon as my breathing sort of laboured I’d be at the
doctor. [P045, 74 years, female, diabetes+COPD, T4,
Ireland]
Many participants experienced benefits from such actions, which
motivated engagement with the ProACT platform:

It’s a whole health awareness...That’s what [the
technology] has created. Before this, I knew I needed

to look after my health, but nobody does, and I got
this system, now it’s become a matter of routine.
[P053, male, 71 years, diabetes+CHD, T3, Ireland]
For P034, who reported struggling with mental health
challenges, it was especially reassuring to see mood changes
including periods of positive mood:

Oh, that was the highlight of my week, looking back
on how I was doing...If I saw my graph was going up,
and I wasn’t as anxious yesterday as I was before,
that would give me a bit of a boost. [P034, 67 years,
male, COPD+CHF, T4, Ireland]

Improving Health and Well-being

At T1, many participants expressed hope that engaging with
ProACT and improving their self-management skills would in
turn lead to improved health and a better quality of life, and this
was the case for a number of participants:

My health has improved immensely...I’ve probably
got the AFib [atrial fibrillation] under control...But,
as I say, I’ve lost weight and I feel much better in
myself. Mentally, physically, every way. [P031, male,
70 years, CHF+CHD, T3, Ireland]
Indeed, throughout the trial, there were a number of critical
clinical outcomes reported by participants in both Ireland and
Belgium, where engagement with ProACT exerted a clear
impact on a health outcome or directly influenced a change in
treatment or care for the participant:

I’ve been in with my GP, he’s increasing the
medication. And we’re still not there with it, so it may
need to be tweaked further. So, without this system I
might’ve been, you know, pretty oblivious to the fact
that there is an issue there you know. [P033, male,
65 years, diabetes+CHD, T3, Ireland]
Participants reported symptoms stabilizing as a result of
implementing self-management practices:

I mean on average they [blood glucose readings]
were 14 or 15 [14 mmol is threshold for a high alert],
before this research started. And that was continuous.
Now it’s halved. Because I’m focused on improving
it. [P014, male, 70 years, diabetes+CHD, T3, Ireland]
Changes in food and diet were also widely reported, as well as
increased activity levels, particularly as participants began to
see the links between their activity and symptoms:

Well, the whole thing for me really is trying to get my
weight down and keep my blood sugars down. And
it’s more stable...It’s [ProACT] done everything
really, it’s gotten my exercise levels up because it
focused me on it. It’s got my blood sugars back in
order. [P048, male, 67 years, diabetes+CHD, T2,
Ireland]
When I started [ProACT] up to now, I feel fitter...It
is only 4000 steps, but I used to do maybe like 300
steps 
a 
day.
[P111, 
male, 
76 
years,
diabetes+CHD+COPD, T3, Belgium]

J Med Internet Res 2021 | vol. 23 | iss. 12 | e22672 | p. 17

Although participants in Belgium reported experiencing
stabilization of symptoms and improvements in terms of activity
and weight, few participants explicitly stated that they thought
their health had improved. Most of the perceived health
situations remained stable, except for those who endured health
setbacks because of their illnesses or unfortunate incidents (eg,
P117 had a fall and P81 had a car accident). However, 1
participant linked his engagement with the technology and the
triage service with his continued ability to live alone:

They [family] were planning on doing that last year
[sending him to a nursing home], now I do not have
to, because I can make my own plan, because I can
control 
myself.
[P74, 
male, 
72 
years,
diabetes+CHD+CHF, T3, Belgium]
When participants attributed potential changes in health to using
the platform, they were related to changes in attitude or
behavior.

Potential Facilitators of Engagement

An important element of the ProACT platform, which was
implemented during the trial, was the service provided alongside
platform usage. A large theme that emerged across T2, T3, and
T4 was Service and Support, which had 2 elements, namely,
the triage service and the technical helpdesk. The triage service
was one of the most commonly discussed topics by ProACT
users in Ireland and Belgium. The majority of participants
commented on the reassurance of having their readings
monitored by the triage service. Most found it beneficial to
know someone was looking out for them behind the scenes and
making sure their readings were within a normal range:

The fact that...I knew someone was keeping an eye
on it. And if that something was going out of kilter
[range] that I’d get a nudge. And that’s all I’d need...I
know there’s a nurse there who’s looking at these
figures. [P015, male, 82 years, Diabetes+CHD, T3,
Ireland]
Participants also noted how the triage nurses acted as a backup
if they were to miss something, which gave further peace of
mind:

It has given my wife a feeling of reassurance. People
are keeping an eye on me. For me...it is also a
reassurance. [P81, male, 68 years, CHD+CHF, T4,
Belgium]
As noted above, a number of participants reported clinical
outcomes during the trial, and many of these were a result of
triage intervention:

They [triage] had suggested maybe to go and get my
cholesterol checked and my cholesterol was a bit high.
It had been going a bit high and then my medication
was changed, and it was as a result of ProACT.
[P039, female, 66 years, COPD+CHD, T4, Ireland]
[Triage nurse] told me get her into a hospital straight
away otherwise you’re going to have a body on your
hands. Bring her out to the hospital and tell them the
way she is. And I did that, and they kept her in...Yeah
she [nurse] wanted to send an ambulance. [Husband

speaking during T3 interview for P018, female, 73
years, diabetes+CHD, T3, Ireland]
Social connection and personalized care were also identified as
a subtheme within the triage service theme, whereby users felt
that the triage nurses truly cared about their well-being. The
majority of participants commented on how the nurses took the
time to chat to them, enquire about their health, and found the
phone calls to be a very pleasant experience: “What I think is
so good about it, is that you have the feeling that someone thinks
it is important what I do.” [P101, male, 72 years, CHF+CHD,
T3, Belgium]. Participants also appreciated the continuity of
care and that the nurses always followed up on any issues,
something many participants felt was lacking with their usual
health care providers.

The research teams also operated a technical helpdesk that
participants could call (Monday-Friday, 9 AM-5 PM) if they
were experiencing any difficulties using the technology. When
a participant called the helpdesk, the researcher attempted to
troubleshoot with the participant over the phone. If this was not
possible, then a researcher visited the participant to ensure that
the issue was resolved. The responsiveness of this service was
an important element in ensuring that participants could remain
technically engaged with the ProACT platform and provide a
fast and meaningful response to technical barriers encountered
by participants, which might otherwise have resulted in
disengagement:

I was helped along every time...[researchers] arrived
straight away or as soon as possible to sort it out for
me. [P043, female, 77 years, COPD+CHF, T4,
Ireland]
To offer context to the necessity of the helpdesk, there were a
total of 355 calls to the helpdesk in Ireland over the course of
the trial (helpdesk calls were not tracked in Belgium). Of these,
22% (78/355) were administrative calls, such as participants
informing the team of an upcoming holiday or requesting
clarification on interview dates. The remaining 78% (277/355)
were related to tech support. Of these, 76 calls were requests
for peripherals (eg, batteries for the blood pressure cuff and
additional testing strips for the blood glucose monitor), 121
were for devices not working (eg, a blood pressure cuff that
would not turn on), 50 related to data syncing issues (eg, if
participants did not see their readings appear in the ProACT
CareApp), 31 related to data accuracy concerns (eg, if a
participant’s own blood glucose monitor had a different reading
to the digital one provided with ProACT), and 29 involved
pairing or connection problems (eg, accidentally turning off
Bluetooth).

Barriers to Engagement

Although the majority of participants learned to master the
ProACT technology over time, technical issues were a barrier
that ultimately led to some participants withdrawing from the
trial. For P007 and P037 in Ireland, the reasons for withdrawal
were frustration with the devices. Both found the devices and
apps complicated to use: “It was just too hard to do because
you couldn’t in the first place take the blood pressure anyway
because it wasn’t working.” [P037, female, 82 years,
COPD+CHD, Ireland]. Although care was taken to address

J Med Internet Res 2021 | vol. 23 | iss. 12 | e22672 | p. 18

these issues, for example, by replacing devices and providing
further training, the initial experience for these participants
resulted in a negative perception of the technology, which led
to their disengagement. Related to this was a lack of trust in the
readings. Some participants, including P93 and P105 in Belgium,
found that the digital glucometer provided for the trial gave
higher readings than their own personal glucometer, which
caused them to distrust data from the trial device.

The second most common reason for withdrawing from the trial
involved the complexity of the participants’ conditions. For
some, monitoring with ProACT felt like an added burden. Three
participants in Ireland who withdrew did so as they felt they
had enough to deal with in managing their conditions or with
health complications which had arisen since the start of the trial.
This was expressed by an informal carer for P007: “I think P007
has enough to contend with at the moment” [IC for P007,
female, 78 years, diabetes+CHD, Ireland] and by P037 who felt
under pressure to generate readings:

Well I was conscious of how much I was walking, you
know and I’d walk up and down to the shed a whole
lot of times if I wasn’t out. So that was it, but I
couldn’t stick that for a year. [P037, female, 82 years,
COPD+CHD, IE]
P007’s informal carer noted that readings generated concern:
“Sometimes it was a little bit scary when you were getting those
readings.” P105 (76 years, female, diabetes+COPD+CHD,
Belgium) stated that she experienced an extra burden by being
confronted by some of the information provided by ProACT.
She said that as a patient with diabetes, she already needed to
be aware of a lot and that the pressure she felt from seeing the

additional readings, such as activity, was experienced as too
much of an extra burden.

Discussion

Principal Findings

This paper has presented the ProACT platform alongside
findings with respect to engagement and usability from a 1-year
PoC trial of the platform with 120 older people with
multimorbidity across 2 EU countries. The findings demonstrate
that the majority of participants actively engaged with the
platform over the full duration of the trial, taking on average
between 2 and 3 readings every day and engaging with
self-reporting and their data in the CareApp. The qualitative
data indicate that participants were motivated to engage as they
found value and benefit in using the platform, including
improving their self-management, gaining confidence, and
experiencing health and well-being benefits. The results also
indicate that participants found the platform usable and of low
burden. Our study makes two primary contributions to the
literature. First, we describe a novel, comprehensive digital
platform, including CareApps, participant management, clinical
triage, and analytics, and outline how it has been designed to
support the self-management of multimorbidity. A recent
systematic review highlighted that such platforms are lacking,
and those that exist only target single disease management [29].
Second, we demonstrated that older adults were actively engaged
with the platform over a 1-year period and we presented
qualitative data to understand the possible reasons for this result.
Textbox 1 summarizes the potential factors that may have
enhanced engagement, which are elaborated upon in the
remainder of this section.

Textbox 1. Likely impact of ProACT components on engagement.

Outcomes

•
Engaging with symptom and well-being monitoring

•
Engaging with reviewing data and acting on it

Potential Factors That Enhanced Engagement

•
User-centered design (understanding needs and requirements)

•
Usability of app

•
All data on 1 platform

•
Benefits experienced because of monitoring

•
Technical support when needed, including face-to-face training during deployment and technical training via the application supplemented by
paper-based materials

•
Clinical oversight and support provided by triage nurses

Recently, researchers of human-computer interaction have begun
to explore how technology can support the self-management of
multimorbidity [18,21,22,24,55]. The majority of this research
has focused on suggesting design requirements for technology,
including understanding the requirements of people with
multimorbidity and those who care for them [21-23,55],
supporting communication about values with people with
multimorbidity and health care professionals [27], managing
health care conflicts [24], and medication management [20,28].

Research has also suggested potential reasons for those with
multimorbidity not engaging with technology-supported
self-management (including self-tracking being experienced as
work and perceptions that health care professionals are not
interested in self-tracked data) [18]. Our work in designing and
developing the ProACT platform occurred before much of this
recent research was published, with the trial beginning in April
2018. However, there are parallels in terms of design suggestions
for multimorbidity management. Ancker et al [18] stated that

J Med Internet Res 2021 | vol. 23 | iss. 12 | e22672 | p. 19

technologies for multimorbidity self-management will only be
successful if they do not place further inconvenience or burden
on the person. Indeed, earlier phases of our work, to understand
user needs, highlighted how consuming it is living with and
managing multimorbidity [21]. This was one of the primary
drivers for designing a single platform for multiple
self-management tasks, which includes features and analytics
to help people with multimorbidity prioritize their conditions
(eg, by highlighting on the dashboard flower those currently
needing attention; Figure 3).

Caldeira et al [24] suggested three design guidelines for
technology to support multimorbidity management: promoting
conflict awareness (between disease and self-management
approaches), supporting conflict resolution (to the most relevant
approaches depending on symptom changes), and promoting
patient expertise (to enact the approaches needed), which were
considered while designing the ProACT platform. Considering
patient expertise, the authors suggest that providing detailed
health information and education can facilitate learning and
contribute to expertise [24]. Our earlier findings also highlighted
the lack of support people with multimorbidity receive in
self-management [21], which identified the need for educational
material, appropriate training on using self-management
technology, and a triage service that would not only respond to
symptom alerts but also motivate, support, and reinforce
education 
presented 
through 
CareApp. 
People 
with
multimorbidity in our study reported more awareness and
increased confidence with respect to self-management,
demonstrated the knowledge of their conditions, and what can
impact them. With respect to designing for conflicts,
CareAnalytics within ProACT have been designed to support
the recognition and resolution of conflicts. For example, the
Health and Wellness Profiler computes a probabilistic
description of the person with multimorbidity, which is
particularly important for multimorbidity, and all conditions
can be considered while assessing the risk associated with the
other variables in the model. For instance, the estimated
probability of a given physical activity level is not the same if
the person with multimorbidity has a fear of falling in addition
to COPD. Using an automated goal recommender that
considered individual patterns related to the performance of a
given behavior (eg, goal achievement, optimal levels of activity),
disease, symptoms, and usage of the recommendation feature,
contribute to more personalized and adaptive digital health
interventions. The goal recommender was only implemented
for 8 weeks during the trial and was focused solely on physical
activity goals. Future work with respect to this feature and
analytic will focus on a more holistic approach to goal setting
to better support the self-management of multimorbidity, in line
with findings identified in our previous research [36]. Similarly,
the education recommender will ensure that any recommended
content considers the person with multimorbidity’s condition
and comorbidity profile as well as their current status to help
them better understand potential conflicts and how to deal with
them. With time, the artificial intelligence systems within
ProACT are expected to learn from the data to provide more
accurate recommendations and include additional parameters
of personalization (eg, progress in other health behaviors,
personalized education).

Despite this promising recent interest in understanding how to
design technologies for the self-management of multimorbidity,
there is little research on platforms that have actually been
designed and implemented or evaluated for longitudinal periods.
However, there is an abundance of research exploring how
technology can support the management of single chronic
diseases, including diabetes [56-58], COPD and related
respiratory diseases [59], chronic kidney disease [60], and
hypertension [61]. Our findings have many parallels with these
studies. For example, Visser et al [58] explored the experiences
of older adults using blood glucometers to monitor type 1
diabetes. The majority of participants reported that they
sustained use of the device over time to know how much insulin
was required before meals and because using the device gave
a sense of safety and confidence. A greater confidence in
practicing self-management was observed in our qualitative
findings. The ability of the technology to provide novel insights
into one’s conditions and support the prevention of
exacerbations (keeping symptoms under control) was also
identified in our study, with similar benefits reported by
Tenendez et al [59] in their study of older people self-managing
chronic respiratory disease. There are also some differences
between our findings and those of others. Tenendez et al found
that participants took a reactive approach to self-managing,
including the monitoring of symptoms, only doing so when they
felt unwell [59]. The authors suggested that the potential reasons
for this are that monitoring chronic respiratory conditions can
be overwhelming and make people more conscious of their
disease. They also suggest that long-term daily self-monitoring
can lack value for those with chronic respiratory conditions,
something that has also been highlighted by others [62,63]. Our
findings contradict this result, thus indicating that people did
find value and benefit in engaging in monitoring and seeing
their data, with additional perceived value because of the triage
service providing backup and peace of mind.

Our findings with respect to engagement with the sensor devices
and CareApp indicate a high level of engagement with symptom
and well-being monitoring and review. However, research has
noted the importance of effective engagement rather than simply
sustained or more engagement, with effective engagement being
defined as sufficient engagement with the digital intervention
to achieve intended outcomes [30]. Intended outcomes, from
the perspective of digital health interventions, often relate to
changes in behavior and improved health and well-being. For
the ProACT trial, the key behavior under examination was
engagement with the platform for self-management. Given that
the ProACT platform represents a novel technology, the
objectives of the trial were to evaluate usage, usability, and
experiences to allow for the refinement of the technology before
a trial to determine its effectiveness. This has been deemed a
necessary approach to digital health intervention development
and evaluation [64,65]. For example, Klasnja et al [64] suggest
that evaluations of novel technologies should focus on
human-computer interaction outcomes, including efficacy
evaluations of specific intervention strategies such as
self-monitoring and gaining a deep understanding of user
experiences. Engagement with interventions has also been
described as a precondition for effectiveness [30]. Although
effectiveness was not specifically measured in our study, the

J Med Internet Res 2021 | vol. 23 | iss. 12 | e22672 | p. 20

qualitative data indicated that participants changed their
behaviors, including that they improved their self-management
skills, got their symptoms under control, engaged in physical
activity, experienced weight loss, and changed when and how
they interacted with their health care professionals. Participants
in Ireland also reported improvements in health. The analysis
of the sensor and well-being data collected through the platform
during the trial is currently underway, focusing particularly on
symptom stabilization and physical activity to determine whether
engagement with the intervention had a positive impact on these
areas.

Previous research has indicated that the adoption of
self-management technologies is limited [66]. Studies on the
adoption of self-management technologies by older adults,
particularly the oldest old, are lacking [67]. A number of studies
have focused on conducting interviews, focus groups, or surveys
with older adults to gauge interest in health technologies or
barriers. Many of these reported negative attitudes. For example,
Heart and Kalderon [32] found that older adults lacked interest
in such technologies and perceived accessibility barriers. The
authors concluded that such technologies would not be accepted
by older adults unless they were very easy to use, useful, and
there was support available to help with technical difficulties.
The authors also suggested that when such factors are present,
older adults can embrace self-management. On the basis of data
from real-world engagement and participant feedback, our
findings support this argument.

A number of possible reasons for sustained engagement during
the ProACT trial have been identified. Throughout the trial,
participants reported benefits, including improvements in health
and well-being related to an increased ability to self-manage.
Perceived benefit plays a role in technology acceptance and
adoption [68,69] as well as in the activation of effective
self-management behaviors [16]. Our findings are in line with
those of a systematic review of studies examining older adults’
usage of technology to support chronic disease management,
which found that participants experienced greater self-efficacy
because of technology-supported self-management, which
enabled improved communication with health care providers,
including personalized feedback and support [17].

Yardley et al [30] state that “successful intervention design
demands a user-centered and iterative approach to development,
using mixed methods and in-depth qualitative research to
progressively refine the intervention to meet user requirements.”
A notable feature of the ProACT approach to designing and
evaluating the platform was that it continually involved people
with multimorbidity in a user-centered design process, including
interviews, focus groups, co-design workshops, usability testing
and evaluation activities, supporting regular, iterative updates
to the ProACT platform. Our findings indicate that the majority
of trial participants found the ProACT platform to be usable.
Usability barriers are recognized within the literature as
negatively impacting older adults’adoption of and engagement
with technology [70,71]. Our findings also indicated that the
participants found using this technology exerted low burden.
This is an important finding given that there is significant work
associated with self-management of chronic diseases,
particularly multiple diseases and comorbidities [41]. Although

participants had self-management activities outside of using the
platform and their interactions with triage, such as attending
appointments and managing medications, which were not
evaluated as a part of the trial, it is promising that engaging in
symptom monitoring, review, and education did not result in a
high level of burden for the majority of participants. The
usability and burden findings, along with the engagement data,
indicate that the extensive user-centered design process during
the project lifecycle cannot be underestimated; without this
effort, it is possible that users would not have sustained their
use of ProACT.

Research has noted that using digital health platforms for
self-management without human support can negatively impact
engagement, resulting in dropout and nonusage attrition [30,72].
Human services, including the triage and helpdesk, provided
alongside the ProACT technology platform, appeared to be an
important factor in terms of contributing to sustained
engagement. Participants received feedback and advice on their
health and well-being from the triage nurses and experienced
continuity of care. Many clinical outcomes were also
precipitated by the triage staff. Ancker et al [18] suggested that
participants in their study lacked motivation to self-manage, as
they perceived that health care professionals were not interested
in their data. Furthermore, participants using ProACT had access
to a technical helpdesk for the study duration if they experienced
any technical issues. As is evident from the Irish helpdesk data
outlined above, this was a necessary service because across the
trial period for 60 participants, 355 calls were made to the
helpdesk, 277 of which were related to technical issues,
primarily related to the third-party devices provided to
participants for symptom monitoring. Indeed, frustration with
the sensing devices, including a poor usability, lack of reliability,
and mistrust of the data they produced, were reasons for
participants withdrawing from the trial. Given the importance
of such devices in health self-management, device providers
should strive to ensure that they are usable and reliable. Other
research on the abandonment of health tracking devices found
reasons that included technology being too complicated, too
complex to learn, or failing to help people reach their goals [73].

Future research should also examine the potential role and
necessity of helpdesk and triage services over longitudinal
periods of time, as the needs of people with multimorbidity, as
well as their self-management and technical skills change.
Research should examine at what point or points of a
self-management journey human support adds value to a digital
health intervention. For example, some research has shown that
support for self-management is mostly needed when a person
first begins using a digital health intervention [56] to ensure
adoption. However, research into the type and level of ongoing
support that might be required for self-managing with multiple,
complex chronic conditions is lacking. This also needs to be
considered within the context of aging, as many older adults
will experience a decline in health or the diagnosis of additional
conditions and comorbidities over time. However, it is important
to note that the levels of triage and technical support required
also have implications in terms of costs of service provision;
for example, the ratio of nurses to patients that is required to

J Med Internet Res 2021 | vol. 23 | iss. 12 | e22672 | p. 21

provide an effective service. Hence, this aspect also needs to
be further examined.

Limitations

There are several limitations to this study. First, given the
resource limitations, the version of the ProACT platform
described in this paper and evaluated in the trial did not integrate
all of the features required to fully support the self-management
of multimorbidity, with development initially focused on
symptom and well-being monitoring, education, setting physical
activity goals, and data sharing. The inclusion of features such
as medication management, care planning, and goal setting
beyond physical activity would be required to fully address the
challenges of the self-management of multiple conditions.
However, the addition of such features could also lead to an
additional technological burden, which could negatively impact
engagement. The integration of CareAnalytics not currently
integrated within the platform and further development of all
analytics could help minimize burden while also enhancing the
platform’s capability to handle recommendations that consider
a person’s full condition profile. For example, future work aims
to further enhance the goal recommender in terms of
personalization by considering the person’s current health status,
as indicated by the Health and Wellness Profiler analytic
described above.

A further point with respect to the PoC study design (which
was primarily to understand the feasibility of people with
multimorbidity engaging with a digital health platform to
self-manage their conditions) is that a control group was not
included; therefore, it was not possible to assess the
effectiveness of individual components of the ProACT platform
and related services (access to triage and technical support).
Future work will aim to examine the potential impact of these

factors in more detail through controlled studies with people
with multimorbidity. Implementing an iterative, user-centered
PoC trial has helped justify the need for a large-scale controlled
study. Therefore, we advocate that such an approach to
designing and developing complex interventions for the
management of multiple diseases should be considered before
progressing toward large-scale studies.

Conclusions

This work is the first to present a digital health platform
designed specifically to support multimorbidity self-management
for older adults, with results showing high levels of engagement
and retention over a 12-month period. There are several
strengths to this work. We present a comprehensive digital
platform that outlines how various components support the
management of multiple diseases. There was active engagement
from participants across all stages of the design, development,
and evaluation of the platform. The trial involved a large number
of participants across 2 EU countries over a longitudinal period.
Few studies on digital health solutions to support the
self-management of chronic conditions have focused on older
adults. Neither do they have such large numbers (especially at
the PoC level) nor do they examine long-term usage.
Furthermore, comparatively little research has examined the
design and evaluation of digital health platforms for people with
multimorbidity.

Planned future work includes updating the platform to further
enhance the management of multimorbidity and a pragmatic
randomized controlled trial to evaluate the effectiveness
(including potential cost-effectiveness) of the platform and
triage service on quality of life, health care utilization, and a
range of other measures, which will begin in 2022.